# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2019
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Chuang Tzu, Chuang Tzu
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/59709/59709-h/59709-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

With this chapter Chuang Tzŭ completes the outline
of his system. The remaining chapters are
either supplementary to the preceding seven, or
independent essays upon cognate subjects.
Joined Toes.
Argument:—Virtues should be natural, not artificial; passive not active.
[Chs. viii to xiii inclusive are illustrative of, or supplementary to,
ch. vii.]
Joined toes and extra fingers are an addition
to nature, though, functionally speaking,
superfluous. Wens and tumours are an addition
to the bodily form, though, as far as nature is concerned,
superfluous. And similarly, to include
charity and duty to one's neighbour among the
functions of man's organism, is not true Tao.
The whole of this chapter is a violent tirade against
the leading doctrines of Confucianism.
For just as joined toes are but useless lumps of
flesh, and extra fingers but useless excrescences, so
are any artificial additions to our internal economy
but harmful adjuncts to real charity and duty to
one's neighbour,
Which are the outcome of Tao.
and are moreover prejudicial to the right use of
intelligence.
People with extra keenness of vision muddle
themselves over the five colours, exaggerate the
value of shades, and of distinctions of greens[100]
and yellows for sacrificial robes. Of such was
Li Chu.
Who could see a pin's point at a distance of 1,000 li.
He is mentioned by Mencius.
People with extra keenness of hearing muddle
themselves over the five notes, exaggerate the tonic
differences of the six pitch-pipes, and the various
timbres of metal, stone, silk, and bamboo, of the
Huang-chung, and of the Ta-lü. Of such was
Shih K'uang.
The blind musician mentioned in ch. ii. The
Huang-chung and the Ta-lü were two of the
twelve bamboo tubes, or pitch-pipes, on which
ancient Chinese music was based. Six were male
or positive, and six female or negative. Hence
they are spoken of collectively as six.
People who graft on charity, force themselves to
display this virtue in order to gain reputation and
to enjoy the applause of the world for that which
is of no account. Of such were Tsêng and Shih.
Tsêng Shên, a famous disciple of Confucius, and Shih
Yu, both noted for their high moral characters.
People who refine in argument do but pile up
tiles or knot ropes in their maunderings over the
hard and white, the like and the unlike, wearing
themselves out over mere useless terms. Of such
were Yang and Mih.
Yang Chu, a philosopher of the fourth century B.C.,
whose "selfish" system was condemned by Mencius;
and Mih Tzŭ, already mentioned in ch. ii.
[101]
Therefore every addition to or deviation from
nature belongs not to the ultimate perfection of all.
Which is in Tao.
He who would attain to such perfection never
loses sight of the natural conditions of his existence.
With him the joined is not united, nor the
separated apart, nor the long in excess, nor the
short wanting. For just as a duck's legs, though
short, cannot be lengthened without pain to the
duck, and a crane's legs, though long, cannot be
shortened without misery to the crane, so that
which is long in man's moral nature cannot be cut
off, nor that which is short be lengthened. All
sorrow is thus avoided.
Intentional charity and intentional duty to one's
neighbour are surely not included in our moral
nature. Yet what sorrow these have involved.
Divide your joined toes and you will howl: bite off
your extra finger and you will scream. In one case
there is too much, in the other too little; but the
sorrow is the same. And the charitable of the age
go about sorrowing over the ills of the age, while
the non-charitable cut through the natural conditions
of things in their greed after place and
wealth. Surely then intentional charity and duty
to one's neighbour are not included in our moral
nature. Yet from the time of the Three Dynasties
downwards what a fuss has been made about them!
Those who cannot make perfect without arc, line,
compasses, and square, injure the natural constitu[102]tion
of things. Those who require cords to bind and
glue to stick, interfere with the natural functions of
things. And those who seek to satisfy the mind of
man by hampering with ceremonies and music and
preaching charity and duty to one's neighbour,
thereby destroy the intrinsicality of things.
For such intrinsicality does exist, in this sense:—Things
which are curved require no arcs; things
which are straight require no lines; things which
are round require no compasses; things which are
rectangular require no squares; things which stick
require no glue; things which hold together require
no cords. And just as all things are produced,
and none can tell how they are produced, so do
all things possess their own intrinsic qualities
and none can tell how they possess them. From
time immemorial this has always been so, without
variation. Why then should charity and duty to
one's neighbour be as it were glued or corded on,
and introduced into the domain of Tao, to give
rise to doubt among mankind?
Lesser doubts change the rule of life; greater
doubts change man's nature.
How do we know this? By the fact that ever
since the time when Shun bid for charity and duty
to one's neighbour in order to secure the empire,
men have devoted their lives to the pursuit thereof.
Is it not then charity and duty to one's neighbour
which change the nature of man?
Therefore I have tried to show that from the
time of the Three Dynasties it has always been the[103]
external which has changed the nature of man. If
a mean man, he will die for gain. If a superior
man, he will die for fame. If a man of rank, he
will die for his ancestral honours. If a Sage, he
will die for the world. The pursuits and ambitions
of these men differ, but the injury to their
natures involved in the sacrifice of their lives is the
same.
Tsang and Ku were shepherds, both of whom
lost their flocks. On inquiry, it appeared that
Tsang had been engaged in reading, while Ku had
gone to take part in some trials of strength. Their
occupations had been different, but the result was
in each case loss of the sheep.
Poh I died for fame at the foot of Mount Shou-yang.
See ch. vi.
Robber Chê died for gain on Mount T'ai.
Robber Chê has a chapter to himself, from which,
though spurious, it may be gathered that he was a
very remarkable personage in his day.
Mount T'ai has been mentioned in ch. i.
Their deaths were not the same, but the injury to
their lives and natures was in each case the same.
How then can we applaud the former and blame
the latter?
And so, if a man dies for charity and duty to his
neighbour the world calls him a noble fellow;
but if he dies for gain, the world calls him a
low fellow. The dying being the same, one is[104]
nevertheless called noble and the other low. But
in point of injury to life and nature, the robber
Chê and Poh I are one. Where then does the
distinction of noble and low come in?
Were a man to apply himself to charity and
duty towards his neighbour until he were the equal
of Tsêng or Shih, this would not be what I mean
by perfection. Or to flavours, until he were the
equal of Yü Erh.
Probably identical with I Ya, the Soyer of China.
Or to sounds, until he were the equal of Shih
K'uang. Or to colours, until he were the equal of
Li Chu. What I mean by perfection is not what
is meant by charity and duty to one's neighbour.
It is found in the cultivation of Tao. And those
whom I regard as cultivators of Tao are not those
who cultivate charity and duty to one's neighbour.
They are those who yield to the natural conditions
of things. What I call perfection of hearing is
not hearing others but oneself. What I call perfection
of vision is not seeing others but oneself.
A saying attributed by Han Fei Tzŭ to Lao Tzŭ:—"To
see oneself is to be clear of sight." See The
Remains of Lao Tzŭ, p. 18.
For a man who sees not himself but others, takes
not possession of himself but of others, thus taking
what others should take and not what he himself
should take.
Multi sunt, qui urbes, qui populos habuere in
potestate, paucissimi, qui se.
[105]
Instead of being himself, he in fact becomes some
one else. And if a man thus becomes some one
else instead of himself, this is a fatal error of which
both the robber Chê and Poh I can be equally
guilty.
And so, conscious of my own deficiency in
regard to Tao, I do not venture at my best to
practise the principles of charity and duty to my
neighbour, nor at my worst to fall into the fatal
error above-mentioned.
Horses' Hoofs.
Argument:—Superiority of the natural over the artificial—Application of
this principle to government.
Horses have hoofs to carry them over frost
and snow; hair, to protect them from wind
and cold. They eat grass and drink water, and
fling up their heels over the champaign. Such is
the real nature of horses. Palatial dwellings are of
no use to them.
One day Poh Loh
A Chinese Rarey, of somewhat legendary character.
appeared, saying, "I understand the management
of horses."
So he branded them, and clipped them, and pared
their hoofs, and put halters on them, tying them up
by the head and shackling them by the feet, and
disposing them in stables, with the result that two
or three in every ten died. Then he kept them
hungry and thirsty, trotting them and galloping
them, and grooming, and trimming, with the misery
of the tasselled bridle before and the fear of the
knotted whip behind, until more than half of them
were dead.
[107]
The potter says, "I can do what I will with clay.
If I want it round, I use compasses; if rectangular,
a square."
The carpenter says, "I can do what I will with
wood. If I want it curved, I use an arc; if straight,
a line."
But on what grounds can we think that the
natures of clay and wood desire this application of
compasses and square, of arc and line? Nevertheless,
every age extols Poh Loh for his skill in
managing horses, and potters and carpenters for
their skill with clay and wood. Those who govern
the empire make the same mistake.
Now I regard government of the empire from
quite a different point of view.
The people have certain natural instincts;—to
weave and clothe themselves, to till and feed themselves.
These are common to all humanity, and
all are agreed thereon. Such instincts are called
"Heaven-sent."
And so in the days when natural instincts prevailed,
men moved quietly and gazed steadily. At
that time, there were no roads over mountains, nor
boats, nor bridges over water. All things were
produced, each for its own proper sphere. Birds
and beasts multiplied; trees and shrubs grew up.
The former might be led by the hand; you could
climb up and peep into the raven's nest. For then
man dwelt with birds and beasts, and all creation
was one. There were no distinctions of good and
bad men. Being all equally without knowledge,[108]
their virtue could not go astray. Being all equally
without evil desires, they were in a state of natural
integrity, the perfection of human existence.
But when Sages appeared, tripping people over
charity and fettering with duty to one's neighbour,
doubt found its way into the world. And then with
their gushing over music and fussing over ceremony,
the empire became divided against itself.
Music and ceremonies are important factors in the
Confucian system of government.
Were the natural integrity of things left unharmed,
who could make sacrificial vessels? Were
white jade left unbroken, who could make the
regalia of courts? Were Tao not abandoned, who
could introduce charity and duty to one's neighbour?
Were man's natural instincts his guide,
what need would there be for music and ceremonies?
Were the five colours not confused, who would
practise decoration? Were the five notes not
confused, who would adopt the six pitch-pipes?
See chs. viii and x.
Destruction of the natural integrity of things, in
order to produce articles of various kinds,—this is
the fault of the artisan. Annihilation of Tao in
order to practise charity and duty to one's neighbour,—this
is the error of the Sage.
Horses live on dry land, eat grass and drink
water. When pleased, they rub their necks
together. When angry, they turn around and kick
up their heels at each other. Thus far only do[109]
their natural dispositions carry them. But bridled
and bitted, with a plate of metal on their foreheads,
they learn to cast vicious looks, to turn the head
to bite, to resist, to get the bit out of the mouth or
the bridle into it. And thus their natures become
depraved,—the fault of Poh Loh.
In the days of Ho Hsü
A legendary ruler of old.
the people did nothing in particular when at rest,
and went nowhere in particular when they moved.
Having food, they rejoiced; having full bellies,
they strolled about. Such were the capacities of
the people. But when the Sages came to worry
them with ceremonies and music in order to rectify
the form of government, and dangled charity and
duty to one's neighbour before them in order to
satisfy their hearts,—then the people began to
develop a taste for knowledge and to struggle one
with the other in their desire for gain. This was
the error of the Sages.
The simplicity of style, and general intelligibility of
this chapter have raised doubts as to its genuineness.
But as Lin Hsi Chung justly observes, its sympathetic
tone in relation to dumb animals, stamps it,
in spite of an undue proportion of word to thought,
as beyond reach of the forger's art.
Opening Trunks.
Argument:—All restrictions artificial, and therefore deceptive—Only by
shaking off such fetters, and reverting to the natural, can man hope
to attain.
The precautions taken against thieves who open
trunks, search bags, or ransack tills, consist
of securing with cords and fastening with bolts and
locks. This is what the world calls wit.
But a strong thief comes who carries off the till
on his shoulders, with box and bag to boot. And
his only fear is that the cords and locks should not
be strong enough!
Therefore, what the world calls wit, simply
amounts to assistance given to the strong thief.
And I venture to state that nothing of that which
the world calls wit, is otherwise than serviceable to
strong thieves; and that nothing of that which the
world calls wisdom is other than a protection to
strong thieves.
How can this be shown?—In the State of Ch'i a
man used to be able to see from one town to the
next, and hear the barking and crowing of its dogs
and cocks.
[111]
So near were they. This sentence has been incorporated
in ch. LXXX of the Tao-Tê-Ching. See The
Remains of Lao Tzŭ, p. 50.
The area covered by the nets of fishermen and
fowlers, and pricked by the plough, was a square of
two thousand and odd li.
Of which three go to a mile, roughly. This statement
is intended to convey an idea of prosperity.
And within its four boundaries not a temple or
shrine was dedicated, nor a district or hamlet
governed, but in accordance with the rules laid
down by the Sages.
Yet one morning
B.C. 481.
T'ien Ch'êng Tzŭ slew the Prince of Ch'i, and stole
his kingdom. And not his kingdom only, but the
wisdom-tricks which he had got from the Sages as
well; so that although T'ien Ch'êng Tzŭ acquired
the reputation of a thief, he lived as comfortably as
ever did either Yao or Shun. The small States
did not venture to blame, nor the great States to
punish him; and so for twelve generations his
descendants ruled over Ch'i.
Commentators have failed to explain away this last
sentence. On the strength of an obvious anachronism,
some have written off the whole chapter as a
forgery; but the general style of argument is against
this view.
Was not this stealing the State of Ch'i and the
wisdom-tricks of the Sages as well in order to
secure himself from the consequences of such theft?
[112]
This amounts to what I have already said,
namely that nothing of what the world esteems
great wit is otherwise than serviceable to strong
thieves, and that nothing of what the world calls
great wisdom is other than a protection to strong
thieves.
Let us take another example. Of old, Lung
Fêng was beheaded, Pi Kan was disembowelled,
Chang Hung was sliced to death, Tzŭ Hsü was
chopped to mince-meat.
The first two have been already mentioned in ch. iv.
Chang Hung was minister to Prince Ling of the
Chou dynasty. Tzŭ Hsü was a name of the famous
Wu Yüan, prime minister of the Ch'u State, whose
corpse is said to have been sewn up in a sack and
thrown into the river near Soochow.
All these four were Sages, but their wisdom could
not preserve them from death.
In fact, it rather hastened their ends.
An apprentice to Robber Chê asked him saying,
"Is there then Tao in thieving?"
"Pray tell me of something in which there is not
Tao," Chê replied. "There is the wisdom by
which booty is located. The courage to go in first,
and the heroism of coming out last. There is the
shrewdness of calculating success, and justice in
the equal division of the spoil. There has never
yet been, a great robber who was not possessed of
these five."
Thus the doctrine of the Sages is equally indis[113]pensable
to good men and to Chê. But good men
are scarce and bad men plentiful, so that the good
the Sages do to the world is little and the evil
great.
Therefore it has been said, "If the lips are
gone, the teeth will be cold." It was the thinness
of the wine of Lu which caused the siege of
Han Tan.
The prince of Ch'u held an assembly, to which the
princes of Lu and Chao brought presents of wine.
That of Lu was poor stuff, while the wine of Chao
was rich and generous. Because, however, the
Master of the Cellar to the prince of Ch'u failed to
get a bribe of wine from the prince of Chao, he
maliciously changed the presents; and the prince
of Ch'u, displeased at what he regarded as an
insult, shortly after laid siege to Han Tan, the chief
city of Chao.
It was the appearance of Sages which caused the
appearance of great robbers.
Drive out the Sages and leave the robbers alone,—then
only will the empire be governed. As when
the stream ceases the gully dries up, and when the
hill is levelled the chasm is filled; so when Sages
are extinct, there will be no more robbers, but the
empire will rest in peace.
On the other hand, unless Sages disappear,
neither will great robbers disappear; nor if you
double the number of Sages wherewithal to govern
the empire will you do more than double the profits
of Robber Chê.
[114]
If pecks and bushels are used for measurement,
they will also be stolen.
There will simply be something more to steal.
If scales and steelyards are used for weighing, they
will also be stolen. If tallies and signets are used
for good faith, they will also be stolen. If charity
and duty to one's neighbour are used for rectification,
they will also be stolen.
How is this so?—One man steals a purse, and is
punished. Another steals a State, and becomes a
Prince. But charity and duty to one's neighbour
are integral parts of princedom. Does he not then
steal charity and duty to one's neighbour together
with the wisdom of the Sages?
So it is that to attempt to drive out great
robbers
Who steal States.
is simply to help them to steal principalities, charity,
duty to one's neighbour, together with measures,
scales, tallies, and signets. No reward of official
regalia and uniform will dissuade, nor dread of
sharp instruments of punishment will deter such
men from their course. These do but double
the profits of robbers like Chê, and make it impossible
to get rid of them,—for which the Sages are
responsible.
Therefore it has been said, "Fishes cannot be
taken away from water: the instruments of government
cannot be delegated to others."
[115]
These words were uttered by Lao Tzŭ. So say
Han Fei Tzŭ and Huai Nan Tzŭ. They have been
incorporated in ch. xxxvi of the Tao-Tê-Ching.
In the wisdom of Sages the instruments of
government are found. This wisdom is not fit
for enlightening the world.
Away then with wisdom and knowledge, and
great robbers will disappear! Discard jade and
destroy pearls, and petty thieves will cease to exist.
Burn tallies and break signets, and the people will
revert to their natural integrity. Split measures
and smash scales, and the people will not fight over
quantities. Utterly abolish all the restrictions of
Sages, and the people will begin to be fit for the
reception of Tao.
Confuse the six pitch-pipes, break up organs and
flutes, stuff up the ears of Shih K'uang,—and each
man will keep his own sense of hearing to himself.
Put an end to decoration, disperse the five categories
of colour, glue up the eyes of Li Chu,—and
each man will keep his own sense of sight to
himself.
Destroy arcs and lines, fling away square and
compasses, snap off the fingers of Kung Ch'ui,—
A famous artisan who could draw an exact circle
with his unaided hand.
and each man will use his own natural skill.
Wherefore the saying, "Great skill is as
clumsiness."
Extremes meet. These words are attributed to Lao
Tzŭ by Huai Nan Tzŭ, and are incorporated in
ch. xlv of the Tao-Tê-Ching.
[116]
Restrain the actions of Tsêng and Shih, stop the
mouths of Yang and Mih, get rid of charity and
duty to one's neighbour,—and the virtue of the
people will become one with God.
If each man keeps to himself his own sense of
sight, the world will escape confusion. If each
man keeps to himself his own sense of hearing,
the world will escape entanglements. If each man
keeps his knowledge to himself, the world will
escape doubt. If each man keeps his own virtue
to himself, the world will avoid deviation from the
true path.
Tsêng, Shih, Yang, Mih, Shih K'uang, Kung
Ch'ui, and Li Chu, all set up their virtue outside
themselves and involve the world in such angry
discussions that nothing definite is accomplished.
Have you never heard of the Golden Age,—
This question must be addressed to the reader.
the days of Yung Ch'êng, Ta T'ing, Poh Huang,
Chung Yang, Li Lu, Li Hsü, Hsien Yüan, Hê Hsü,
Tsun Lu, Chu Yung, Fu Hsi, and Shên Nung?
Ancient rulers, several of whom have already been
mentioned.
Then the people used knotted cords.
As a means of intercommunication. The details of
the system have not, however, come down to us.
They were contented with what food and raiment
they could get. They lived simple and peaceful
lives. Neighbouring districts were within sight,[117]
and the cocks and dogs of one could be heard in
the other, yet the people grew old and died without
ever interchanging visits.
In those days, government was indeed perfect.
But nowadays any one can excite the people by
saying, "In such and such a place there is a Sage."
Immediately they put together a few provisions
and hurry off, neglecting their parents at home and
their master's business abroad, filing in unbroken
line through territories of Princes, with a string of
carts and carriages a thousand li in length. Such
is the evil effect of an exaggerated desire for knowledge
among our rulers. And if rulers aim at
knowledge and neglect Tao, the empire will be
overwhelmed in confusion.
How can it be shown that this is so?—Bows and
cross-bows and hand-nets and harpoon-arrows,
involve much knowledge in their use; but they
carry confusion among the birds of the air. Hooks
and bait and nets and traps, involve much knowledge
in their use; but they carry confusion among
the fishes of the deep. Fences and nets and snares,
involve much knowledge in their use; but they
carry confusion among the beasts of the field. In
the same way the sophistical fallacies of the hard
and white and the like and the unlike of schoolmen
involve much knowledge of argument; but they
overwhelm the world in doubt.
Therefore it is that whenever there is great
confusion, love of knowledge is ever at the bottom
of it. For all men strive to grasp what they do[118]
not know, while none strive to grasp what they
already know; and all strive to discredit what they
do not excel in, while none strive to discredit what
they do excel in. The result is overwhelming
confusion.
Thus, above, the splendour of the heavenly
bodies is dimmed; below, the energy of land and
water is disturbed; while midway the influence of
the four seasons is destroyed. There is not one
tiny creature which moves on earth or flies in
air but becomes other than by nature it should be.
So overwhelming is the confusion which desire for
knowledge has brought upon the world ever since
the time of the Three Dynasties downwards!
The simple and the guileless have been set aside;
the specious and the false have been exalted.
Tranquil inaction has given place to a love of
disputation; and by disputation has confusion
come upon the world.
On Letting Alone.
Argument:—The natural conditions of our existence require no artificial
aids—The evils of government—Failure of coercion—Tao the refuge—Inaction
the secret—The action of Inaction—Illustrations.
There has been such a thing as letting
mankind alone; there has never been such
a thing as governing mankind.
With success.
Letting alone springs from fear lest men's
natural dispositions be perverted and their virtue
laid aside. But if their natural dispositions be not
perverted nor their virtue laid aside, what room
is there left for government?
Of old, when Yao governed the empire, he
caused happiness to prevail to excess in man's
nature; and consequently the people were not
satisfied. When Chieh
See p. 40.
governed the empire he caused sorrow to prevail
to excess in man's nature; and consequently the
people were not contented. Dissatisfaction and
discontent are subversive of virtue; and without
virtue there is no such thing for an empire as
stability.
Virtue, here in its ordinary sense.
[120]
When man rejoices greatly he gravitates towards
the positive pole. When he sorrows deeply he
gravitates towards the negative pole.
These "poles" are the male and female principles
already alluded to on p. 82. Originally developed
from the Great Monad, they became the progenitors
of all creation.
If the equilibrium of positive and negative
In nature.
is disturbed, the four seasons are interrupted, the
balance of heat and cold is destroyed, and man
himself suffers physically thereby.
Because men are made to rejoice and to sorrow
and to displace their centre of gravity, they lose their
steadiness, and are unsuccessful in thought and
action. And thus it is that the idea of surpassing
others first came into the world, followed by the
appearance of such men as Robber Chê, Tsêng, and
Shih, the result being that the whole world could
not furnish enough rewards for the good nor distribute
punishments enough for the evil among
mankind. And as this great world is not equal to
the demand for rewards and punishments; and as,
ever since the time of the Three Dynasties
The legendary emperors Fu Hsi, Shên Nung, and
Huang Ti, or the Yellow Emperor, already mentioned.
downwards, men have done nothing but struggle
over rewards and punishments,—what possible[121]
leisure can they have had for adapting themselves
to the natural conditions of their existence?
Besides, over-refinement of vision leads to
debauchery in colour; over-refinement of hearing
leads to debauchery in sound; over-refinement of
charity leads to confusion in virtue;
Here again the manifestation of Tao. See p. 45.
over-refinement of duty towards one's neighbour
leads to perversion of principle;
The eternal principles which are of Tao and not of
man.
over-refinement of ceremonial leads to divergence
from the true object; over-refinement of music
leads to lewdness of thought; over-refinement of
wisdom leads to an extension of mechanical art;
and over-refinement of shrewdness leads to an
extension of vice.
As shown in the preceding chapter.
If people adapt themselves to the natural conditions
of existence, the above eight
Vision, hearing, charity, duty to one's neighbour,
ceremonial, music, wisdom, and shrewdness.
may be or may not be; it matters not. But if
people do not adapt themselves to the natural
conditions of existence, then these eight become
hindrances and spoilers, and throw the world into
confusion.
[122]
In spite of this, the world reverences and
cherishes them, thereby greatly increasing the
sum of human error. And not as a passing
fashion, but with admonitions in words, with
humility in prostrations, and with the stimulus
of music and song. What then is left for me?
Therefore, for the perfect man who is unavoidably
summoned to power over his fellows, there is
naught like Inaction.
It is not according to the spirit of Tao that a man
should shirk his mortal responsibilities. On the contrary,
Tao teaches him how to meet them.
By means of inaction he will be able to adapt himself
to the natural conditions of existence. And
so it is that he who respects the State as his own
body is fit to support it, and he who loves the State
as his own body, is fit to govern it.
This last sentence is attributed by Huai Nan Tzŭ
to Lao Tzŭ, and has been incorporated in the Tao-Tê-Ching,
ch. xiii. It is curious that Chuang Tzŭ
should say nothing about its authorship, and perhaps
even more curious that Kuo Hsiang, his editor and
commentator of the fourth century A.D., should say
nothing either about the claims of Lao Tzŭ or the
Tao-Tê-Ching.
And if I can refrain from injuring my internal
economy, and from taxing my powers of sight and
hearing, sitting like a corpse while my dragon-power
is manifested around, in profound silence
while my thunder-voice resounds, the powers of
heaven responding to every phase of my will, as[123]
under the yielding influence of inaction all things
are brought to maturity and thrive,—what leisure
then have I to set about governing the world?
Some of this passage is repeated in ch. xiv.
Ts'ui Chü
A casual personage.
asked Lao Tzŭ, saying, "If the empire is not to
be governed, how are men's hearts to be kept in
order?"
"Be careful," replied Lao Tzŭ, "not to interfere
with the natural goodness of the heart of man.
Man's heart may be forced down or stirred up. In
each case the issue is fatal.
"By gentleness, the hardest heart may be
softened. But try to cut and polish it,—'twill glow
like fire or freeze like ice. In the twinkling of an
eye it will pass beyond the limits of the Four Seas.
In repose, profoundly still; in motion, far away in
the sky. No bolt can bar, no bond can bind,—such
is the human heart."
"Of old, the Yellow Emperor first caused charity
and duty to one's neighbour to interfere with the
natural goodness of the heart of man. In consequence
of which, Yao and Shun wore the hair
off their legs in endeavouring to feed their people.
They disturbed their internal economy in order to
find room for charity and duty to one's neighbour.
They exhausted their energies in framing laws and
statutes. Still they did not succeed.
[124]
"Thereupon, Yao confined Huan Tou on Mount
Tsung; drove the chief of San-miao and his people
into San-wei, and kept them there; and banished
the Minister of Works to Yu Island.
These words are quoted (with variants) from the
Shu Ching or Canon of History. They refer to
individuals who had misconducted themselves in
carrying out the new régime.
But they were not equal to their task, and through
the times of the Three Princes
The Great Yü, T'ang, and Wên Wang, founder of
the Chou dynasty.
the empire was in a state of great unrest. Among
the bad men were Chieh and Chê; among the good
were Tsêng and Shih. By and by, the Confucianists
and the Mihists arose; and then came
exultation and anger of rivals, fraud between the
simple and the cunning, recrimination between the
virtuous and the evil, slander between the honest
and the dishonest,—until decadence set in, men fell
away from their original virtue, their natures
became corrupt, and there was a general rush for
knowledge.
"The next thing was to coerce by all kinds of
physical torture, thus bringing utter confusion into
the empire, the blame for which rests upon those
who would interfere with the natural goodness of
the heart of man.
"In consequence, virtuous men sought refuge in
mountain caves, while rulers of States sat trembling[125]
in their ancestral halls. Then, when dead men
lay about pillowed on each others' corpses, when
cangued prisoners and condemned criminals jostled
each other in crowds,—then the Confucianists and
the Mihists, in the midst of gyves and fetters, stood
forth to preach!
Salvation from the ills of which they and their systems
had been the cause.
Alas, they know not shame, nor what it is to blush!
"Until I can say that the wisdom of Sages is
not a fastener of cangues, and that charity and
duty to one's neighbour are not bolts for gyves,
how should I know that Tsêng and Shih are not
the forerunners
Lit. "sounding arrows," used by bandits as a signal
for beginning the attack.
of Chieh and Chê?
The meaning intended is that good cannot exist
without its correlative evil.
"Therefore I said, 'Abandon wisdom and discard
knowledge, and the empire will be at peace.'"
These words have been incorporated in ch. xix of
the Tao-Tê-Ching. The present rendering somewhat
modifies the view I expressed on p. 16 of The
Remains of Lao Tzŭ.
The Yellow Emperor sat on the throne for nineteen
years, and his laws obtained all over the
empire.
Hearing that Kuang Ch'êng Tzŭ
[126]
Said by some commentators to be another name for
Lao Tzŭ, but if so, then it must have been Lao Tzŭ
as he existed, an incarnation of Tao, before his
appearance in the Confucian age.
was living on Mount K'ung-t'ung, he went thither
to see him, and said, "I am told, Sir, that you are
in possession of perfect Tao. May I ask in what
perfect Tao consists? I desire to avail myself of
the good influence of heaven and earth in order to
secure harvests and feed my people. I should also
like to control the Two Powers of nature
The Yin and the Yang. See pp. 82, 120.
in order to the protection of all living things.
How can I accomplish this?"
"What you desire to avail yourself of," replied
Kuang Ch'êng Tzŭ, "is the primordial integrity of
matter. What you wish to control are the disintegrators
thereof. Ever since the empire has been
governed by you, the clouds have rained without
waiting to thicken, the foliage of trees has fallen
without waiting to grow yellow, the brightness of
the sun and moon has paled, and the voice of the
flatterer is heard on every side. How then speak
of perfect Tao?"
The Yellow Emperor withdrew. He resigned
the Throne. He built himself a solitary hut. He
lay upon straw. For three months he remained
in seclusion, and then went again to see Kuang
Ch'êng Tzŭ.
The latter was lying down with his face to the
south. The Yellow Emperor approached after the
manner of an inferior, upon his knees. Prostrating[127]
himself upon the ground he said, "I am told, Sir,
that you are in possession of perfect Tao. May I
ask how my self may be preserved so as to last?"
Kuang Ch'êng Tzŭ jumped up with a start. "A
good question indeed!" cried he. "Come, and I
will speak to you of perfect Tao.
"The essence of perfect Tao is profoundly
mysterious; its extent is lost in obscurity.
"See nothing; hear nothing; let your soul be
wrapped in quiet; and your body will begin to take
proper form. Let there be absolute repose and
absolute purity; do not weary your body nor disturb
your vitality,—and you will live for ever. For
if the eye sees nothing, and the ear hears nothing,
and the mind
Lit. the heart.
thinks nothing, the soul will preserve the body,
and the body will live for ever.
Not in the grosser worldly sense, but as a sublimated
unit in eternity.
"Cherish that which is within you, and shut off
that which is without; for much knowledge is a
curse. Then I will place you upon that abode of
Great Light which is the source of the positive
Power, and escort you through the gate of Profound
Mystery which is the source of the negative
Power. These Powers are the controllers of heaven
and earth, and each contains the other.
Knowledge thereof is knowledge of the great mystery
of human existence.
[128]
"Cherish and preserve your own self,
In accordance with the above.
and all the rest will prosper of itself.
The welfare of the people, the success of their harvests,
etc.
I preserve the original One, while resting in harmony
with externals. It is because I have thus
cared for my self now for twelve hundred years
that my body has not decayed."
The Yellow Emperor prostrated himself and
said, "Kuang Ch'êng Tzŭ is surely God...."
Whereupon the latter continued, "Come, I will
tell you. That self is eternal; yet all men think it
mortal. That self is infinite; yet all men think it
finite. Those who possess Tao are princes in this
life and rulers in the hereafter. Those who do not
possess Tao, behold the light of day in this life
and become clods of earth in the hereafter.
"Nowadays, all living things spring from the dust
and to the dust return. But I will lead you through
the portals of Eternity into the domain of Infinity.
My light is the light of sun and moon. My life is
the life of heaven and earth. I know not who
comes nor who goes. Men may all die, but I
endure for ever."
"A mighty drama, enacted on the theatre of Infinitude,
with suns for lamps, and Eternity as a background;
whose author is God, and whose purport
and thousandfold moral lead us up to the 'dark with
excess of light' of the throne of God."—Carlyle.
[129]
The Spirit of the Clouds when passing eastwards
through the expanse of Air
The term here used has also been explained to mean
some supernatural kind of tree, over which we may
imagine the Cloud-Spirit to be passing.
happened to fall in with the Vital Principle. The
latter was slapping his ribs and hopping about;
whereupon the Spirit of the Clouds said, "Who
are you, old man, and what are you doing here?"
"Strolling!" replied the Vital Principle, without
stopping.
Activities ceaseless in their imperceptible operation.
"I want to know something," continued the
Spirit of the Clouds.
"Ah!" uttered the Vital Principle, in a tone of
disapprobation.
"The relationship of heaven and earth is out of
harmony," said the Spirit of the Clouds; "the six
influences do not combine,
The positive and negative principles, wind, rain,
darkness, and light.
and the four seasons are no longer regular. I desire
to blend the six influences so as to nourish all
living beings. What am I to do?"
"I do not know!" cried the Vital Principle,
shaking his head, while still slapping his ribs and
hopping about; "I do not know!"
So the Spirit of the Clouds did not press his
question; but three years later, when passing eastwards
through the Yu-sung territory, he again fell[130]
in with the Vital Principle. The former was overjoyed,
and hurrying up, said, "Has your Holiness
forgotten me?"
He then prostrated himself, and desired to be
allowed to interrogate the Vital Principle; but the
latter said, "I wander on without knowing what I
want. I roam about without knowing where I am
going. I stroll in this ecstatic manner, simply
awaiting events. What should I know?"
"I too roam about," answered the Spirit of the
Clouds; "but the people depend upon my movements.
I am thus unavoidably summoned to
power; and under these circumstances I would
gladly receive some advice."
"That the scheme of empire is in confusion," said
the Vital Principle, "that the conditions of life are
violated, that the will of God does not triumph,
that the beasts of the field are disorganised, that
the birds of the air cry at night, that blight reaches
the trees and herbs, that destruction spreads among
creeping things,—this, alas! is the fault of
government."
"True," replied the Spirit of the Clouds, "but
what am I to do?"
"It is here," cried the Vital Principle, "that the
poison lurks! Go back!"
To the root, to that natural state in which by inaction
all things are accomplished.
"It is not often," urged the Spirit of the Clouds,
"that I meet with your Holiness. I would gladly
receive some advice."
[131]
"Feed then your people," said the Vital Principle,
"with your heart.
By the influence of your own perfection.
Rest in inaction, and the world will be good of
itself. Cast your slough. Spit forth intelligence.
Ignore all differences. Become one with the infinite.
Release your mind. Free your soul. Be vacuous.
Be Nothing!
"Let all things revert to their original constitution.
If they do this, without knowledge, the
result will be a simple purity which they will never
lose; but knowledge will bring with it a divergence
therefrom. Seek not the names nor the relations of
things, and all things will flourish of themselves."
"Knowledge is the knowing that we cannot know."
Emerson.
"Your Holiness," said the Spirit of the Clouds,
as he prostrated himself and took leave, "has informed
me with power and filled me with mysteries.
What I had long sought, I have now found."
The men of this world all rejoice in others being
like themselves, and object to others not being like
themselves.
"The man, and still more the woman, who can be
accused either of doing 'what nobody does,' or of
not doing 'what everybody does,' is the subject of as
much depreciatory remark as if he or she had committed
some grave moral delinquency." Mill's Essay
on Liberty, ch. iii.
Those who make friends with their likes and do[132]
not make friends with their unlikes, are influenced
by a desire to differentiate themselves from others.
But those who are thus influenced by a desire to
differentiate themselves from others,—how will they
find it possible to do so?
As all have similar ambitions, they will only be on
the same footing as the rest.
To subordinate oneself to the majority in order to
gratify personal ambition, is not so good as to let
that majority look each one after his own affairs.
Those who desire to govern kingdoms, clutch at the
advantages of the Three Princes without seeing the
troubles involved. In fact, they trust to luck. But
in thus trusting to luck not to destroy the kingdom,
their chances of preserving it do not amount to one
in ten thousand, while their chances of destroying
it are ten thousand to nothing and even more.
Such, alas! is the ignorance of rulers.
The above somewhat unsatisfactory paragraph condemns
those who strive to distinguish themselves
from, and set themselves up as governors of, their
fellow-men.
For, given territory, there is the great thing—Man.
Given man, he must not be managed as if
he were a mere thing; though by not managing him
at all he may actually be managed as if he were a
mere thing. And for those who understand that
the management of man as if he were a mere thing
is not the way to manage him, the issue is not confined
to mere government of the empire. Such men
may wander at will between the six limits of space or[133]
travel over the continent of earth, unrestrained in
coming and in going. This is to be distinguished
from one's fellows, and this distinction is the
highest attainable by man.
The doctrine of the perfect man is to him as
shadow to form, as echo to sound. Ask and it
responds, fulfilling its mission as the help-mate of
humanity. Noiseless in repose, objectless in
motion, it guides you to the goal, free to come and
free to go for ever without end. Alone in its exits
and its entrances, it rivals the eternity of the sun.
As for his body, that is in accordance with the
usual standard. Being in accordance with the usual
standard it is not distinguished in any way. But if
not distinguished in any way, what becomes of the
distinction by which he is distinguished?
Those who see what is to be seen,—of such were
the perfect men of old. Those who see what is not
to be seen,—they are the chosen of the universe.
Spiritual sight carries them beyond the horizon
where natural vision stops short.
Low in the scale, but still to be allowed for,—matter.
Humble, but still to be followed,—
Rather than guided.
mankind. Of others, but still to be attended to,—affairs.
Harsh, but still necessary to be set forth,—the
law. Far off, but still claiming our presence,—duty
to one's neighbour. Near, but still claiming
extension,—charity. Of sparing use, but still to be
of bounteous store,—ceremony. Of middle course,
but still to be of lofty scope,—virtue. One, but[134]
not to be without modification,—Tao. Spiritual,
yet not to be devoid of action,—God.
In inaction there is action.
Therefore the true Sage looks up to God, but
does not offer to aid. He perfects his virtue, but
does not involve himself. He guides himself by
Tao, but makes no plans. He identifies himself
with charity, but does not rely on it. He extends
to duty towards his neighbour, but does not store it
up. He responds to ceremony, without tabooing it.
Although really recognising only the ceremony of
the heart which requires no outward sign.
He undertakes affairs without declining them. He
metes out law without confusion. He relies on his
fellow-men and does not make light of them. He
accommodates himself to matter and does not
ignore it.
Thus the action of the Sage is after all inaction.
While there should be no action, there should be
also no inaction.
Of a positive, premeditated character.
He who is not divinely enlightened will not be sublimely
pure. He who has not clear apprehension of
Tao will find this beyond his reach. And he who
is not enlightened by Tao,—alas indeed for him!
What then is Tao?—There is the Tao of God,
and the Tao of man. Inaction and compliance
make the Tao of God: action and entanglement
the Tao of man. The Tao of God is fundamental:
the Tao of man is accidental. The distance which
separates them is great. Let us all take heed
thereto!
The Universe.
Argument:—The prëeminence of Tao—All things informed thereby—The
true Sage illumined thereby—His attributes—His perfection—Man's
senses his bane—Illustrations.
Vast as is the universe, its phenomena are
regular. Countless though its contents, the
laws which govern these are uniform. Many
though its inhabitants, that which dominates them
is sovereignty. Sovereignty begins in virtue and
ends in God. Therefore it is called divine.
The term here used has been elsewhere rendered
"infinite."
Of old, the empire was under the sovereignty of
inaction. There was the virtue of God,—nothing
more.
Meaning, of course, Tao. In other words, all things
existed under their own natural conditions.
Words being in accordance with Tao, the
sovereignty of the empire was correct. Delimitations
being in accordance with Tao, the duties of
prince and subject were clear. Abilities being in
accordance with Tao, the officials of the empire[136]
governed. The point of view being always in
accordance with Tao, all things responded thereto.
Under the reign of inaction, the natural prevailed
over the artificial. (1) The sovereign could utter
no cruel mandate. (2) Sovereign and subject each
played his allotted part. (3) The right men were
in the right place. (4) All things were as they
were, and not as man would have them.
Thus, virtue was the connecting link between
God and man, while Tao spread throughout all
creation. Men were controlled by outward circumstances,
applying their in-born skill to the development
of civilised life. This skill was bound up
with the circumstances of life, and these with duty,
and duty with virtue, and virtue with Tao, and
Tao with God.
Therefore it has been said, "As for those who
nourished the empire of old, having no desires for
themselves, the empire was not in want. They did
nothing, and all things proceeded on their course.
They preserved a dignified repose, and the people
rested in peace."
We are not told who said these words. They are
not in the Tao-Tê-Ching; and yet if Lao Tzŭ did
not utter them, it is difficult to say who did.
The Record says, "By converging to One, all
things may be accomplished. By the virtue which
is without intention, even the supernatural may be
subdued."
[137]
How much more man? Kuo Hsiang says the
Record was the name of a work ascribed to Lao
Tzŭ.
The Master said, "Tao covers and supports all
things,"—so vast is its extent. Each man should
prepare his heart accordingly.
This "Master" has been identified with both
Chuang Tzŭ and Lao Tzŭ.
"To act by means of inaction is God. To speak
by means of inaction is Virtue. To love men and
care for things is Charity. To recognise the unlike
as the like is breadth of view. To make no distinctions
is liberal. To possess variety is wealth. And
so, to hold fast to virtue is strength. To complete
virtue is establishment. To follow Tao is to be
prepared. And not to run counter to the natural
bias of things is to be perfect.
"He who fully realises these ten points, by storing
them within enlarges his heart, and with this
enlargement brings all creation to himself. Such a
man will bury gold on the hillside and cast pearls
into the sea. He will not struggle for wealth, nor
strive for fame. He will not rejoice at old age, nor
grieve over early death. He will find no pleasure
in success, no chagrin in failure. He will not
account a throne as his own private gain, nor the
empire of the world as glory personal to himself.
His glory is to know that all things are One, and
that life and death are but phases of the same
existence!"
[138]
"Let man learn that he is here, not to work, but to
be worked upon; and that, though abyss open
under abyss, and opinion displace opinion, all are
at last contained in the Eternal Cause." Emerson.
The Master said, "How profound in its repose,
how infinite in its purity, is Tao!
"If metal and stone were without Tao, they
would not be capable of emitting sound. And
just as they possess the property of sound but will
not emit sound unless struck, so surely is the same
principle applicable to all creation.
Meaning that all creation is responsive to proper
influences, in accordance with Tao, if we only knew
where to seek them.
"The man of complete virtue remains blankly
passive as regards what goes on around him. He
is as originally by nature, and his knowledge
extends to the supernatural. Thus, his virtue
expands his heart, which goes forth to all who
come to take refuge therein.
His heart does not initiate the movement, but
simply responds to an influence brought to bear.
"Without Tao, form cannot be endued with
life. Without virtue, life cannot be endued with
intelligence. To preserve one's form, live out one's
life, establish one's virtue, and realise Tao,—is not
this complete virtue?
"Issuing forth spontaneously, moving without
premeditation, all things following in his wake,—such
is the man of complete virtue!
[139]
"He can see where all is dark. He can hear
where all is still. In the darkness he alone can see
light. In the stillness he alone can detect harmony.
He can sink to the lowest depths of materialism.
To the highest heights of spirituality he can soar.
This because he stands in due relation to all things.
Though a mere abstraction, he can minister to their
wants, and ever and anon receive them into rest,—the
great, the small, the long, the short, for ever
without end."
He is, as it were, a law of compensation to all
things.
The Yellow Emperor travelled to the north
of the Red Lake and ascended the K'un-lun
Mountains. Returning south he lost his magic
pearl.
His spiritual part, his soul.
He employed Intelligence to find it, but without
success. He employed Sight to find it, but without
success. He employed Speech
Also explained as "Strength."
to find it, but without success. Finally, he
employed Nothing, and Nothing got it.
He did not employ Nothing to find it. He only
employed Nothing.
"Strange indeed," quoth the Emperor, "that
Nothing should have been able to get it!"
[140]
Knowledge, sight, and speech, tend to obscure
rather than illuminate the spiritual nature of man.
Only in a state of negation can true spirituality be
found.
Yao's tutor was Hsü Yu. The latter's tutor was
Yeh Ch'üeh, and Yeh Ch'üeh's tutor was Wang I,
whose tutor was Pei I.
Yao enquired of Hsü Yu, saying, "Would Yeh
Ch'üeh do to be emperor? I am going to get
Wang I to ask him."
"Alas!" cried Hsü Yu, "that would be bad
indeed for the empire. Yeh Ch'üeh is a clever and
capable man. He is by nature better than most
men, but he seeks by means of the human to reach
the divine. He strives to do no wrong; but he is
ignorant of the source from which wrong springs.
Emperor forsooth! He avails himself of the
artificial and neglects the natural. He lacks unity
in himself. He worships intelligence and is always
in a state of ferment. He is a slave to circumstances
and to things. Wherever he looks, his
surroundings respond. He himself responds to
his surroundings.
He is not yet an abstraction, informed by Tao.
He is always undergoing modifications and is
wanting in fixity. How should such a one be fit
for emperor? Still every clan has its elder. He
may be leader of a clan, but not a leader of leaders.
A captain who has been successful in suppressing
rebellion, as minister is a bane, as sovereign, a
thief."
[141]
Yao went to visit Hua. The border-warden of
Hua said "Ha! a Sage. My best respects to
you, Sir. I wish you a long life."
"Don't!" replied Yao.
"I wish you plenty of money," continued the
border-warden.
"Don't!" replied Yao.
"And many sons," added he.
"Don't!" replied Yao.
"Long life, plenty of money, and many sons,"
cried the warden, "these are what all men desire.
How is it you alone do not want them?"
"Many sons," answered Yao, "are many
anxieties. Plenty of money means plenty of
trouble. Long life involves much that is not
pleasant to put up with. These three gifts do not
advance virtue; therefore I declined them."
"At first I took you for a Sage," said the
warden, "but now I find you are a mere man.
God, in sending man into the world, gives to each
his proper function. If you have many sons and
give to each his proper function, what cause have
you for anxiety?
"And similarly, if you have wealth and allow
others to share it, what troubles will you have?"
"The true Sage dwells like the quail
At random.
and feeds like a fledgeling.
Which is dependent on its parents.
He travels like the bird, leaving no trace behind.[142]
If there be Tao in the empire, he and all things
are in harmony. If there be not Tao, he cultivates
virtue in retirement. After a thousand years
of this weary world, he mounts aloft, and riding
upon the white clouds passes into the kingdom of
God, whither the three evils do not reach, and
where he rests secure in eternity. What is there
to put up with in that?"
Thereupon the border-warden went off, and Yao
followed him; saying, "May I ask——," to which
the warden only replied "Begone!"
The style of the above episode varies enough from
Chuang Tzŭ's standard to make its authorship
doubtful.
When Yao was Emperor, Poh Ch'êng Tzŭ Kao
Lao Tzŭ under a previous incarnation. See the
Kuang Ch'êng Tzŭ of p. 125.
was one of his vassals. But when Yao handed
over the empire to Shun, and Shun to the Great
Yü, Poh Ch'êng Tzŭ Kao resigned his fief and
betook himself to agriculture.
The Great Yü going to visit him, found him
working in the fields; whereupon he approached
humbly, saying, "When Yao was emperor, you,
Sir, were a vassal; but when Yao handed over the
empire to Shun, and Shun to me, you resigned
your fief and betook yourself to agriculture. May
I enquire the reason of this?"
"When Yao ruled the empire," said Tzŭ Kao,[143]
"the people exerted themselves without reward
and behaved themselves without punishment.
But now you reward and punish them, and yet
they are not good. From this point virtue will
decline, the reign of force will begin, and the
troubles of after ages will date their rise. Away
with you! Do not interrupt my work." And he
quietly went on ploughing as before.
The above episode is unmistakably spurious.
At the beginning of the beginning, even Nothing
did not exist. Then came the period of the
Nameless.
"The Nameless," says the Tao-Tê-Ching, ch. i,
"was the beginning of heaven and earth." See
also ch. ii, ante.
When One came into existence, there was One,
but it was formless. When things got that by
which they came into existence, it was called their
virtue.
Sc. that, by virtue of which they are what they are.
See p. 45.
That which was formless, but divided,
I.e. allotted.
though without interstice,
Unbroken in continuity.
was called destiny.
Then came the movement which gave life, and[144]
things produced in accordance with the principles
of life had what is called form. When form
encloses the spiritual part, each with its own
characteristics, that is its nature. By cultivating
this nature, we are carried back to virtue; and if
this is perfected, we become as all things were in
the beginning. We become unconditioned, and
the unconditioned is great. As birds join their
beaks in chirping,
Unconsciously.
and beaks to chirp must be joined,—to be thus
joined with the universe without being more conscious
of it than an idiot, this is divine virtue,
this is accordance with the eternal fitness of
things.
Confucius asked Lao Tzŭ, saying, "There are
persons who cultivate Tao according to fixed rules
of possible and impossible, fit and unfit, just as
the schoolmen speak of separating hardness from
whiteness as though these could be hung up on
different pegs.
See p. 22.
Could such persons be termed sages?"
"That," replied Lao Tzŭ, "is but the skill of
the handicraftsman, wearing out body and soul
alike. The powers of the hunting-dog involve it
in trouble;
It is kept by man instead of being free.
[145]
the cleverness of the monkey brings it down from
the mountain.
Into the hands of man.
Ch'iu, what I mean you cannot understand, neither
can you put it into words.
Ch'iu was the personal name of Confucius. It is
never uttered by the Confucianist, the term "a
certain one" being usually substituted. Neither is
it ever written down, except with the omission of
some stroke, by which its form is changed.
Those who have a head and feet, but no mind nor
ears, are many. Those who have a body without
a body or appearance of one, and yet there they
are,—are none. Movement and rest, life and
death, rise and fall, are not at the beck and call of
man. Cultivation of self is in his own hands.
To be unconscious of objective existences and of
God, this is to be unconscious of one's own personality.
And he who is unconscious of his own
personality, combines in himself the human and
the divine."
Chiang Lü Mien went to see Chi Ch'ê,
Two obscure personages.
and said, "The Prince of Lu begged me to instruct
him, but I declined. However, he would take no
refusal, so I was obliged to do so. I don't know if
I was correct in my doctrine or not. Please note
what I said. I told him to be decorous and thrifty;[146]
to advance the public-spirited and loyal, and to have
no partialities. Then, I said, no one would venture
to oppose him."
Chi Ch'ê sniggered and said, "Your remarks on
the virtues of Princes may be compared with the
mantis stretching out its feelers and trying to
stop a carriage,—not likely to effect the object
proposed.
See ch. iv, where the same figure is used.
Besides, he would be placing himself in the position
of a man who builds a lofty tower and makes a display
of his valuables where all his neighbours will
come and gaze at them."
Attracting people by means not in accordance with
Tao.
"Alas! I fear I am but a fool," replied Chiang
Lü Mien. "Nevertheless, I should be glad to be
instructed by you in the proper course to pursue."
"The government of the perfect Sage," explained
Chi Ch'ê, "consists in influencing the hearts of the
people so as to cause them to complete their
education, to reform their manners, to subdue the
rebel mind, and to exert themselves one and all for
the common good. This influence operates in
accordance with the natural disposition of the
people, who are thus unconscious of its operation.
He who can so act has no need to humble himself
before the teachings of Yao and Shun. He makes
the desires of the people coincident with virtue,
and their hearts rest therein."
[147]
When Tzŭ Kung
See ch. vi.
went south to the Ch'u State on his way back to
the Chin State, he passed through Han-yin. There
he saw an old man engaged in making a ditch to
connect his vegetable garden with a well. He had
a pitcher in his hand, with which he was bringing
up water and pouring it into the ditch,—great
labour with very little result.
"If you had a machine here," cried Tzŭ Kung,
"in a day you could irrigate a hundred times your
present area. The labour required is trifling as
compared with the work done. Would you not
like to have one?"
"What is it?" asked the gardener.
"It is a contrivance made of wood," replied Tzŭ
Kung, "heavy behind and light in front. It draws
up water as you do with your hands, but in a constantly
overflowing stream. It is called a well-sweep."
Still used all over China.
Thereupon the gardener flushed up and said, "I
have heard from my teacher that those who have
cunning implements are cunning in their dealings,
and that those who are cunning in their dealings
have cunning in their hearts, and that those who
have cunning in their hearts cannot be pure and
incorrupt, and that those who are not pure and
incorrupt are restless in spirit, and that those who
are restless in spirit are not fit vehicles for Tao.[148]
It is not that I do not know of these things. I
should be ashamed to use them."
At this Tzŭ Kung was much abashed, and said
nothing. Then the gardener asked him who he
was, to which Tzŭ Kung replied that he was a
disciple of Confucius.
"Are you not one who extends his learning with
a view to being a Sage; who talks big in order to
put himself above the rest of mankind; who plays
in a key to which no one can sing so as to spread
his reputation abroad? Rather become unconscious
of self and shake off the trammels of the
flesh,—and you will be near. But if you cannot
govern your own self, what leisure have you for
governing the empire? Begone! Do not interrupt
my work."
Tzŭ Kung changed colour and slunk away, being
not at all pleased with this rebuff; and it was not
before he had travelled some thirty li that he
recovered his usual appearance.
"What did the man we met do," asked a disciple,
"that you should change colour and not
recover for such a long time?"
"I used to think there was only one man in all
the world," replied Tzŭ Kung.
Meaning Confucius.
"I did not know that there was also this man.
I have heard the Master say that the test of a
scheme is its practicability, and that success
must be certain. The minimum of effort with[149]
the maximum of success,—such is the way of the
Sage.
The absurdity of attributing such doctrines to Confucius
will be apparent to every student of the Sage's
remains.
"Not so this manner of man. Aiming at Tao,
he perfects his virtue. By perfecting his virtue
he perfects his body, and by perfecting his body
he perfects his spiritual part. And the perfection
of the spiritual part is the Tao of the Sage.
Coming into life he is as one of the people, knowing
not whither he is bound. How complete is his
purity? Success, profit, skill,—these have no place
in his heart. Such a man, if he does not will it, he
does not stir; if he does not wish it, he does not
act. If all the world praises him, he does not
heed. If all the world blames him, he does not
repine.
Reminding us of the philosopher Yung of ch. i.
The praise and the blame of the world neither
advantage him nor otherwise. He may be called a
man of perfect virtue. As for me, I am but a mere
creature of impulse."
So he went back to Lu to tell Confucius. But
Confucius said, "That fellow pretends to a knowledge
of the science of the ante-mundane. He
knows something, but not much. His government
is of the internal, not of the external. What is
there wonderful in a man by clearness of intelligence
becoming pure, by inaction reverting to his[150]
original integrity, and with his nature and his
spiritual part wrapped up in a body, passing
through this common world of ours? Besides, to
you and to me the science of the ante-mundane is
not worth knowing."
It is only the present which concerns man.
This last is an utterance which might well have
fallen from the lips of Confucius. But the whole
episode is clearly an interpolation of later times.
As Chun Mang was starting eastwards to the
ocean, he fell in with Yüan Fêng on the shore of
the eastern sea.
These names are probably allegorical, but it is
difficult to say in exactly what sense.
"Whither bound?" cried the latter.
"I am going to the ocean," replied Chun Mang.
"What are you going to do there?" asked Yüan
Fêng.
"The ocean," said Chun Mang, "is a thing you
cannot fill by pouring in, nor empty by taking out.
I am simply on a trip."
You cannot do anything to the infinite.
"But surely you have intentions with regard to
the straight-browed people?... Come, tell me
how the Sage governs."
The straight-browed, lit. horizontal-eyed, people,
are said by one commentator to have been "savages."
"Oh, the government of the Sage," answered[151]
Chun Mang. "The officials confine themselves
to their functions. Ability is secure of employment.
The voice of the people is heard, and action
is taken accordingly. Men's words and deeds are
their own affairs, and so the empire is at peace. A
beck or a call, and the people flock together from
all sides. This is how the Sage governs."
"Tell me about the man of perfect virtue," said
Yüan Fêng.
"The man of perfect virtue," replied Chun
Mang, "in repose has no thoughts, in action no
anxiety. He recognises no right, nor wrong, nor
good, nor bad. Within the Four Seas, when all
profit—that is his pleasure; when all share—that
is his repose. Men cling to him as children who
have lost their mothers; they rally round him as
wayfarers who have missed their road. He has
wealth and to spare, but he knows not whence it
comes. He has food and drink more than sufficient,
but knows not who provides it. Such is a
man of virtue."
"And now," said Yüan Fêng, "tell me about
the divine man."
"The divine man," replied Chun Mang, "rides
upon the glory of the sky where his form can no
longer be discerned. This is called absorption into
light. He fulfils his destiny. He acts in accordance
with his nature. He is at one with God and
man. For him all affairs cease to exist, and all
things revert to their original state. This is called
envelopment in darkness."
[152]
Mên Wu Kuei and Ch'ih Chang Man Chi were
looking at Wu Wang's troops.
The famous founder of the Chou dynasty, B.C.
1169-1116.
"He is not equal to the Great Yü," said the
latter; and consequently "we are involved in all
these troubles."
"May I ask," replied Mên Wu Kuei, "if the
empire was under proper government when the
Great Yü began to govern it, or had he first to
quell disorder and then to proceed to government?"
"If the empire had all been under proper government,"
said the other, "what would there have been
for the Great Yü to do? He was as ointment to a
sore. Only bald men use wigs; only sick people
want doctors. And the Sage blushes when a filial
son, with anxious look, administers medicine to
cure his loving father.
Because to need drugs, the father must first have
been sick; and this, from a Chinese point of view,
is clearly the fault of the son.
"In the Golden Age, good men were not appreciated;
ability was not conspicuous. Rulers were
mere beacons, while the people were free as the
wild deer. They were upright without being
conscious of duty to their neighbours. They loved
one another without being conscious of charity.
They were true without being conscious of loyalty.
They were honest without being conscious of good
faith. They acted freely in all things without[153]
recognising obligations to any one. Thus, their
deeds left no trace; their affairs were not handed
down to posterity.
Rousseau, in Du Contrat Social, thus describes
society as it would be if every man was a true
Christian:—"Chacun remplirait son devoir; le peuple
serait soumis aux lois, les chefs seraient justes et
modérés, les magistrats intègres, incorruptibles, les
soldats mépriseraient la mort, il n'y aurait ni vanité
ni luxe."
"A filial son does not humour his parents. A
loyal minister does not flatter his prince. This is
the acme of filial piety and loyalty. To assent to
whatever a parent or a prince says, and to praise
whatever a parent or a prince does, this is what the
world calls unfilial and disloyal conduct, though
apparently unaware that the principle is of universal
application. For though a man assents to
whatever the world says, and praises whatever the
world does, he is not dubbed a toady; from which
one might infer that the world is severer than a
father and more to be respected than a prince!
"If you tell a man he is a wheedler, he will not
like it. If you tell him he is a flatterer, he will be
angry. Yet he is everlastingly both. But all such
sham and pretence is what the world likes, and
consequently people do not punish each other for
doing what they do themselves. For a man to
arrange his dress, or make a display, or suit his
expression so as to get into the good graces of the
world, and yet not to call himself a flatterer; to[154]
identify himself in every way with the yeas and
nays of his fellows, and yet not call himself one of
them;—this is the height of folly.
"A man who knows that he is a fool is not a
great fool. A man who knows his error is not
greatly in error. Great error can never be shaken
off; a great fool never becomes clear-headed. If
three men are travelling and one man makes a
mistake, they may still arrive at their destination,
error being in the minority. But if two of them
make a mistake, then they will not succeed, error
being in the majority. And now, as all the world
is in error, I, though I know the true path, am
alas! unable to guide.
"Grand music does not appeal to vulgar ears.
Give them the Chê-yang or the Huang-hua,
The "Not for Joseph" and "Sally Come Up" of
ancient China.
and they will roar with laughter. And likewise
great truths do not take hold of the hearts of the
masses. And great truths not finding utterance,
common-places carry the day. Two earthen instruments
will drown the sound of one metal one;
and the result will not be melodious.
"And now, as all the world is in error, I, though
I know the true path,—how shall I guide? If I
know that I cannot succeed and yet try to force
success, this would be but another source of error.
Better, then, to desist and strive no more. But if
I strive not, who will?
[155]
"An ugly man who has a son born to him in the
middle of the night will hurry up with a light, in
dread lest the child should be like himself.
"An old tree is cut down to make sacrificial
vessels, which are then ornamented with colour.
The stump remains in a ditch. The sacrificial
vessels and the stump in the ditch are very differently
treated as regards honour and dishonour;
equally, as far as destruction of the woods original
nature is concerned. Similarly, the acts of Robber
Chê and of Tsêng and Shih are very different; but
the loss of original nature is in each case the same.
"The causes of this loss are five in number;
viz.—The five colours confuse the eye, and the eyes
fail to see clearly. The five sounds confuse the
ear, and the ear fails to hear accurately. The five
scents confuse the nose, and obstruct the sense of
smell. The five tastes cloy the palate, and vitiate
the sense of taste. Finally, likes and dislikes cloud
the understanding, and cause dispersion of the
original nature.
"These five are the banes of life; yet Yang and
Mih regarded them as the summum bonum.
As attainment of Tao. For Yang Chu and Mih
Tzu, see chs. ii and viii.
They are not my summum bonum. For if men
who are thus fettered can be said to have attained
the summum bonum, then pigeons and owls in a
cage may also be said to have attained the summum
bonum!
[156]
"Besides, to stuff one's inside with likes and
dislikes and sounds and colours; to encompass
one's outside with fur caps, feather hats, the carrying
of tablets, or girding of sashes—full of rubbish
inside while swathed in magnificence without—and
still to talk of having attained the summum
bonum;—then the prisoner with arms tied behind
him and fingers in the squeezer, the tiger or the
leopard which has just been put in a cage, may
justly consider that they too have attained the
summum bonum!"
"L'homme," says Rousseau (op. cit.), "est né libre,
et partout il est dans les fers."
This chapter, as it stands, is clearly not from the
hand of Chuang Tzŭ. One critic justly points out the
want of logical sequence in arrangement of argument
and illustrations. Another, while admitting general
refinement of style, calls attention to a superficiality
of thought noticeable in certain portions. "Yet only
those," he adds, "who eat and sleep with their
Chuang Tzŭs would be able to detect this."
The Tao of God.
Argument:—Tao is repose—Repose the secret of the universe—Cultivation
of essentials—Neglect of accidentals—The sequence of
Tao—Spontaneity of true virtue—Tao is unconditioned—Tao
cannot be conveyed—Illustrations.
The Tao of God operates ceaselessly; and all
things are produced. The Tao of the sovereign
operates ceaselessly; and the empire rallies around
him. The Tao of the Sage operates ceaselessly;
and all within the limit of surrounding ocean acknowledge
his sway. He who apprehends God, who
is in relation with the Sage, and who recognises the
radiating virtue of the sovereign,—his actions will
be to him unconscious, the actions of repose.
With him all will be inaction, by which all things
will be accomplished.
The repose of the Sage is not what the world calls
repose. His repose is the result of his mental attitude.
All creation could not disturb his equilibrium:
hence his repose.
When water is still, it is like a mirror, reflecting
the beard and the eyebrows. It gives the accuracy
of the water-level, and the philosopher makes it his
model. And if water thus derives lucidity from[158]
stillness, how much more the faculties of the mind?
The mind of the Sage being in repose becomes
the mirror of the universe, the speculum of all
creation.
Repose, tranquillity, stillness, inaction,—these
were the levels of the universe, the ultimate perfection
of Tao.
In the early days of Time, ere matter had assumed
shape, it was by such levels that the spiritual was
adjusted.
Therefore wise rulers and Sages rest therein.
Resting therein they reach the unconditioned,
from which springs the conditioned; and with
the conditioned comes order.
Meaning those laws which are inseparable from
concrete existences.
Again, from the unconditioned comes repose, and
from repose comes movement,
When once inner repose has been established, outer
movement results as a matter of necessity, without
injury to the organism.
and from movement comes attainment. Further,
from repose comes inaction, and from inaction comes
potentiality of action.
When inaction has been achieved, action results
spontaneously and unconsciously to the organism.
And inaction is happiness; and where there is
happiness no cares can abide, and life is long.
Repose, tranquillity, stillness, inaction,—these
were the source of all things. Due perception of[159]
this was the secret of Yao's success as a ruler, and
of Shun's success as his minister. Due perception
of this constitutes the virtue of sovereigns on the
throne, the Tao of the inspired Sage and of the
uncrowned King below. Keep to this in retirement,
and the lettered denizens of sea and dale will
recognise your power. Keep to this when coming
forward to pacify a troubled world, and your merit
shall be great and your name illustrious, and the
empire united into one. In your repose you will be
wise; in your movements, powerful. By inaction
you will gain honour; and by confining yourself to
the pure and simple, you will hinder the whole
world from struggling with you for show.
To fully apprehend the scheme of the universe,
Lit.: "the virtue of heaven and earth," meaning
their inaction by which all things are brought to
maturity.
this is called the great secret of being in accord with
God, whereby the empire is so administered that
the result is accord with man. To be in accord
with man is human happiness; to be in accord with
God is the happiness of God.
Chuang Tzŭ said, "O my exemplar! Thou who
destroyest all things, and dost not account it cruelty;
thou who benefitest all time, and dost not account
it charity; thou who art older than antiquity and
dost not account it age; thou who supportest the
universe, shaping the many forms therein, and
dost not account it skill;—this is the happiness of
God!"
[160]
Therefore it has been said, "Those who enjoy
the happiness of God, when born into the world,
are but fulfilling their divine functions; when they
die, they do but undergo a physical change. In
repose, they exert the influence of the Negative; in
motion, they wield the power of the Positive."
See ante, chs. vi and xi.
Thus, those who enjoy the happiness of God
have no grievance against God, no grudge against
man. Nothing material injures them; nothing
spiritual punishes them. Accordingly it has been
said, "Their motion is that of heaven;
One of ceaseless revolution, without beginning or
end.
their repose is that of earth. Mental equilibrium
gives them the empire of the world. Evil spirits
do not harass them without; demons do not trouble
them within. Mental equilibrium gives them sovereignty
over all creation." Which signifies that in
repose to extend to the whole universe and to be in
relation with all creation,—this is the happiness of
God. This enables the mind of the Sage to cherish
the whole empire.
For the virtue of the wise ruler is modelled upon
the universe, is guided by Tao, and is ever occupied
in inaction. By inaction, he administers the empire,
and has energy to spare; but by action he
finds his energy inadequate to the administration of
the empire. Therefore the men of old set great
store by inaction.
[161]
But if rulers practise inaction and the ruled also
practise inaction, the ruled will equal the rulers,
and will not be as their subjects. On the other
hand, if the ruled practise action and rulers also
practise action, rulers will assimilate themselves to
the ruled, and will not be as their masters.
Rulers must practise inaction in order to administer
the empire. The ruled must practise action in
order to subserve the interests of the empire. This
is an unchangeable law.
And one over which the commentators have exhausted
not a little wit. At the end of the chapter,
the reader will be able to draw his own conclusions.
Thus, the men of old, although their knowledge
did not extend throughout the universe, were not
troubled in mind. Although their intellectual
powers beautified all creation, they did not rejoice.
Although their abilities exhausted all things within
the limits of ocean, they did not act.
Heaven has no parturitions, yet all things are
evolved. Earth knows no increment, yet all things
are nourished. The wise ruler practises inaction,
and the empire applauds him. Therefore it has
been said, "There is nothing more mysterious
In its action.
than heaven, nothing richer than earth, nothing
greater than the wise ruler." Wherefore also it has
been said, "The virtue of the wise ruler makes him
the peer of heaven and earth." Charioted upon the
universe, with all creation for his team, he passes
along the highway of mortality.
[162]
The essential is in the ruler; the accidental in
the ruled.
Lit. the "root," and the "tip" of the branch,
respectively.
The ultima ratio lies with the prince; representation
is the duty of the minister.
Appeal to arms is the lowest form of virtue.
Rewards and punishments are the lowest form of
education. Ceremonies and laws are the lowest
form of government. Music and fine clothes are
the lowest form of happiness. Weeping and
mourning are the lowest form of grief. These five
should follow the movements of the mind.
The ancients indeed cultivated the study of accidentals,
but they did not allow it to precede that
of essentials. The prince precedes, the minister
follows. The father precedes, the son follows. The
elder brother precedes, the younger follows. Seniors
precede, juniors follow. Men precede, women
follow. Husbands precede, wives follow. Distinctions
of rank and precedence are part of the scheme
of the universe, and the Sage adopts them accordingly.
In point of spirituality, heaven is honourable,
earth is lowly. Spring and summer precede autumn
and winter: such is the order of the seasons. In
the constant production of all things, there are
phases of existence. There are the extremes of
maturity and decay, the perpetual tide of change.
And if heaven and earth, divinest of all, admit of
rank and precedence, how much more man?
[163]
In the ancestral temple, parents rank before all;
at court, the most honourable; in the village, the
elders; in matters to be accomplished, the most
trustworthy. Such is the order which appertains
to Tao. He who in considering Tao disregards
this order, thereby disregards Tao; and he who in
considering Tao disregards Tao,—whence will he
secure Tao?
Therefore, those of old who apprehended Tao,
first apprehended God. Tao came next, and then
charity and duty to one's neighbour, and then the
functions of public life, and then forms and names,
and then employment according to capacity, and
then distinctions of good and bad, and then discrimination
between right and wrong, and then
rewards and punishments. Thus wise men and
fools met with their dues; the exalted and the
humble occupied their proper places. And the
virtuous and the worthless being each guided by
their own natural instincts, it was necessary to distinguish
capabilities, and to adopt a corresponding
nomenclature, in order to serve the ruler, nourish
the ruled, administer things generally, and elevate
self. Where knowledge and plans are of no avail,
one must fall back upon the natural. This is perfect
peace, the acme of good government. Therefore it
has been written, "Wherever there is form, there
is also its name." Forms and names indeed
the ancients had, but did not give precedence to
them.
Thus, those of old who considered Tao, passed[164]
through five phases before forms and names were
reached, and nine before rewards and punishments
could be discussed.
As given in the preceding paragraph.
To rise per saltum to forms and names is to be
ignorant of their source; to rise per saltum to
rewards and punishments is to be ignorant of their
beginning. Those who invert the process of discussing
Tao, arguing in a directly contrary sense,
are rather to be governed by others than able to
govern others themselves.
To rise per saltum to forms and names and
rewards and punishments, this is to understand the
instrumental part of government, but not to understand
the great principle of government.
Which is Tao.
This is to be of use in the administration of the
empire, but not to be able to administer the empire.
This is to be a sciolist, a man of narrow
views.
Ceremonies and laws were indeed cultivated by
the ancients; but they were employed in the service
of the rulers by the ruled. Rulers did not employ
them as a means of nourishing the ruled.
From the beginning of this chapter, the argument
has been eminently unsatisfactory.
Of old, Shun asked Yao, saying, "How does
your Majesty employ your faculties?"
[165]
"I am not arrogant towards the defenceless,"
replied Yao. "I do not neglect the poor. I grieve
for those who die. I pity the orphan. I sympathise
with the widow. Beyond this, nothing."
"Good indeed!" cried Shun, "but yet not
great."
"How so?" inquired Yao.
"Be passive," said Shun, "like the virtue of
God. The sun and moon shine; the four seasons
revolve; day and night alternate; clouds come and
rain falls."
"Alas!" cried Yao, "what a muddle I have been
making. You are in accord with God; I am in
accord with man."
Of old, heaven and earth were considered great;
and the Yellow Emperor and Yao and Shun all
thought them perfection. Consequently, what did
those do who ruled the empire of old? They did
what heaven and earth do; no more.
When Confucius was going west to place his
works in the Imperial library of the House of
Chou, Tzŭ Lu
The most popular of all the disciples of Confucius.
In the striking words of Mr. Watters, "He was
equally ready to argue, fight, be silent, pray for his
master, and die with him. So it is very unfair in
Dr. Legge to call him a kind of Peter, meaning of
course Simon Peter, a man who lacked faith, courage,
and fidelity, and who moreover cursed and swore."—Guide
to the Tablets in a Confucian Temple.
counselled him, saying, "I have heard that a[166]
certain librarian of the Chêng department, by
name Lao Tan,
Or, as usually named in this work, Lao Tzŭ.
"Chêng" appears to have been merely a distinctive
name.
has resigned and retired into private life. Now as
you, Sir, wish to deposit your works, it would be
advisable to go and interview him."
"Certainly," said Confucius; and he thereupon
went to see Lao Tzŭ. The latter would not hear
of the proposal; so Confucius began to expound
the doctrines of his twelve canons, in order to
convince Lao Tzŭ.
These twelve have been variously enumerated as
(1) the Book of Changes, Parts i and ii, with the
ten Wings. (2) The twelve Dukes of the Spring
and Autumn, etc.
"This is all nonsense," cried Lao Tzŭ, interrupting
him. "Tell me what are your criteria."
"Charity," replied Confucius, "and duty towards
one's neighbour."
"Tell me, please," asked Lao Tzŭ, "are these
part of man's original nature?"
The question of an innate moral sense early occupied
the attention of Chinese thinkers.
"They are," answered Confucius. "Without
charity, the superior man could not become what
he is. Without duty to one's neighbour, he would
be of no effect. These two belong to the original
nature of a pure man. What further would you
have?"
[167]
"Tell me," said Lao Tzŭ, "in what consist
charity and duty to one's neighbour?"
"They consist," answered Confucius, "in a
capacity for rejoicing in all things; in universal
love, without the element of self. These are the
characteristics of charity and duty to one's neighbour."
"What stuff!" cried Lao Tzŭ. "Does not
universal love contradict itself?
If every one loves every one, there can be no such
thing as love, just as absolute altruism only achieves
the same result as absolute egoism.
Is not your elimination of self a positive manifestation
of self?
On the "Don't nail his ear to the pump" principle.
Sir, if you would cause the empire not to lose its
source of nourishment,—there is the universe, its
regularity is unceasing; there are the sun and
moon, their brightness is unceasing; there are the
stars, their groupings never change; there are
birds and beasts, they flock together without varying;
there are trees and shrubs, they grow upwards
without exception, Be like these; follow
Tao; and you will be perfect. Why then these
vain struggles after charity and duty to one's
neighbour, as though beating a drum in search of
a fugitive. Alas! Sir, you have brought much
confusion into the mind of man."
The drum similitude occurs again in ch. xiv.
[168]
Shih Ch'êng Ch'i
Of whom nothing is known.
visited Lao Tzŭ, and addressed him, saying,
"Having heard, Sir, that you were a Sage, I put
aside all thought of distance to come and visit
you. Travelling many stages, the soles of my feet
thickened, but I did not venture to rest. And now
I see you are not a Sage. While rats feasted off
your leavings, you turned your sister out of doors.
This is not charity. Though you have no lack of
food, raw and cooked, you are stingy beyond all
bounds."
At this Lao Tzŭ was silent and made no reply;
and the next day Shih Ch'êng Ch'i came again and
said, "Before, I was rude to you; now, I am sorry.
How is this?"
"I have no pretension," replied Lao Tzŭ, "to be
possessed of cunning knowledge nor of divine
wisdom. Had you yesterday called me an ox, I
should have considered myself an ox. Had you
called me a horse, I should have considered myself
a horse.
"For if men class you in accordance with truth,
and you reject the classification, you only double
the reproach. My humility is natural humility.
It is not humility for humility's sake."
Shih Ch'êng Ch'i moved respectfully away.
Without allowing his shadow to fall on Lao Tzŭ.
Bringing one foot up to the other only. Not
venturing to let it pass as in ordinary walking.
[169]
Then he advanced again, also respectfully, and
said, "May I ask you about personal cultivation?"
Lao Tzŭ said, "Your countenance is a strange
one. Your eyes protrude. Your jaws are heavy.
Your lips are parted. Your demeanour is self-satisfied.
You look like a man on a tethered
horse.
His body there, his mind elsewhere.
You are too confident. You are too hasty. You
think too much of your own powers. Such men are
not trusted. Those who are found on the wrong
side of a boundary line are called thieves."
Lao Tzŭ said, "Tao is not too small for the
greatest, nor too great for the smallest. Thus all
things are embosomed therein; wide indeed its
boundless capacity, unfathomable its depth.
"Form, and virtue, and charity, and duty to
one's neighbour, these are the accidentals of the
spiritual. Except he be a perfect man, who shall
determine their place? The world of the perfect
man, is not that vast? And yet it is not able to
involve him in trouble. All struggle for power,
but he does not join. Though discovering nothing
false, he is not tempted astray. In spite of the
utmost genuineness, he still confines himself to
essentials.
To the root, not to the branch.
"He thus places himself outside the universe,
beyond all creation, where his soul is free from[170]
care. Apprehending Tao, he is in accord with
virtue. He leaves charity and duty to one's
neighbour alone. He treats ceremonies and music
as adventitious. And so the mind of the perfect
man is at peace.
"Books are what the world values as representing
Tao. But books are only words, and the valuable
part of words is the thought therein contained.
That thought has a certain bias which cannot be
conveyed in words, yet the world values words as
being the essence of books. But though the world
values them, they are not of value; as that sense
in which the world values them is not the sense in
which they are valuable.
"That which can be seen with the eye is form
and colour; that which can be heard with the ear
is sound and noise. But alas! the people of this
generation think that form, and colour, and sound,
and noise, are means by which they can come to
understand the essence of Tao. This is not so.
And as those who know, do not speak, while those
who speak do not know, whence should the world
derive its knowledge?"
The first half of this last sentence has been pitchforked
à propos de bottes into ch. lvi of the Tao-Tê-Ching.
See The Remains of Lao Tzŭ, pp. 7
and 38.
Duke Huan.
The famous ruler of the Ch'i State. Flourished
7th century B.C.
[171]
was one day reading in his hall, when a wheelwright
who was working below,
Below the covered dais, termed "hall," which has
an open frontage, in full view of which such work
might be carried on.
flung down his hammer and chisel, and mounting
the steps said, "What words may your Highness
be studying?"
"I am studying the words of the Sages," replied
the Duke.
"Are the Sages alive?" asked the wheelwright.
"No," answered the Duke; "they are dead."
"Then the words your Highness is studying,"
rejoined the wheelwright, "are only the dregs of
the ancients."
"What do you mean, sirrah!" cried the Duke,
"by interfering with what I read? Explain yourself,
or you shall die."
"Let me take an illustration," said the wheelwright,
"from my own trade. In making a wheel,
if you work too slowly, you can't make it firm; if
you work too fast, the spokes won't fit in. You
must go neither too slowly nor too fast. There
must be co-ordination of mind and hand. Words
cannot explain what it is, but there is some mysterious
art herein. I cannot teach it to my son;
nor can he learn it from me. Consequently,
though seventy years of age, I am still making
wheels in my old age. If the ancients, together
with what they could not impart, are dead and[172]
gone, then what your Highness is studying must
be the dregs."
This episode of the wheelwright is to be found in
the works of Huai Nan Tzŭ, of the 2nd century B.C.
He used it to illustrate the opening words of the
Tao-Tê-Ching; and in The Remains of Lao Tzŭ,
p. 6, it is stated that he stole it from Chuang Tzŭ
without acknowledgment.
When that statement was made I had not come to
the conclusion, now forced upon me, that the above
chapter is not from the hand of Chuang Tzŭ. As
one critic remarks, the style is generally admirable;
but it is not the style of Chuang Tzŭ.
The Circling Sky.
Argument:—The Ultimate Cause—Integrity of Tao—Music and Tao—Failure
of Confucianism—Confucius and Lao Tzŭ—Confucius
attains to Tao—Illustrations.
[This chapter is supplementary to ch. v.]
"The sky turns round; the earth stands still;
sun and moon pursue one another. Who
causes this? Who directs this? Who has leisure
enough to see that such movements continue?
"Some think there is a mechanical arrangement
which makes these bodies move as they do.
Others think that they revolve without being able
to stop.
"The clouds cause rain; rain causes clouds.
Whose kindly bounty is this? Who has leisure
enough to see that such, result is achieved?
"Wind comes from the north. It blows now
east, now west; and now it whirls aloft. Who
puffs it forth? Who has leisure enough to be
flapping it this way or that? I should like to know
the cause of all this."
We are not told the name of this questioner.
Wu Han Chao
An ancient worthy.
[174]
said, "Come here, and I will tell you. Above
there are the Six Influences
The Yin and Yang principles, wind, rain, darkness,
and light; as in ch. xi.
Some commentators read, the "Six Cardinal Points,"
viz.: N., E., S., W., above, and below.
and the Five Virtues.
Charity, duty to one's neighbour, order, wisdom, and
truth.
If a ruler keeps in harmony with these, his rule is
good; if not, it is bad. By following the nine
chapters of the Lo book,
Containing a mystic revelation of knowledge in the
form of a diagram, supposed to have been delivered
to one of the legendary rulers of China more than
2,000 years before the Christian era.
his rule will be a success and his virtue complete;
he will watch over the interests of his people, and
all the empire will owe him gratitude. This is to
be an eminent ruler."
"A very round answer," says Lin Hsi Chung, "to
a very square question."
Tang, a high official of Sung, asked Chuang Tzŭ
about charity. Chuang Tzŭ said, "Tigers and
wolves have it."
"How so?" asked Tang.
"The natural love between parents and offspring,"
replied Chuang Tzŭ,—"is not that charity?"
[175]
Tang then inquired about perfect charity.
"Perfect charity," said Chuang Tzŭ, "does not
admit of love for the individual."
It embraces all men equally. To love one person
would imply at least the possibility of hating another.
See also p. 167, where Lao Tzŭ refutes the doctrine
of universal love.
"Without such love," replied Tang, "it appears
to me there would be no such thing as affection,
and without affection no filial piety. Does perfect
charity not admit of filial piety?"
"Not so," said Chuang Tzŭ. "Perfect charity
is the more extensive term. Consequently, it was
unnecessary to mention filial piety. It was not
that filial piety was omitted. It was merely not
particularised.
"A man who travels southwards to Ying,
Capital of the Ch'u State.
cannot see Mount Ming in the north. Why?
Because he is too far off.
"Therefore it has been said that it is easy to be
respectfully filial, but difficult to be affectionately
filial.
The artificial is easier than the natural.
But even that is easier than to become unconscious
of one's natural obligations, which is in turn easier
than to cause others to be unconscious of the
operations thereof.
I.e. to be filial without letting others be conscious
of the fact.
[176]
Similarly, this is easier than to become altogether
unconscious of the world, which again is easier
than to cause the world to be unconscious of one's
influence upon it.
Such is perfect charity, which operates without
letting its operation be known.
"True virtue does nothing, yet it leaves Yao and
Shun far behind. Its good influence extends to
ten thousand generations, yet no man knoweth it
to exist. What boots it then to sigh after charity
and duty to one's neighbour?
"Filial piety, fraternal love, charity, duty to
one's neighbour, loyalty, truth, chastity, and
honesty,—these are all studied efforts, designed to
aid the development of virtue. They are only
parts of a whole.
"Therefore it has been said, 'Perfect honour
includes all the honour a country can give. Perfect
wealth includes all the wealth a country can give.
Perfect ambition includes all the reputation one
can desire.' And by parity of reasoning, Tao does
not admit of sub-division."
Pei Mên Ch'êng
Of whom nothing is recorded.
said to the Yellow Emperor, "When your Majesty
played the Han-ch'ih
Name of a piece of music, the meaning of which is
not known.
in the wilds of Tung-t'ing, the first time I heard[177]
it I was afraid, the second time I was amazed, and
the last time I was confused, speechless, overwhelmed."
"You are not far from the truth," replied the
Yellow Emperor. "I played as a man, drawing
inspiration from God. The execution was punctilious,
the expression sublime.
"Perfect music first shapes itself according to a
human standard; then it follows the lines of the
divine; then it proceeds in harmony with the five
virtues; then it passes into spontaneity. The four
seasons are then blended, and all creation is
brought into accord. As the seasons come forth
in turn, so are all things produced. Now fulness,
now decay, now soft and loud in turn, now clear,
now muffled, the harmony of Yin and Yang. Like
a flash was the sound which roused you as the
insect world is roused,
By the warm breath of spring.
followed by a thundering peal, without end and
without beginning, now dying, now living, now
sinking, now rising, on and on without a moment's
break. And so you were afraid.
"When I played again, it was the harmony of
the Yin and Yang, lighted by the glory of sun and
moon; now broken, now prolonged, now gentle,
now severe, in one unbroken, unfathomable volume
of sound. Filling valley and gorge, stopping the
ears and dominating the senses, adapting itself to
the capacities of things,—the sound whirled around
on all sides, with shrill note and clear. The spirits[178]
of darkness kept to their domain. Sun, moon, and
stars, pursued their appointed course. When the
melody was exhausted I stopped; if the melody
did not stop, I went on.
The music was naturally what it was, independently
of the player.
You would have sympathised, but you could not
understand. You would have looked, but you
could not see. You would have pursued, but you
could not overtake. You stood dazed in the
middle of the wilderness, leaning against a tree
and crooning, your eye conscious of exhausted
vision, your strength failing for the pursuit, and so
unable to overtake me. Your frame was but an
empty shell. You were completely at a loss, and
so you were amazed.
"Then I played in sounds which produce no
amazement, the melodious law of spontaneity,
springing forth like nature's countless buds, in
manifold but formless joy, as though poured forth
to the dregs, in deep but soundless bass. Beginning
nowhere, the melody rested in void; some
would say dead, others alive, others real, others
ornamental, as it scattered itself on all sides in
never to be anticipated chords.
"The wondering world enquires of the Sage.
He is in relation with its variations and follows the
same eternal law.
"When no machinery is set in motion, and yet
the instrumentation is complete, this is the music
of God. The mind awakes to its enjoyment with[179]out
waiting to be called. Accordingly, Yu Piao
praised it, saying, 'Listening you cannot hear its
sound; gazing you cannot see its form.
Yu Piao is said to have been one of the pre-historic
rulers of China. Readers of the Tao-Tê-Ching
(ch. xiv) will here find another nail for the coffin
of that egregious fraud. See The Remains of Lao
Tzŭ, p. 14. Also ch. xxii of this work.
It fills heaven and earth. It embraces the six
cardinal points.' Now you desired to listen to it,
but you were not able to grasp its existence. And
so you were confused.
"My music first induced fear; and as a consequence,
respect. I then added amazement, by
which you were isolated.
From consciousness of your surroundings.
And lastly, confusion; for confusion means absence
of sense, and absence of sense means Tao, and
Tao means absorption therein."
When Confucius travelled west to the Wei State,
Yen Yüan
The "John" among the disciples of Confucius. He
closed a pure and gentle life at the early age of 32,
to the inexpressible grief of the Sage.
asked Shih Chin,
Chief musician of the Lu State.
saying, "What think you of my Master?"
"Alas!" replied Shih Chin, "he is not a
success."
[180]
"How so?" enquired Yen Yüan.
"Before the straw dog has been offered in
sacrifice," replied Shih Chin, "it is kept in a box,
wrapped up in an embroidered cloth, and the augur
fasts before using it. But when it has once been
offered up, passers-by trample over its body, and
fuel-gatherers pick it up for burning. Then, if
any one should take it, and again putting it in a
box and wrapping it up in an embroidered cloth,
watch and sleep alongside, he would not only
dream, but have nightmare into the bargain.
The thing being uncanny. From which it would
appear that the use of the straw dog was to induce
dreams of future events.
"Now your Master has been thus treating the
ancients, who are like the dog which has already
been offered in sacrifice. He causes his disciples
to watch and sleep alongside of them. Consequently,
his tree
Beneath which he used to teach.
has been cut down in Sung; they will have none
of him in Wei; in fact, his chances among the
Shangs and the Chous are exhausted. Is not this
the dream? And then to be surrounded by the
Ch'êns and the Ts'ais, seven days without food,
death staring him in the face,—is not this the
nightmare?
"For travelling by water there is nothing like a
boat. For travelling by land there is nothing like
a cart. This because a boat moves readily in[181]
water; but were you to try to push it on land you
would never succeed in making it go.
Be in harmony with your surroundings.
Now ancient and modern times may be likened
unto water and land; Chou and Lu to the boat
and the cart. To try to make the customs of Chou
succeed in Lu, is like pushing a boat on land: great
trouble and no result, except certain injury to oneself.
Your Master has not yet learnt the doctrine
of non-angularity, of self-adaptation to externals.
"Have you never seen a well-sweep? You pull
it, and down it comes. You release it, and up it
goes. It is the man who pulls the well-sweep, and
not the well-sweep which pulls the man; so that
both in coming down and going up, it does not
run counter to the wishes of the man. And so it
was that the ceremonial and obligations and laws
of the Three Emperors and Five Rulers did not
aim at uniformity of application but at good
government of the empire. Their ceremonial,
obligations, laws, etc., were like the cherry-apple,
the pear, the orange, and the pumelo,—all differing
in flavour but each palatable. They changed with
the changing season.
"Dress up a monkey in the robes of Chou Kung,
See ch. iv.
and it will not be happy until they are torn to
shreds. And the difference between past and
present is much the same as the difference between
Chou Kung and a monkey.
[182]
"When Hsi Shih
A famous beauty of old.
was distressed in mind, she knitted her brows. An
ugly woman of the village, seeing how beautiful
she looked, went home, and having worked herself
into a fit frame of mind, knitted her brows. The
result was that the rich people of the place barred
up their doors and would not come out, while the
poor people took their wives and children and
departed elsewhere. That woman saw the beauty
of knitted brows, but she did not see wherein the
beauty of knitted brows lay.
In suitability to the individual.
Alas! your Master is emphatically not a success."
Confucius had lived to the age of fifty-one without
hearing Tao, when he went south to P'ei, to
see Lao Tzŭ.
Lao Tzŭ said, "So you have come, Sir, have
you? I hear you are considered a wise man up
north. Have you got Tao?"
"Not yet," answered Confucius.
"In what direction," asked Lao Tzŭ, "have you
sought for it?"
"I sought it for five years," replied Confucius,
"in the science of numbers, but did not succeed."
"And then?..." continued Lao Tzŭ.
"Then," said Confucius, "I spent twelve years
seeking for it in the doctrine of the Yin and Yang,
also without success."
[183]
"Just so," rejoined Lao Tzŭ. "Were Tao something
which could be presented, there is no man
but would present it to his sovereign, or to his
parents. Could it be imparted or given, there is no
man but would impart it to his brother or give
it to his child. But this is impossible, for the
following reason. Unless there is a suitable endowment
within, Tao will not abide. Unless there is
outward correctness, Tao will not operate. The
external being unfitted for the impression of the
internal, the true Sage does not seek to imprint.
The internal being unfitted for the reception of the
external, the true Sage does not seek to receive.
Attempting neither to teach nor to learn.
"Reputation is public property; you may not
appropriate it in excess. Charity and duty to one's
neighbour are as caravanserais established by wise
rulers of old; you may stop there one night, but
not for long, or you will incur reproach.
"The perfect men of old took their road through
charity, stopping a night with duty to their neighbour,
on their way to ramble in transcendental
space. Feeding on the produce of non-cultivation,
and establishing themselves in the domain of no
obligations, they enjoyed their transcendental inaction.
Their food was ready to hand; and being
under no obligations to others, they did not put
any one under obligation to themselves. The
ancients called this the outward visible sign of an
inward and spiritual grace.
[184]
"Those who make wealth their all in all, cannot
bear loss of money. Those who make distinction
their all in all, cannot bear loss of fame. Those who
affect power will not place authority in the hands of
others. Anxious while holding, distressed if losing,
yet never taking warning from the past and seeing
the folly of their pursuit,—such men are the accursed
of God.
"Resentment, gratitude, taking, giving, censure
of self, instruction of others, power of life and
death,—these eight are the instruments of right;
but only he who can adapt himself to the vicissitudes
of fortune, without being carried away, is fit
to use them. Such a one is an upright man among
the upright. And he whose heart is not so constituted,—the
door of divine intelligence is not yet
opened for him."
Confucius visited Lao Tzŭ, and spoke of charity
and duty to one's neighbour.
Lao Tzŭ said, "The chaff from winnowing will
blind a man's eyes so that he cannot tell the points
of the compass. Mosquitoes will keep a man awake
all night with their biting. And just in the same
way this talk of charity and duty to one's neighbour
drives me nearly crazy. Sir! strive to keep the
world to its own original simplicity. And as the
wind bloweth where it listeth, so let Virtue establish
itself. Wherefore such undue energy, as though
searching for a fugitive with a big drum?
See p. 167.
[185]
"The snow-goose is white without a daily bath.
The raven is black without daily colouring itself.
The original simplicity of black and of white is beyond
the reach of argument. The vista of fame and
reputation is not worthy of enlargement. When the
pond dries up and the fishes are left upon dry
ground, to moisten them with the breath or to
damp them with a little spittle is not to be compared
with leaving them in the first instance in their
native rivers and lakes."
Repeated from ch. vi.
On returning from this visit to Lao Tzŭ,
Confucius did not speak for three days. A
disciple asked him, saying, "Master, when you
saw Lao Tzŭ, in what direction did you admonish
him?"
"I saw a Dragon," replied Confucius, "—a
Dragon which by convergence showed a body, by
radiation became colour, and riding upon the
clouds of heaven, nourished the two Principles of
Creation. My mouth was agape: I could not
shut it. How then do you think I was going to
admonish Lao Tzŭ?"
Upon this Tzŭ Kung remarked, "Ha! then a
man can sit corpse-like manifesting his dragon-power
around, his thunder-voice heard though
profound silence reigns, his movements like
those of the universe? I too would go and see
him."
More repetition, this time from ch. xi.
[186]
So on the strength of his connection with Confucius,
Tzŭ Kung obtained an interview. Lao Tzŭ
received him distantly and with dignity, saying in a
low voice, "I am old, Sir. What injunctions may
you have to give me?"
"The administration of the Three Kings and of
the Five Rulers," replied Tzŭ Kung, "was not
uniform; but their reputation has been identical.
How then, Sir, is it that you do not regard them
as Sages?"
"Come nearer, my son," said Lao Tzŭ. "What
mean you by not uniform?"
"Yao handed over the empire to Shun," replied
Tzŭ Kung; "and Shun to Yü. Yü employed
labour, and T'ang employed troops. Wên Wang
followed Chou Hsin and did not venture to oppose
him. Wu Wang opposed him and would not
follow. Therefore I said not uniform."
"Come nearer, my son," said Lao Tzŭ, "and I will
tell you about the Three Kings and the Five Rulers.
"The Yellow Emperor's administration caused
the affections of the people to be catholic. Nobody
wept for the death of his parents, and nobody found
fault.
One commentator says "killed themselves in their
own dwellings." But if so, Chuang Tzŭ's influence
was of small practical value as far as the swordsmen
were concerned. They might as well have continued
their profession of arms.
The Old Fisherman.
[Spurious.]
Confucius, travelling in the Black Forest,
rested awhile at Apricot Altar. His disciples
sat down to their books, and he himself played
upon the lute and sang.
Half way through the song, an old fisherman
stepped out of a boat and advanced towards them.
His beard and eyebrows were snowy white. His
hair hung loose, and he flapped his long sleeves as
he walked over the foreshore. Reaching firm
ground, he stood still, and with left hand on his
knee and right hand to his ear, listened.
When the song was finished, he beckoned to Tzŭ
Kung and Tzŭ Lu, both of whom went to him.
Then pointing with his finger, he enquired, saying,
"What is that man doing here?"
"He is the Sage of Lu," replied Tzŭ Lu.
"Of what clan?" asked the old man.
"Of the K'ung family," replied Tzŭ Lu.
"And what is his occupation?" said the old
man.
"He devotes himself," replied Tzŭ Lu, "to[414]
loyalty and truth. He practises charity and duty
towards his neighbour. He regulates ceremonies and
music. He distinguishes the relationships of man.
He is loyal to his prince above, a reformer of the
masses below. Thus he will be of great service to
the whole empire. Such is his occupation."
"Is he a ruler of a State?" asked the old man.
"He is not," said Tzŭ Kung.
"A minister?" said the old man.
"No," said Tzŭ Kung.
Then the old man laughed and walked away,
saying, "Charity is charity, yet I fear he will not
escape the wear of mind and tear of body which
imperil the original purity of man. How far,
alas, has he wandered from the true path!"
From Tao.
Tzŭ Kung went back and told Confucius, who,
laying aside his lute, arose and said, "This man is
a Sage!"
Thereupon he followed the old man down the
shore, catching him up just as he was drawing in
his boat with his staff. Perceiving Confucius, the
old man turned round to receive him, at which Confucius
stepped back and prostrated himself twice
before advancing.
"What do you want, Sir?" asked the fisherman.
"Just now, venerable Sir," replied Confucius,
"you left without finishing your remarks. In my
stupidity I cannot make out what you mean.[415]
Therefore I have come in the humble hope of
hearing any words with which you may deign to
help me."
"Well," said the old man, "you are certainly
anxious to learn."
At this Confucius prostrated himself twice, and
when he got up said, "Yes, I have been a student
from my youth upwards until now, the sixty-ninth
year of my age. Yet I have never heard the true
doctrine, which I am now ready to receive without
bias."
"Like species follow like," answered the old man.
"Like sounds respond to like.
See p. 283, and the experiment of the two lutes,
p. 319.
This is a law of nature. I will now with your leave
apply what I know to what you occupy yourself
with,—the affairs of men.
"The Son of Heaven, the princes, the ministers,
and the people,—if these four fulfil their proper
functions, the result is good government. If they
quit their proper places, the result is unutterable
confusion. When the officials mind their duties
and the people their business, neither is injured by
the other.
"Barren land, leaky roofs, want of food and
clothing, inability to meet taxation, quarrels of
wives and concubines, no precedence between young
and old,—such are the sorrows of the people.
"Capacity unequal to one's duties, and inability
to carry on routine work, absence of clean-handed[416]ness,
and carelessness among subordinates, lack of
distinction and want of preferment,—such are the
sorrows of ministers.
"The Court without loyal ministers and the
State in rebellion, the artisan unskilful and the
tribute unsatisfactory, the periodical levées unattended
and the Son of Heaven displeased,—such
are the sorrows of the princes.
"The two great principles of nature working
inharmoniously, heat and cold coming at irregular
seasons so that men and things suffer, the princes
rebellious and fighting among themselves so that
the people perish, music and ceremonies ill regulated,
wealth dissipated, the relationships of man
disregarded, the masses sunk in immorality,—such
are the sorrows which fall to the share of the Son
of Heaven.
"But now you, Sir, occupying neither the more
exalted position of ruler nor performing the subordinate
functions of minister, nevertheless take upon
yourself to regulate music and ceremonies and to
distinguish the relationships of man, in order to
reform the masses. Are you not travelling out of
your own sphere?
"Further, men have eight blemishes, and there
are four things which obstruct business. These
should be investigated.
"Meddling with matters which do not matter to
you, is prying.
"To push one's way in, regardless of neglect, is
to be forward.
[417]
"To adapt one's thoughts and arrange one's
words, is sycophancy.
"To applaud a person, right or wrong, is
flattery.
"To love speaking evil of others, is slander.
"To sever friendships and break ties, is mischievousness.
"To praise people falsely with a view to injure
them, is malice.
"To give ready assent with a view to worm out
the wishes of others, good and bad alike, is to be a
hypocrite.
"These eight blemishes cause a man to throw
others into confusion and bring injury upon himself.
The superior man will not have him for a
friend; the enlightened prince will not employ him
as his minister.
"To love the conduct of great affairs, and to introduce
change into established order with a view
to gain reputation,—this is ambition.
"To strive to get all into one's own hands, and to
usurp what should be at the disposal of others,—this
is greed.
"To know one's faults but not to correct them, to
receive admonition but only to plunge deeper,—this
is obstinacy.
"To suffer those who are like oneself, but as for
those unlike not to credit them with the virtues
they really possess,—this is bigotry.
"Such are the four things which obstruct business.
And only he who can put aside the above[418]
eight and abstain from the above four is fit for
instruction."
At this Confucius heaved a sigh of distress.
Then having twice prostrated himself, he arose and
said, "Twice was I driven from Lu. I was tabooed
in Wei. My tree was cut down in Sung. I was
surrounded by the Ch'êns and the Ts'ais. I know
not what my fault is that I should have suffered
these four persecutions."
"Dear me!" said the old man in a vexed tone,
"How slow of perception you are.
"There was once a man who was so afraid of his
shadow and so disliked his own footsteps that he
determined to run away from them. But the oftener
he raised his feet the more footsteps he made, and
though he ran very hard his shadow never left
him. From this he inferred that he went too
slowly, and ran as hard as he could without resting,
the consequence being that his strength broke
down and he died. He was not aware that by
going into the shade he would have got rid of his
shadow, and that by keeping still he would have
put an end to his footsteps. Fool that he was!
"Now you occupy yourself with charity and
duty to one's neighbour. You examine into the distinction
of like and unlike, the changes of motion
and rest, the canons of giving and receiving, the
emotions of love and hate, and the restraint of joy
and anger. Yet you cannot avoid the calamities
you speak of.
"Reverently care for your body. Carefully pre[419]serve
your natural purity. Leave externals to
others. Then you will not be involved. But as it
is, instead of improving yourself you are trying to
improve other people. Surely this is dealing with
the external."
"Then may I enquire," said Confucius in a tone
of distress, "what is the original purity?"
"Our original purity," replied the fisherman, "is
the perfection of truth unalloyed. Without this,
we cannot influence others. Hence, those who
weep to order, though they mourn, do not grieve.
Those who assume anger, though violent, do not
inspire awe. Those who affect friendship, though
they smile, are not in unison."
"Real mourning grieves in silence. Real anger
awes without expression. Real friendship is unison
without the aid of smiles. Our emotions are
dependent upon the original purity within; and
accordingly we hold the latter in esteem.
"If applied to human affairs, then in serving our
parents we are filial, in serving our prince we are
loyal, in the banquet hour we are merry, in the
hour of mourning we are sad.
"The object of loyalty is successful service; of
a banquet, mirth; of mourning, grief; of serving
parents, gratifying their wishes. If the service is
accomplished, it matters not that no trace remain.
In the way of kudos to the accomplisher.
If parents be gratified, it matters not how. If a
banquet results in mirth, the accessories are of no[420]
importance. If there be real grief in mourning, it
matters not what ceremonies may be employed.
"Ceremonial is the invention of man. Our
original purity is given to us from God. It is as
it is, and cannot be changed. Wherefore the true
Sage models himself upon God, and holds his
original purity in esteem. He is independent of
human exigencies. Fools, however, reverse this.
They cannot model themselves upon God, and have
to fall back on man. They do not hold original
purity in esteem. Consequently they are ever
suffering the vicissitudes of mortality, and never
reaching the goal. Alas! you, Sir, were early
steeped in deceit, and are late in hearing the great
doctrine."
Confucius, having again prostrated himself twice,
arose and said,
"It has been a godsend to meet you, Sir, to-day.
Pray allow me to follow you as your servant, that
I may benefit by your teaching. I venture to ask
where you live that I may enter upon my duties
and learn the great doctrine."
"I have heard," replied the old man, "that if a
man is a fit companion, one may travel with him
into the uttermost depths of Tao. But that if he
is not a fit companion, and does not know Tao,
one must avoid his company, that no harm may
befall. Excuse me, I must leave you." Thereupon
he pushed off his boat, and disappeared among the
reeds.
"Yen Yüan then brought up the chariot, and[421]
Tzŭ Lu offered the hand-cord to Confucius. But
the latter paid no attention. He waited until the
ripples on the water had smoothed down and the
sound of the punt-pole had died away, before he
ventured to get up.
Tzŭ Lu, who was at the side of the chariot, enquired
saying, "Master, I have been in your service
now for a long time, yet never did I see you treat
any man like this. In the presence of a ruler of
ten thousand or a thousand chariots, I have never
seen you treated other than with great respect,
while you yourself would wear a haughty air. Yet
before this old fisherman, leaning on his punt-pole,
you cringe and bow and prostrate yourself twice
before answering. Is not this too much? The
disciples do not know what to make of it. Why
this behaviour to an old fisherman?"
"Yu!" cried Confucius, resting on the bar of
the chariot; "it is difficult to make anything of
you. You have long studied ceremonies and duty
to your neighbour, yet you have not succeeded in
getting rid of the old evil nature. Come here, and
I will tell you.
"To meet an elder without respect is want of
ceremony. To see a Sage and not to honour him,
is not to be in charity with man. Unless you are
in charity with man, you cannot humble yourself
before a fellow-creature. And unless you can
honestly do this, you can never attain to that state
of original purity; but the body will constantly
suffer. Alas! there is no greater evil than not to[422]
be in charity with man. Yet in such a plight,
O Yu, are you.
"Further. Tao is the source of all creation.
Men have it, and live. They lose it, and die.
Affairs in antagonism thereto, fail; in accordance
therewith, succeed. Therefore, wherever Tao
abides, there is the reverence of the true Sage.
And as this old fisherman may be said to possess
Tao, could I venture not to respect him?"
Lieh Tzŭ.
Argument:—Outward manifestation of inward grace—Its dangers—Self-esteem—Its
errors—Inscrutability of Tao—Artificiality of Confucius—Tests
of virtue—Chuang Tzŭ declines office—His death.
When Lieh Tzŭ
Lieh Yü K'ou, a name well known in connection
with Tao. But it is extremely doubtful if such a
man ever lived. His record is not given by the
historian Ssŭ-ma Ch'ien, and he may well have
been no more than an allegorical personage created
by Chuang Tzŭ for purposes of illustration. It was
however thought necessary under the Han dynasty
to supply his "Works"; and the treatise thus provided
still passes under his name, though generally
regarded as a forgery. See pp. 4, 5.
went to Ch'i, half way there he turned round
and came back. Falling in with Poh Hun Wu
Jen, the latter said, "How is it you are so soon
back again?"
"I was afraid," replied Lieh Tzŭ.
"Afraid of what?" asked Poh Hun Wu Jen.
"Out of ten restaurants at which I ate," said
Lieh Tzŭ, "five would take no payment."
[424]
"And what is there to be afraid of in that?"
enquired Poh Hun Wu Jen.
"The truth within not being duly assimilated,"
replied Lieh Tzŭ, "a certain brightness is visible
externally. And to conquer men's hearts by force
of the external is to induce in oneself a disregard
for authority and age which is the precursor of
trouble.
"A restaurant keeper is one who lives by retailing
soup. When his returns are counted up, his
profit is but small, and his influence is next to
nothing. But if such a man could act thus, how
much more the ruler of a large State? His bodily
powers worn out in the duties of his position, his
mental powers exhausted by details of administration,
he would entrust me with the government
and stimulate me by reward. That is what I was
afraid of."
"Your inner lights are good," replied Poh Hun
Wu Jen; "but if you remain stationary at this
point, the world will still gather around you."
Contrary to Tao.
Shortly afterwards Poh Hun Wu Jen went to
visit Lieh Tzŭ, and lo! his court-yard was filled
with boots.
Of the visitors come to hear him. These were left
outside the door, in accordance with an ancient
custom mentioned in the Book of Rites. See p. 368.
Poh Hun Wu Jen stood there awhile, facing the[425]
north, his cheek all wrinkled by resting it on his
staff. Then, without a word, he departed.
Upon this being announced to Lieh Tzŭ,
By the servant whose duty it was to receive guests.
he seized his shoes and ran out barefoot.
In his hurry.
When he reached the outer gate, he called aloud,
"Master! now that you have come, will you not
give me medicine?"
"It is all over!" cried Poh Hun Wu Jen. "I
told you that the world would gather around you.
It is not that you can make people gather around
you. You cannot prevent them from doing so.
Of what use would my instruction be? Exerting
influence thus unduly over others, you are by them
influenced in turn. You disturb your natural constitution,
and are of no further account.
In the original, these lines rhyme.
"The shrewd grow weary, the wise grieve.
Those who are without abilities have no ambitions.
With full bellies they roam happily about, like
drifting boats, not caring whither they are bound."
There was a man of the Chêng State, named[426]
Huan. He pursued his studies at a place called
Ch'iu-shih. After three years only, he had graduated
as a Confucianist; and like a river which
fertilises its banks to a distance of nine li, so did
his good influence reach into three families.
His father's, his mother's, and his wife's.
He caused his younger brother to graduate as a
Mihist. But inasmuch as in the question of Confucianism
versus Mihism,
The philosophy of Mih Tzŭ, who taught the doctrine
of universal love, etc. See pp. 17, 440.
the father took the side of the Mihist, at the end of
ten years Huan committed suicide.
Then the father dreamed that Huan appeared to
him and said, "It was I who caused your son to
become a Mihist. Why give all the credit to him
who is but as the fruit of an autumn pine?"
Various interpretations of this simile are given:
none satisfactory. E.g. (1) Like a dry cone. (2)
Which another has planted and reared.
Verily God does not reward man for what he
does, but for what he is.
I.e. for the natural, not for the artificial.
And it was in this sense that the younger brother
was caused to become a Mihist.
He was naturally so inclined.
Whereas a man who should regard his distinctive
abilities as of his own making, without reference to[427]
his parents, would be like the man of Ch'i who
dug a well and then wanted to keep others away
from it.
Forgetting that God put the spring there in the first
instance.
Hence the saying that the men of to-day are all
Huans.
Wherefore it follows that men of true virtue are
unconscious of its possession. How much more
then the man of Tao? This is what the ancients
called escaping the vengeance of God.
Which would be incurred by aping his goodness.
The true Sage rests in that which gives rest, and
not in that which does not give rest. The world
rests in that which does not give rest, and not in
that which does give rest.
The natural and the artificial.
Chuang Tzŭ said, "To know Tao is easy. The
difficulty lies in the elimination of speech. To know
Tao without speech appertains to the natural. To
know Tao with speech appertains to the artificial.
The men of old were natural, not artificial.
"Chu P'ing Man spent a large patrimony in
learning under Chih Li I how to kill dragons.
To acquire Tao. There is no record of the persons
mentioned.
By the end of three years he was perfect, but there
was no direction in which he could show his skill.
Tao cannot be put into practice.
[428]
"The true Sage regards certainties as uncertainties;
therefore he is never up in arms.
In a state of mental disturbance.
Men in general regard uncertainties as certainties;
therefore they are constantly up in arms. To
accustom oneself to arms causes one to fly to arms
on every provocation; and to trust to arms is to
perish."
"The intelligence of the mean man does not rise
beyond bribes and letters of recommendation. His
mind is be-clouded with trivialities. Yet he would
penetrate the mystery of Tao and of creation, and
rise to participation in the One. The result is
that he is confounded by time and space; and that
trammelled by objective existences, he fails to reach
apprehension of that age before anything was.
"But the perfect man,—he carries his mind back
to the period before the beginning. Content to
rest in the oblivion of nowhere, passing away like
flowing water, he is merged in the clear depths of
the infinite.
"Alas! man's knowledge reaches to the hair on
a hair, but not to eternal peace."
A man of the Sung State, named Ts'ao Shang,
acted as political agent for the prince of Sung at
the court of the Ch'in State. When he went
thither, he had a few carriages; but the prince of
Ch'in was so pleased with him that he added one
hundred more.
[429]
On his return to Sung, he visited Chuang Tzŭ
and said, "As for living in poverty in a dirty
hovel, earning a scanty subsistence by making
sandals, with shrivelled face and yellow ears,—this
I could not do. Interviewing a powerful ruler,
with a retinue of a hundred carriages,—that is my
forte."
"When the prince of Ch'in is sick," replied
Chuang Tzŭ, "and he summons his physician to
open a boil or cleanse an ulcer, the latter gets one
carriage. The man who licks his piles gets five.
The more degrading the work, the greater the
number of carriages given. You, Sir, must have
been attending to his piles to get so many carriages.
Begone with you!"
"Not," says Lin Hsi Chung, "from the pen of
Chuang Tzŭ."
Duke Ai of Lu asked Yen Ho, saying, "Were I
to make Confucius a pillar of my realm, would the
State be profited thereby?"
"It would be most perilous!" replied Yen Ho.
"Confucius is a man of outward show and of
specious words. He mistakes the branch for the
root.
Accessories for fundamentals.
He seeks to impress the people by an overbearing
demeanour, the hollowness of which he does not
perceive. If he suits you, and you entrust him[430]
with the welfare of the State, it will only be by
mistake that he will succeed.
This passage is variously interpreted.
"To cause the people to leave the true and study
the false does not so much affect the people of
to-day as those of coming generations. Wherefore
it is better not to have Confucius.
"The difficulty of governing lies in the inability
to practise self-effacement. Man does not govern
as God does.
Regardless of self.
"Merchants and traders are altogether out of
the pale.
Of Tao.
Or if chance ever brings them within it, their rights
are never freely admitted.
"External punishments are inflicted by metal
and wood. Internal punishments are inflicted by
anxiety and remorse. Fools who incur external
punishment are treated with metal or wood.
Those who incur internal punishment are devoured
by the conflict of emotions. It is only the pure
and perfect man who can succeed in avoiding
both."
Confucius said, "The heart of man is more dangerous
than mountains and rivers, more difficult to
understand than Heaven itself. Heaven has its
periods of spring, summer, autumn, winter, day[431]time
and night. Man has an impenetrable exterior,
and his motives are inscrutable. Thus some men
appear to be retiring when they are really forward.
Others have abilities, yet appear to be worthless.
Others are compliant, yet gain their ends. Others
take a firm stand, yet yield the point. Others go
slow, yet advance quickly.
"Those who fly to duty towards their neighbour
as though thirsting after it, drop it as though
something hot. Thus the loyalty of the superior
man is tested by employing him at a distance, his
respectfulness by employing him near at hand.
His ability, by troublesome missions. His knowledge,
by unexpected questions. His trustworthiness,
by specification of time limits. His integrity
by entrusting him with money. His fidelity, by
dangerous tasks. His decorum, by filling him
with wine. His morality, by placing him in disreputable
surroundings. Under the application of
these nine tests, the inferior man stands revealed.
"Chêng K'ao Fu, on receiving his first appointment,
bowed his head. On receiving his second
appointment, he hunched his back. On receiving
his third appointment, he fell upon his face, walking
away at the side of the path.
Instead of in the middle as any blustering braggart
would have done.
Who would not try to be like him?
"Yet ordinary men, on their first appointment,
become self-important. On their second, they give[432]
themselves airs in their chariots. On their third,
they call their own fathers by their personal names.
As we should say, "by their Christian names."
The term "fathers" includes uncles.
Which of them can be compared with Hsü Yu of
old?
"There is nothing more fatal than intentional
virtue, when the mind looks outwards.
Spontaneity is the essence of real virtue.
For by thus looking outwards, the power of introspection
is destroyed.
"There are five sources of injury to virtue.
Eyes, nose, mouth, ears, and thought.
Of these, that which aims at virtue is the chief.
What is it to aim at virtue? Why a man who
aims at virtue practises what he approves and
condemns what he does not practise.
"There are eight causes of failure, three certain
elements of success. There are six sources of
strength and weakness.
"Beauty, a long beard, size, height, robustness,
grace, courage, daring,—these eight, in which men
surpass their fellows, are therefore passports to
failure.
"Modesty, compliance, humility,—these three
are sure roads to success.
[433]
"Wisdom manifests itself in the external.
Whereby the internal suffers.
Courage makes itself many enemies. Charity and
duty towards one's neighbour incur many reproaches.
Three sources of weakness.
"To him who can penetrate the mystery of life,
all things are revealed. He who can estimate
wisdom at its true value,
Sc. at nothing.
is wise. He who comprehends the Greater Destiny,
becomes himself part of it.
Of the great scheme of the universe, seen and
unseen.
He who comprehends the Lesser Destiny, resigns
himself to the inevitable."
Referring to life as ordinarily regarded by mortals.
Three sources of strength.
A man who had been to see the prince of Sung
and had been presented with ten chariots, was
putting on airs in the presence of Chuang Tzŭ.
"At Ho-Shang," said the latter, "there was a
poor man who supported his family by plaiting
rushes. One day his son dived into the river and
got a pearl worth a thousand ounces of silver.
The father bade him fetch a stone and smash it to
pieces, explaining that he could only have got such
a pearl very deep down from under the nose of the
dragon, which must have been asleep. And he[434]
said he was afraid that when the dragon waked,
the boy would have a poor chance.
If found with it in his possession.
"Now the State of Sung is deeper than a deep
river, and the prince of Sung is fiercer than a
dragon. To get these chariots, you must have
caught him asleep. And when he wakes, you will
be ground to powder."
Some prince having invited Chuang Tzŭ to enter
his service, Chuang Tzŭ said in reply to the envoy,
"Sir, have you ever noticed a sacrificial ox? It is
bedecked with ribbons and fares sumptuously. But
when it comes to be slaughtered for the temple,
would it not gladly exchange places with some
neglected calf?"
Quoted, with variants, by the historian Ssŭ-ma
Ch'ien, in his biographical notice of Chuang Tzŭ.
See Introduction.
When Chuang Tzŭ was about to die, his disciples
expressed a wish to give him a splendid
funeral. But Chuang Tzŭ said, "With Heaven
and Earth for my coffin and shell; with the sun,
moon, and stars as my burial regalia; and with all
creation to escort me to the grave,—are not my
funeral paraphernalia ready to hand?"
"We fear," argued the disciples, "lest the carrion
kite should eat the body of our Master"; to
which Chuang Tzŭ replied, "Above ground I
shall be food for kites; below I shall be food for
mole-crickets and ants. Why rob one to feed
the other?
With this may be compared the reply of Diogenes
on a similar occasion. When the old cynic asked
to be left unburied, his friends objected that he would
be eaten by dogs and birds.
"Place my staff near me," said Diogenes, "that I
may drive them away."
"How will you manage that?" enquired the friends.
"You will not be conscious."
"What then will it matter to me to be torn by
beasts," cried Diogenes, "if I am not conscious
of it?"
"If you adopt, as absolute, a standard of evenness
which is so only relatively, your results will
not be absolutely even. If you adopt, as absolute,
a criterion of right which is so only relatively, your
results will not be absolutely right. Those who
trust to their senses become slaves to objective
existences. Those alone who are guided by their
intuitions find the true standard. So far are the
senses less reliable than the intuitions. Yet fools[436]
trust to their senses to know what is good for
mankind, with alas! but external results."
As the genuine text of the Spring and Autumn ends
with the appearance of the ch'i lin (or kilin) and the
death of Confucius, so have disciples of Chuang Tzŭ
agreed that the genuine text of Chuang Tzŭ comes
to a fitting close at the death-bed of their great
Master.
The final chapter is but a summary of the whole,
compiled by the early editors of the work.
The Empire.
[Summary by early editors.]
Systems of government are many. Each
man thinks his own perfect. Where then
does what the ancients called the system of Tao
come in? There is nowhere where it does not
come in.
It may be asked whence our spirituality, whence
our intellectuality. The true Sage is born; the
prince is made. Yet all proceed from an original
One.
He who does not separate from the Source is
one with God. He who does not separate from
the essence is a spiritual man. He who does not
separate from the reality is a perfect man. He who
makes God the source, and Tê the root, and Tao
the portal, passively falling in with the modifications
of his environment,—he is the true Sage.
These are but four different denominations of the
ideal man.
He who practises charity as a kindness, duty to
one's neighbour as a principle, ceremony as a convenience,
music as a pacificator, and thus becomes[438]
compassionate and charitable,—he is a superior
man.
We sink here to a lower level, though still a high
one. The "superior man" is the ideal man of
Confucian ethics. In him divinity finds no place.
He who regulates his conduct by law, who regards
fame as an external adjunct, who verifies his
hypotheses, who bases his judgment upon proof,—such
men rank one, two, three, four, etc. It is thus
that officials rank. In a strict sense of duty, in
making food and raiment of paramount importance,
in caring for and nourishing the old, the weak, the
orphan, and the widow, they all exemplify the
principle of true government.
Partly, if not wholly. This the dead level of ordinary
mortality, still within the operation of Tao.
Thus far-reaching was the extension of Tao
among the ancients.
The companion of the gods, the purifier of the
universe, it nourishes all creation, it unites the
empire, it benefits the masses. Illuminating the
fundamental, it is bound up with the accessory,
reaching to all points of the compass and to the
opposite extremes of magnitude. There is indeed
nowhere where it is not!
How it enlightened the polity of past ages is
evidenced in the records which historians have
preserved to us. Its presence in the Canons of
Poetry, History, Rites, and Music, has been made
clear by many scholars of Chou and Lu. It in[439]forms
the Canon of Poetry with its vigour, the
Canon of History with its usefulness, the Canon
of Rites with its adaptability, the Canon of Music
with its harmonising influence, the Canon of
Changes with its mysterious Principles, and the
Spring and Autumn with its discriminations.
Spread over the whole world, it is focussed in the
Middle Kingdom, and the learning of all schools
renders constant homage to its power.
But when the world is disorganised, true Sages
do not manifest themselves, Tao ceases to exist as
One, and the world becomes cognisant of the idiosyncrasies
of the individual. These are like the
senses of hearing, sight, smell, and taste,—not
common to each organ. Or like the skill of various
artisans,—each excellent of its kind and each useful
in its turn, but not equally at the command of all.
Consequently, when a mere specialist comes forward
and dogmatises on the beauty of the universe
the principles which underlie all creation, the position
occupied by the ancients in reference to the
beauty of the universe, and the limits of the supernatural,—it
follows that the Tao of inner wisdom
and of outer strength is obscured and prevented
from asserting itself. Every one alas! regards the
course he prefers as the infallible course. The
various schools diverge never to meet again; and
posterity is debarred from viewing the original
purity of the universe and the grandeur of the
ancients. For the system of Tao is scattered in
fragments over the face of the earth.
[440]
Not to covet posthumous fame, nor to aim at
dazzling the world, nor to pose as a benefactor of
mankind, but to be a strict self-disciplinarian while
lenient to the faults of others,—herein lay the Tao
of the ancients.
Mih Tzŭ and Ch'in Hua Li
A disciple of Mih Tzŭ.
became enthusiastic followers of Tao, but they
pushed the system too far, carrying their practice
to excess. The former wrote an essay Against
Music, and another which he entitled Economy.
To be found in the collection which passes under the
name of Mih Tzŭ.
There was to be no singing in life, no mourning
after death. He taught universal love and beneficence
towards one's fellow men, without contentions,
without censure of others. He loved learning, but
not in order to become different from others. Yet
his views were not those of the ancient Sages,
whose music and rites he set aside.
The Yellow Emperor gave us the Hsien-ch'ih.
Yao gave us the Ta-chang. Shun, the Ta-shao.
Yü, the Ta-hsia. T'ang, the Ta-hu. Wên Wang,
the P'i-yung. Wu Wang and Chou Kung added
the Wu.
Famous musical compositions.
The mourning ceremonial of old was according
to the estate of each, and determined in proportion
to rank. Thus, the body of the Son of Heaven[441]
was enclosed in a seven-fold coffin. That of a
feudal prince, in a five-fold coffin. That of a
minister, in a three-fold coffin. That of a private
individual, in a two-fold coffin. But now Mih Tzŭ
would have no singing in life, no mourning after
death, and a single coffin of only three inches in
thickness as the rule for all alike!
Such doctrines do not illustrate his theory of
universal love;
They betray a want of sympathy with human weaknesses.
neither does his practice of them establish the fact
of his own personal self-respect. They may not
suffice to destroy his system altogether; though it
is unreasonable to prohibit singing, and weeping,
and rejoicing in due season.
He would have men toil through life and hold
death in contempt. But this teaching is altogether
too unattractive. It would land mankind in sorrow
and lamentation. It would be next to impossible
as a practical system, and cannot, I fear, be regarded
as the Tao of the true Sage. It would be
diametrically opposed to human passions, and as
such would not be tolerated by the world. Mih
Tzŭ himself might be able to carry it out; but not
the rest of the world. And when one separates
from the rest of the world, his chances of developing
an ideal State become small indeed.
Mih Tzŭ argued in favour of his system as
follows:—Of old, the great Yü drained off the[442]
flood of waters, and caused rivers and streams to
flow through the nine divisions of the empire and
the parts adjacent thereto,—three hundred great
rivers, three thousand branches, and streams without
number. With his own hands he plied the
bucket and dredger, in order to reduce confusion
to uniformity,
Make all streams flow to the sea.
until his calves and shins had no hair left upon
them. The wind bathed him, the rain combed
him; but he marked out the nations of the world,
and was in very truth a Sage. And because he
thus sacrificed himself to the commonwealth, ages
of Mihists to come would also wear short serge
jackets and straw sandals, and toil day and night
without stopping, making self-mortification their
end and aim, and say to themselves, "If we cannot
do this, we do not follow the Tao of Yü, and are
unworthy to be called Mihists."
The disciples of Hsiang Li Ch'in,
A professor of Mihism.
the followers of the five princes, Mihists of the
south, such as K'u Huo, Chi Ch'ih, and Têng
Ling,—all these studied the canon of Mih Tzŭ,
but their disagreements and agreements were not
identical. They called each other schismatics, and
quarrelled over the "hard and white," the "like
and unlike," and argued over questions of "odd
and even." Chü Tzŭ was their Sage, and they
wanted to canonise him as a saint, that they might[443]
carry on his doctrines into after ages. Even now
these differences are not settled.
Thus we see that Mih Tzŭ and Ch'in Hua Li,
while right in theory, were wrong in practice.
They would merely have taught mankind to vie
with each other in working the hair off their calves
and shins. The evil of that system would have
predominated over the good. Nevertheless, Mih
Tzŭ was undoubtedly a well-meaning man. In
spite of failure, with all its withering influences, he
stuck to his text. He may be called a man of
genius.
But not a true Sage.
Not to be involved in the mundane, not to
indulge in the specious, not to be overreaching
with the individual, nor antagonistic to the public;
but to desire the tranquillity of the world in general
with a view to the prolongation of life, to seek no
more than sufficient for the requirements of oneself
and others, and by such a course to purify the
heart,—herein lay the Tao of the ancients.
Sung Hsing and Yin Wên became enthusiastic
followers of Tao. They adopted a cap, shaped like
the Hua Mountain, as a badge. They bore themselves
with kindly discrimination towards all
things. They spoke of the passive qualities of the
heart as though they had been active; and declared
that whosoever could bring joy among mankind
and peace within the girdle of ocean should be
made ruler over them.
They suffered obloquy without noticing the[444]
insult. They preserved the people from strife.
They prohibited aggression and caused arms to lie
unused. They saved their generation from wars,
and carried their system over the whole empire, to
the delight of the high and to the improvement of
the lowly. Though the world would have none of
them, yet they struggled on and would not give
way. Hence it was said that when high and low
became tired of seeing them, they intruded themselves
by force. In spite of all this, they did too
much for others, and too little for themselves.
"Give us," said they, "but five pints of rice, and
it will be enough." The master could not thus eat
his fill; but the disciples, although starving, did
not forget the world's claims.
This is not satisfactorily explained by any commentator.
Kuo Hsiang says that these two men
regarded the world as their "master."
Day and night they toiled on, saying, "Must we
necessarily live? Shall we ape the so-called
saviours of mankind?"
"The superior man," they say, "is not a fault-finder.
He does not appropriate the credit of
others. He looks on one who does no good to the
world as a worthless fellow. He regards prohibition
of aggressive actions and causing arms to lie
unused, as external; the diminution and restraint
of our passions, as internal. In all matters, great
or small, subtle or gross, such is the point to
which he attains."
To be public-spirited and belong to no party, in[445]
one's dealings not to be all for self, to move without
being bound to a given course, to take things
as they come, to have no remorse for the past, no
anxiety for the future, to have no partialities, but
to be on good terms with all,—herein lay the Tao
of the ancients.
P'êng Mêng, T'ien P'ien, and Shên Tao, became
enthusiastic followers of Tao. Their criterion was
the identity of all things. "The sky," said they,
"can cover but cannot support us. The earth can
support but cannot cover us. Tao can embrace all
things but cannot deal with particulars."
They knew that in creation all things had their
possibilities and their impossibilities. Therefore
they said, "Selection excludes universality. Training
will not reach in all directions. But Tao is
comprehensive."
Consequently, Shên Tao discarded all knowledge
and self-interest and became a fatalist.
It is about as difficult to apprehend Tao apart from
fatalism as the omniscience of God apart from predestination.
Passivity was his guiding principle. "For," said
he, "we can only know that we know nothing, and
a little knowledge is a dangerous thing.
"Take any worthless fellow who laughs at mankind
for holding virtue in esteem, any unprincipled
vagabond who reviles the great Sages of the world,
and subject him to torture. In his agony he will
sacrifice positive and negative alike. If he can but
get free, he will trouble no more about knowledge[446]
and forethought. Past and future will cease to
exist for him, in his then neutral condition.
"Move when pushed, come when dragged. Be
like a whirling gale, like a feather in the wind, like
a mill-stone going round. The mill-stone as an
existence is perfectly harmless. In motion or at
rest it does no more than is required, and cannot
therefore incur blame.
"Why? Because it is simply an inanimate
thing. It has no anxieties about itself. It is never
entangled in the trammels of knowledge. In motion
or at rest it is always governed by fixed laws, and
therefore it never becomes open to praise. Hence
it has been said, 'Be as though an inanimate
thing, and there will be no use for Sages.'
"For a clod cannot be without Tao,"—at which
some full-blooded young buck covered the argument
with ridicule by crying out, "Shên Tao's
Tao is not for the living, but for the dead!"
It was the same with T'ien P'ien. He studied
under P'êng Mêng; with the result that he learnt
nothing.
Tao cannot be learnt.
P'êng Mêng's tutor said, "Those of old who
knew Tao, reached the point where positive and
negative ceased to exist. That was all."
Now the bent of these men is one of opposition,
which it is difficult to discuss. They act in every
way differently from other people, but cannot escape
the imputation of purpose.
Which takes the place of spontaneity.
[447]
What they call Tao is not Tao; and what they
predicate affirmatively cannot escape being negative.
The fact is that P'êng Mêng, T'ien P'ien, and Shên
Tao, did not know Tao. Nevertheless they all had
a certain acquaintance with it.
To make the root the essential, to regard objective
existences as accidental, to look upon accumulation
as deficiency, and to meekly accept the dispositions
of Providence,—herein lay the Tao of the
ancients.
Kuan Yin and Lao Tzŭ became enthusiastic
followers of Tao.
For Kuan Yin, see p. 230.
They based their system upon nothingness, with
One as their criterion. Their outward expression
was gentleness and humility. Their inward belief
was in unreality and avoidance of injury to all
things.
Kuan Yin said, "Adopt no absolute position.
Let externals take care of themselves. In motion,
be like water. At rest, like a mirror.
Receptive, but not permanently so.
Respond, like the echo.
Only when called upon.
Be subtle, as though non-existent. Be still, as
though pure. Regard uniformity as peace. Look
on gain as loss. Do not precede others. Follow
them."
Lao Tzŭ said, "He who conscious of being[448]
strong, is content to be weak,—he shall be
a cynosure of men.
This is quoted by Huai Nan Tzŭ as a saying by Lao
Tzŭ, and appears in ch. xxviii of the Tao-Tê-Ching.
See The Remains of Lao Tzŭ, p. 21.
"He who conscious of purity, puts up with disgrace,—he
shall be the cynosure of mankind.
"He who when others strive to be first, contents
himself with the lowest place, is said to accept the
contumely of the world.
"He who when others strive for the substantial,
contents himself with the unsubstantial, stores up
nothing and therefore has abundance. There he
is in the midst of his abundance which comes to
him without effort on his part. He does nothing,
and laughs at the artifices of others.
"He who when others strive for happiness is
content with security, is said to aim at avoiding evil.
Compare the Tao-Tê-Ching, ch. xxii.
"He who makes depth of fundamental importance
and moderation his rule of life, is said to
crush that which is hard within him and temper
that which is sharp.
"To be in liberal sympathy with all creation,
and not to be aggressive towards one's fellow-men,—this
may be called perfection."
O Kuan Yin! O Lao Tzŭ! verily ye were the
true Sages of old.
Silence, formlessness, change, impermanence, now
life, now death, heaven and earth blended in one,[449]
the soul departing, gone no one knows where:
suddenly, no one knows whither, as all things go
in turn, never to come back again;—herein lay the
Tao of the ancients.
Chuang Tzŭ became an enthusiastic follower of
Tao. In strange terms, in bold words, in far-reaching
language, he gave free play to his
thoughts, without following any particular school
or committing himself to any particular line.
He looked on the world as so sunk in corruption
that it was impossible to speak gravely. Therefore
he employed "goblet words" which apply in
various directions; he based his statements upon
weighty authority in order to inspire confidence;
and he put words in other people's mouths in order
to secure breadth.
See ch. xxvii ad init.
In accord with the spirit of the universe, he was at
peace with all creation. He judged not the rights
and wrongs of mankind, and thus lived quietly in
his generation. Although his book is an extraordinary
production, it is plausible and harmless
enough. Although the style is most irregular, it
is at the same time ingenious and attractive.
As a thinker, he is endlessly suggestive. Above,
he roams with God. Below, he consorts with those
who are beyond the pale of life and death, who deny
a beginning and an end. In relation to the root,
The origin of all things.
he speaks on a grand and extensive scale. In relation
to Tao, he establishes a harmony between man[450]
and the higher powers. Nevertheless, he yields to
the modifications of existence and responds to the
exigencies of environment. His arguments are
inexhaustible, and never illogical. He is far-reaching,
mysterious, and not to be fully explored.
It is impossible for a European critic to believe that
Chuang Tzŭ penned the above paragraphs. See
post, p. 454.
Hui Tzŭ was a man of many ideas. His works
would fill five carts. But his doctrines are paradoxical,
and his terms are used ambiguously.
He calls infinite greatness, beyond which there
is nothing, the Greater One. He calls infinite
smallness, within which there is nothing, the
Lesser One.
Recognising two absolute extremes.
He says that that which is without dimensions
measures a thousand li.
On the principle that mathematical points, though
themselves without dimensions, collectively fill up
space.
That heaven and earth are equally low. That
mountain and marsh are equally level.
It depends upon the point of view.
That the sun at noon is the sun setting.
To people living farther east.
That when an animal is born, it dies.
As regards its previous state it dies when leaving it
for a new state.
That the likeness of things partly unlike is called[451]
the lesser likeness of unlikes. That the likeness of
things altogether unlike is called the greater likeness
of unlikes. That southwards there is no
limit, and yet there is a limit. That one can reach
Yüeh to-day and yet be there before. That joined
rings can be separated. That the middle of the
world is north of Yen and south of Yüeh.
It is wherever the speaker is. The space between
Yen and Yüeh is as zero compared with the infinite.
That he loves all creation equally, just as heaven
and earth are impartial to all.
In covering and supporting all.
Accordingly, Hui Tzŭ was regarded as a great
philosopher and a very subtle dialectician; and
became a favourite with the other dialecticians of
the day.
He said that there were feathers in an egg.
Because on a chicken.
That a fowl had three feet.
The third being volition.
That Ying was the world.
As you cannot say it is not the world.
That a dog could be a sheep. That a mare could
lay eggs. That a nail has a tail.
Names being arbitrary in all cases.
That fire is not hot.
It is the man who feels it hot.
That mountains have mouths.
As evidenced by echoes.
[452]
That wheels do not press down the ground.
Touching only at a point.
That the eye does not see.
It is the man.
That the finger does not touch. That the uttermost
extreme is not the end. That a tortoise is
longer than a snake.
Because longer lived!
That a carpenter's square is not square.
Like Horace's Whetstone which makes other things
sharp, "exsors ipsa secandi."
That compasses will not make a circle.
It is the draughtsman.
That a round hole will not surround a square
handle. That the shadow of a flying bird does not
move. That there is a moment when a swiftly-flying
arrow is neither moving nor at rest. That
a dog is not a hound.
Two things cannot be identical unless even their
names are the same.
That a bay horse and a dun cow are three.
Taken separately they are two. Taken together they
are one. One and two make three.
That a white dog is black.
If his eyes are black. Part standing for the whole.
That a motherless colt never had a mother.
When it had a mother, it was not an orphan.
[453]
That if you take a stick a foot long and every day
cut it in half, you will never come to the end of it.
Compare "Achilles and the Tortoise," and the
sophisms of the Greek philosophers.
And such was the stuff which dialecticians used to
argue about with Hui Tzŭ, also without ever
getting to the end of it.
Huan T'uan and Kung Sun Lung were of this
class. By specious premisses they imposed on
people's minds and drove them into false conclusions.
But though they won the battle in
words, they did not carry conviction into their
adversaries' hearts. Theirs were but the snares of
the sophist.
Hui Tzŭ daily devoted his intelligence to such
pursuits, purposely advancing some preposterous
thesis upon which to dispute. That was his characteristic.
He had besides a great opinion of his
own wisdom, and used to say, "The universe does
not hold my peer."
Hui Tzŭ makes a parade of his strength, but is
devoid of any sound system. An eccentric fellow
in the south, named Huang Liao, asked why the
sky did not fall and the earth sink; also, whence
came wind, rain, and thunder.
Hui Tzŭ was not backward in replying to these
questions, which he answered unhesitatingly. He
went into a long discussion on all creation, and
talked away without end, though to himself he
seemed to be saying very little. He supplemented[454]
this with most extraordinary statements, making
it his chief object to contradict others, and being
desirous of gaining fame by defeating all comers.
Thus, he was never popular. Morally, he was
weak; physically, he was violent. His was a dark
and narrow way.
Looked at from the point of view of the Tao of
the universe, the value of Hui Tzŭ may be compared
with the efforts of a mosquito or a gadfly.
Of what use was he to the world? As a specialist,
he might have succeeded. But to let him put
himself forward as an exponent of Tao, would
have been dangerous indeed.
He would not however be content to be a
specialist. He must needs roam insatiably over all
creation, though he only succeeded in securing the
reputation of a sophist.
Alas for the talents of Hui Tzŭ! He is extravagantly
energetic, and yet has no success. He
investigates all creation, but does not conclude in
Tao. He makes a noise to drown an echo. He
is like a man running a race with his own shadow.
Alas!
As to the genuineness of this concluding chapter,
every one may form his own opinion. The question
has been hotly fought, and great names could be
mentioned on each side. Wang An Shih and Su
Tung P'o both thought that it might well have come
from the hand of Chuang Tzŭ. Lin Hsi Chung
thought not, and on his side the majority of Western
students will in all probability be ranged.
Page 1, line 3 (from bottom), insert comma after "sunbeam."
   "   49, line 2, Prince Ling is the same individual as the Duke Ling
of pp. 65, 250, 346.
[All such terms are, of course, arbitrary, being used
merely as convenient equivalents of the Chinese
titles in the text]
   "   60,   "   13, For "Hou I" read "Hou Yi." [This for the sake
of uniformity. See pp. 255, 308, &c.]
   "   65,   "   16, For "too short" read "too scraggy."
   "   65,   "   20, For "too thin" read "too scraggy."
   "   72,   "   4, For "Chi Tzŭ Hsü Yü" read "Chi Tzŭ, Hsü Yü."
   "   170,   "   3 (from bottom), After "Duke Huan." omit the full stop.
   "   228,   "   14, For "glow-worm" read "fire-fly."
   "   230,   "   22, For "to the minister" read "to be the minister."
   "   262,   "   22, For "Wên Po" read "Wên Poh."
   "   270,   "   6, For "Po Li Ch'i" read "Poh Li Ch'i."
   "   272,   "   3 (from bottom), For "Po Hun" read "Poh Hun."
   "   309,   "   12 For "Duke Mu" read "Duke Muh."
   "   309,   "   12 For "Po Li Ch'i" read "Poh Li Ch'i."
   "   314, last line, "Love for the people," &c. Compare p. 329, lines
17 and 18, "There is no difficulty," &c. The conflict
between the meanings of these two passages
has not been pointed out. The first passage is
rendered by some commentators, "Not to be able
to love the people is the," &c. Neither rendering
is quite satisfactory; for reasons which would
require quotations from the Chinese text.
[467]
   "   324, lines 15 and 26, For "Tzŭ Chi" read "Tzŭ Ch'i."
   "   327,   "   18 and 28, For "Tzŭ Chi" read "Tzŭ Ch'i."
   "   328, line 7, For "Tzŭ Chi" read "Tzŭ Ch'i."
   "   346,   "   5, After "Duke Ling," add "of Wei."
   "   371,   "   17, For "Shih Hu" read "Shih-hu."
   "   373,   "   3, For "Tan Hsüeh" read "Tan-hsüeh."
   "   394,   "   8, For "Yin Li" read "Yin-li."
[These last three corrections mean that I have
written names of places with a hyphen between
the transliteration of the component Chinese
characters, the names of men with a capital letter
to the transliteration of each of the Chinese characters
which go to make up the surname and
personal name]
THE END.
WYMAN AND SONS, PRINTERS GREAT QUEEN STREET, LONDON, W.C.
Chinese Sketches. Death of an Emperor—Etiquette—Gambling—Fêng-shui—Opium—Pawnbrokers—Slang—Inquests,
&c. &c.
Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio. Translation of the
Liao Chai. 2 vols. 8vo.
Historic China, and other Sketches.
Gems of Chinese Literature. Containing Extracts from various
Authors, from B.C. 500 to A.D. 1600.
A Short History of Koolangsu.
On Some Translations and Mistranslations in Williams'
Syllabic Dictionary.
Dictionary of Colloquial Idioms in the Mandarin Dialect.
Chinese without a Teacher: Being a Collection of Easy and
Useful Sentences in the Mandarin Dialect. With a Vocabulary.
2nd Edition.
Synoptical Studies in Chinese Character.
Handbook of the Swatow Dialect.
Record of the Buddhistic Kingdoms. Translated from the Chinese.
With copious Notes.
Two Chinese Poems: The San Tzŭ Ching, or the Trimetrical
Classic; and the Ch'ien Tzŭ Wên, or Thousand Character
Essay. Metrically translated.
From Swatow to Canton: An Overland Journey.
A Glossary of Reference, on Subjects connected with the Far East.
2nd Edition.
The Remains of Lao Tzŭ. Hong Kong: 1886.
[1] Pronounce Chwongdza.
[2] In the modern province of An-hui.
[3] Hence he is often spoken of in the book language as "Ch'i-yüan."
[4] Pronounce Lowdza. The low as in allow. See p. vii.
[5] Of an imaginative character, in keeping with the visionary teachings
of his master.
[6] See chs. xxxi, xxix, and x, respectively.
[7] The second of these personages is doubtless identical, though the
name is differently written, with the Kêng Sang Ch'u of ch. xxiii. The
identity of the first name has not been satisfactorily settled.
[8] See p. 17.
[9] This last clause is based upon a famous passage in the Lun Yü:—The
perfect man is not a mere thing; i.e., his functions are not limited.
The idea conveyed is that Chuang Tzŭ's system was too far-reaching to be
practical.
[10] See p. 434.
[11] The Canon of Tao, and of Tê, the exemplification thereof. See
p. 125. I have discussed the claims of this work at some length in The
Remains of Lao Tzŭ: Hong Kong, 1886.
[12] The brilliant philosopher, statesman, poet, &c., of the Sung dynasty
(A.D. 1036-1101).
[13] A curious parallelism will be found in Supernatural Religion, vol. i,
p. 460:—


"No period in the history of the world ever produced so many
spurious works as the first two or three centuries of our era. The name
of every Apostle, or Christian teacher, not excepting that of the great
Master, was freely attached to every description of religious forgery."
[14] On the authority of the I-wên-chih.
[15] A work of the fifth century A.D.
[16] Of the Han dynasty. Mayers puts him a little later, viz., A.D. 275.
[17] The China Review, vol. xvi, p. 195.
[18] In A.D. 742.
[19] The Divine Classic of Nan-hua. By Frederic Henry Balfour,
F.R.G.S., Shanghai and London, 1881.
[20] One example will suffice. In ch. xxiii (see p. 309) there occurs a
short sentence which means, "A one-legged man discards ornament,
his exterior not being open to commendation."


Mr. Balfour translated this as follows:—"Servants will tear up a
portrait, not liking to be confronted with its beauties and its defects."
[21] In 1885 this treatise was republished by Dr. Legge in its place as
Bk. xxviii of the Lî Kî of Li Chi (Sacred Books of the East, vols. xxvii,
xxviii), with a new title The State of Equilibrium and Harmony. But the
parallelism with the Aristotelian doctrine is as obvious as ever.
[22] See the fragments in Ritter and Preller's Hist. Phil. Græc. § 93 and
§ 94 A. B. Seventh edition.
[23] Heracl. Eph. Rell. Bywater, xvi.
[24] ὀχλολοίδορος Ἡράκλειτος Timon ap. Diog. Laert. ix. i.
[25] Οὐκ ἐμεῦ ἀλλὰ τοὺ λόγου ἀκουσάντας ὁμολογέειν σοφόν ἐστι ἓν πάντα εἶναι. Heracl. Eph. Rell. i.
[26] Hippolytus Ref. haer. ix. 9.
[27] Heracl. Eph. Rell. xxxix.
[28] Ibid., lvii.
[29] Ibid., lxvii.
[30] Ibid., lxix.
[31] Ibid., lxx.
[32] Ibid., lxxviii.
[33] Ibid., xlv.
[34] Ibid., lix.
[35] Ibid., xxxvi.
[36] Ibid., xliv.
[37] Ibid., iii.
[38] Ibid., v.
[39] Heracl. Eph. Rell. iv.
[40] Ibid., xlv.
[41] Ibid., xlvii.
[42] Ibid., liv., and notes.
[43] Ibid., li.
[44] Ibid., xci, xix.
[45] Ibid., xxix.
[46] Cf. Plat. Phaedr. 265: κατ' ἄρθρα ᾑ πέφυκεν καὶ μὴ ἐπιχειρεῖν καταγνύναι
μέρος μηδὲν κακοῦ μαγείρου τρόπῳ χρώμενος.
[47] Cf. Herbert Spencer's well-known paradox,—"The sense of duty or
moral obligation is transitory, and will diminish as fast as moralisation
increases."—Data of Ethics, p. 127.
[48] Theaet. 176. A. διὸ καὶ πειρᾶσθαι χρὴ ἐνθένδε ἐκεῖσε φεύγειν ὅ τι
τάχιστα. φυγὴ δὲ ὁμοίωσις Θεῷ κατὰ τὸ δυνατόν. ὁμοίωσις δὲ δίκαιον καὶ ὅσιον
μετὰ φρονήσεως γενέσθαι.
[49] Heracl. Eph. Rell. lxv.
[50] Chuang Tzŭ, chap. xiv, p. 182-189.
[51] Encycl. Met., Art. "Lao Tzŭ."
[52] Quoted by Dr. Legge, loc. cit.
[53] E.g. Mr. Edwin Arnold's Light of Asia, and still more Professor
Seydel's Das Evangelium von Jesu in seinen Verhältnissen zu Buddha-Sage
and Buddha-Lehre. On the other side of the question, cf. Dr.
Kellogg's The Light of Asia and The Light of the World. London,
1885. And an article in the Nineteenth Century for July, 1888, on
Buddhism, by the Bishop of Colombo.

TRANSLATED FROM THE CHINESE
BY
HERBERT A. GILES
H. B. M.'s Consul at Tamsui
London
BERNARD QUARITCH
1889
Chuang Tzŭ[1] belongs to the third and fourth
centuries before Christ. He lived in the feudal
age, when China was split up into a number of States
owning a nominal allegiance to the royal, and weakly,
House of Chou.
He is noticed by the historian Ssŭ-ma Ch'ien, who
flourished at the close of the second century B.C., as
follows:—
Chuang Tzŭ was a native of Mêng.[2] His personal
name was Chou. He held a petty official
post at Ch'i-yüan in Mêng.[3] He lived contemporaneously
with Prince Hui of the Liang State and
Prince Hsüan of the Ch'i State. His erudition was
most varied; but his chief doctrines are based upon
the sayings of Lao Tzŭ.[4] Consequently, his writings,
which extend to over 100,000 words, are mostly
allegorical.[5]
[vi]
He wrote The Old Fisherman, Robber Chê, and
Opening Trunks, with a view to asperse the Confucian
school and to glorify the mysteries of Lao
Tzŭ.[6] Wei Lei Hsü, Kêng Saṅg Tzŭ, and the like,
are probably unsubstantial figments of his imagination.[7]
Nevertheless, his literary and dialectic skill
was such that the best scholars of the age proved
unable to refute his destructive criticism of the
Confucian and Mihist schools.[8]
His teachings were like an overwhelming flood,
which spreads at its own sweet will. Consequently,
from rulers and ministers downwards, none could
apply them to any definite use.[9]
Prince Wei of the Ch'u State, hearing of Chuang
Tzŭ's good report, sent messengers to him, bearing
costly gifts, and inviting him to become Prime
Minister. At this Chuang Tzŭ smiled and said
to the messengers, "You offer me great wealth
and a proud position indeed; but have you never
seen a sacrificial ox?—When after being fattened
up for several years, it is decked with embroidered
trappings and led to the altar, would it not willingly
then change places with some uncared-for pigling?...
Begone! Defile me not! I would
rather disport myself to my own enjoyment in the[vii]
mire than be slave to the ruler of a State. I will
never take office. Thus I shall remain free to
follow my own inclinations."[10]
To enable the reader to understand more fully the
writings of Chuang Tzŭ, and to appreciate his aim and
object, it will be necessary to go back a few more hundred
years.
In the seventh century B.C., lived a man, now commonly
spoken of as Lao Tzŭ. He was the great Prophet of
his age. He taught men to return good for evil, and to
look forward to a higher life. He professed to have
found the clue to all things human and divine.
He seems to have insisted that his system could not be
reduced to words. At any rate, he declared that those
who spoke did not know, while those who knew did not
speak.
But to accommodate himself to conditions of mortality,
he called this clue TAO, or The Way, explaining that the
word was to be understood metaphorically, and not in a
literal sense as the way or road upon which men walk.
The following are sentences selected from the indisputably
genuine remains of Lao Tzŭ, to be found scattered
here and there in early Chinese literature:—
All the world knows that the goodness of doing
good is not real goodness.
When merit has been achieved, do not take
it to yourself. On the other hand, if you do not
take it to yourself, it shall never be taken from you.
By many words wit is exhausted. It is better
to preserve a mean.
[viii]
Keep behind, and you shall be put in front.
Keep out, and you shall be kept in.
What the world reverences may not be treated
with irreverence.
Good words shall gain you honour in the market-place.
Good deeds shall gain you friends among
men.
He who, conscious of being strong, is content
to be weak,—he shall be a cynosure of men.
The Empire is a divine trust, and may not be
ruled. He who rules, ruins. He who holds by
force, loses.
Mighty is he who conquers himself.
He who is content, has enough.
To the good I would be good. To the not-good
I would also be good, in order to make them good.
If the government is tolerant, the people will be
without guile. If the government is meddling,
there will be constant infraction of the law.
Recompense injury with kindness.
The wise man's freedom from grievance is
because he will not regard grievances as such.
Of such were the pure and simple teachings of Lao
Tzŭ. But it is upon the wondrous doctrine of Inaction
that his claim to immortality is founded:—
Do nothing, and all things will be done.
I do nothing, and my people become good of
their own accord.
Abandon wisdom and discard knowledge, and
the people will be benefited an hundredfold.
The weak overcomes the strong, the soft overcomes
the hard. All the world knows this; yet
none can act up to it.
[ix]
The softest things in the world override the
hardest. That which has no substance enters
where there is no fissure. And so I know that
there is advantage in Inaction.
Such doctrines as these were, however, not likely to
appeal with force to the sympathies of a practical people.
In the sixth century B.C., before Lao Tzŭ's death, another
Prophet arose. He taught his countrymen that duty to
one's neighbour comprises the whole duty of man.
Charitableness of heart, justice, sincerity, and fortitude,—sum
up the ethics of Confucius. He knew nothing of a
God, of a soul, of an unseen world. And he declared
that the unknowable had better remain untouched.
Against these hard and worldly utterances, Chuang Tzŭ
raised a powerful cry. The idealism of Lao Tzŭ had
seized upon his poetic soul, and he determined to stem
the tide of materialism in which men were being fast
rolled to perdition.
He failed, of course. It was, indeed, too great a task to
persuade the calculating Chinese nation that by doing
nothing, all things would be done. But Chuang Tzŭ
bequeathed to posterity a work which, by reason of its
marvellous literary beauty, has always held a foremost
place. It is also a work of much originality of thought.
The writer, it is true, appears chiefly as a disciple insisting
upon the principles of a Master. But he has contrived to
extend the field, and carry his own speculations into regions
never dreamt of by Lao Tzŭ.
It may here be mentioned that the historian Ssŭ-ma
Ch'ien, already quoted, states in his notice of Lao Tzŭ
that the latter left behind him a small volume in 5,000[x]
and odd characters. Ssŭ-ma Ch'ien does not say, nor
does he give the reader to understand, that he himself had
ever seen the book in question. Nor does he even hint
(see p. v.) that Chuang Tzŭ drew his inspiration from a
book, but only from the "sayings" of Lao Tzŭ.
Confucius never mentions this book. Neither does
Mencius, China's "Second Sage," who was born about
one hundred years after the death of the First.
But all this is a trifle compared with the fact that
Chuang Tzŭ himself never once alludes to such a book;
although now, in this nineteenth century, there are some,
happily few in number, who believe that we possess the
actual work of Lao Tzŭ's pen. It is, perhaps, happier
still that this small number cannot be said to include
within it the name of a single native scholar of eminence.
In fact, as far as I know, the whole range of Chinese
literature yields but the name of one such individual
who has ever believed in the genuineness of the so-called
Tao-Tê-Ching.[11] Even he would probably have remained
unknown to fame, had he not been brother to Su
Tung-p'o.[12]
Chuang Tzŭ, indeed, puts into the mouth of Lao Tzŭ
sayings which are now found in the Tao-Tê-Ching, mixed
up with a great many other similar sayings which are
not to be found there. But he also puts sayings, which
now appear in the Tao-Tê-Ching, into the mouth of
[xi]Confucius (p. 275)! And even into the mouth of the
Yellow Emperor (pp. 277-278), whose date is some
twenty centuries earlier than that of Lao Tzŭ himself!!
Two centuries before the Christian era, an attempt was
made to destroy, with some exceptions, the whole of
Chinese literature, in order that history might begin anew
from the reign of the First Emperor of united China.
The extent of the actual mischief done by this "Burning
of the Books" has been greatly exaggerated. Still, the
mere attempt at such a holocaust gave a fine chance to
the scholars of the later Han dynasty (A.D. 25-221), who
seem to have enjoyed nothing so much as forging, if not
the whole, at any rate portions, of the works of ancient
authors. Some one even produced a treatise under the
name of Lieh Tzŭ, a philosopher mentioned by Chuang
Tzŭ, not seeing that the individual in question was a
creation of Chuang Tzŭ's brain!
And the Tao-Tê-Ching was undoubtedly pieced together
somewhere about this period, from recorded sayings and
conversations of Lao Tzŭ.[13]
Chuang Tzŭ's work has suffered in like manner. Several
chapters are clearly spurious, and many episodes have
been interpolated by feeble imitators of an inimitable
style.
The text, as it now stands, consists of thirty-three
chapters. These are a reduction from fifty-three, which
[xii]appear to have been in existence in the fourth century A.D.[14]
The following is the account given in the Imperial Catalogue
of the first known edition:—
Chuang Tzŭ, with Commentary, in 10 books. By
Kuo Hsiang of the Chin dynasty (A.D. 265-420).
The Shih-shuo-hsin-yü[15] states that Kuo Hsiang
stole his work from Hsiang Hsiu.[16] Subsequently,
Hsiang Hsiu's edition was issued, and the two were
in circulation together. Hsiang Hsiu's edition is
now lost, while Kuo Hsiang's remains.
Comparison with quotations from Hsiang Hsiu's
work, as given in Chuang Tzŭ Explained, by Lu
Tê-ming, shows conclusive evidence of plagiarism.
Nevertheless, Kuo Hsiang contributed a certain
amount of independent revision, making it impossible
for us to regard the whole as from the hand of
Hsiang Hsiu. Consequently, it now passes under
the name of Kuo Hsiang.
Since Kuo Hsiang's time, numberless editions with
ever-varying interpretations have been produced to delight
and to confuse the student. Of these, I have chosen six,
representative as nearly as possible of different schools of
thought. Their editors are:—
1.—Kuo Hsiang of the Chin dynasty. (a) As given
in the Shih Tzŭ Ch'üan Shu, or Complete Works of the
Ten Philosophers. (b) As edited by Tan Yüan-ch'un, of
the Ming dynasty, with his own valuable notes.
2.—Lü Hui-ch'ing of the Sung dynasty.
3.—Lin Hsi-yi of the Sung dynasty.
4.—Wang Yü of the Sung dynasty. Son of the famous
Wang An-shih.
5.—Hsing Tung, a Taoist priest of the Ming dynasty.
6.—Lin Hsi-chung, of the Ming and Ch'ing dynasties.
Where there is a consensus of opinion, I have followed
such interpretation without demur. But where opinions
differ, I have not hesitated to accept that interpretation
which seemed to me to be most in harmony with the
general tenor of Chuang Tzŭ's philosophy. And where
all commentators fail equally, as they sometimes do, to
yield anything at all intelligible, I have then ventured to
fall back upon what Chuang Tzŭ himself would have
called the "light of nature." Always keeping steadily in
view the grand precept of Lin Hsi-chung, that we should
attempt to interpret Chuang Tzŭ neither according to Lao
Tzŭ, nor according to Confucius, nor according to Buddha,
but according to Chuang Tzŭ himself.
Of the thirty-three existing chapters, the first seven are
called "inside" chapters, the next fifteen "outside," and
the remaining eleven "miscellaneous."
The meaning of "inside" and "outside" is a matter of
dispute. Some Chinese critics have understood these
terms in the obvious sense of esoteric and exoteric. But
it is simpler to believe with others that the titles of the
first seven chapters are taken from the inside or subject-matter,
while the outside chapters are so named because
their titles are derived casually from words which happen
to stand at the beginning or outside of each.
[xiv]
Compared with the "miscellaneous," these latter seem
to have been classed together as elucidating a single
principle in terms more easy of apprehension; while the
"miscellaneous" chapters embrace several distinct trains
of thought, and are altogether more abstruse. The
arrangement is unscientific, and it was probably this which
caused Su Tung-p'o to decide that division into chapters
belongs to a later age. He regards chaps. xxix-xxxii as
spurious, although Ssŭ-ma Ch'ien alludes to two of these
as Chuang Tzŭ's work. It has indeed been held that the
inside chapters alone (i-vii) are from Chuang Tzŭ's own
pen. But most of the other chapters, exclusive of
xxix-xxxii, contain unmistakable traces of a master hand.
Ch. xvii, by virtue of an exquisite imagery, has earned
for its author the affectionate sobriquet of "Chou of the
Autumn Floods."
Chuang Tzŭ, it must be remembered, has been for
centuries classed as a heterodox writer. His work was
an effort of reaction against the materialism of Confucian
teachings. And in the course of it he was anything but
sparing of terms. Confucius is dealt with in language
which no modern literate can approve. But the beauty
and vigour of the language are facts admitted by all. He
is constantly quoted in the great standard lexicon which
passes under the name of K'ang Hsi.
But no acquaintance with the philosophy of Chuang
Tzŭ would assist the candidate for honours at the competitive
examinations which are the portals to official place
and power. Consequently, Chuang Tzŭ is studied chiefly
by older men, who have retired from office, or who have
been disappointed in their career. Those too who are[xv]
dominated by a religious craving for something better
than mortality, find in his pages much agreeable solace
against the troubles of this world, with an implied promise
of another and a better world to come.
It has been publicly announced that translations of Lao
Tzŭ and Chuang Tzŭ are to appear among the Sacred
Books of the East.[17]
Now to include the Tao-Tê-Ching in such a series would
be already a doubtful step. Apart from spuriousness, it
can only by a severe stretch of courtesy be termed a
"sacred book." It undoubtedly contains many of Lao
Tzŭ's sayings, but it also undoubtedly contains much that
Lao Tzŭ never said and never could have said. It illustrates
rather that period when the pure Tao of Lao Tzŭ
began to be corrupted by alchemistic research and gropings
after the elixir of life. It was probably written up in self-defence
against the encroachments of Buddhism, in those
early days of religious struggle when China was first
flooded with the "sacred books" of the West. It is not
seriously recognised as the Canon of ancient Taoism.
Among the Taoists of to-day, not one in ten thousand has
more than heard its name. For modern Taoism is but a
hybrid superstition,—a mixture of ancient nature-worship
and Buddhistic ceremonial, with Tao as the style of the
firm. Its teachings are farther removed from the Tao
of Lao Tzŭ than Ritualism from the Christianity of
Christ.
As to Chuang Tzŭ, his work can in no sense be called
"sacred." Unless indeed we modify somewhat the
[xvi]accepted value of terms, and reckon the works of Aristotle
among the "sacred" books of the Greeks. Chuang Tzŭ
was scarcely the founder of a school. He was not a
Prophet, as Lao Tzŭ was, nor can he fairly be said ever
to have been regarded by genuine Taoists as such.
When, many centuries later, the light of Lao Tzŭ's real
teachings had long since been obscured, then a foolish
Emperor conferred upon Chuang Tzŭ's work the title of
Holy Canon of Nan-hua.[18] But this was done solely to
secure for the follies of the age the sanction of a great
name. Not to mention that Lieh Tzŭ's alleged work, and
many other similar forgeries have also been equally
honoured. So that if works like these are to be included
among the Sacred Books of the East, then China alone will
be able to supply matter for translation for the next few
centuries to come.
Partly of necessity, and partly to spare the general
reader, I have relegated to a supplement all textual and
critical notes involving the use of Chinese characters.
This supplement will be issued as soon as possible after
my return to China. It will not form an integral part of
the present work, being intended merely to assist students
of the language in verifying the renderings I have here
seen fit to adopt. As a compromise I have supplied a
kind of running commentary, introduced, in accordance
with the Chinese system, into the body of the text. It is
hoped that this will enable any one to understand the
drift of Chuang Tzŭ's allusions, and to follow arguments
which are usually subtle and oft-times obscure.
[xvii]
Only one previous attempt has been made to place
Chuang Tzŭ in the hands of English readers.[19] In that
case, the knowledge of the Chinese language possessed by
the translator was altogether too elementary to justify
such an attempt.[20]

HERBERT A. GILES.

By the Rev. AUBREY MOORE,
Tutor of Keble and Magdalen Colleges, Oxford; Hon. Canon of Christ Church, &c.
The translator of Chuang Tzŭ has asked me to append a note on the
philosophy of chs. i-vii. It is difficult to see how one who writes not only
in ignorance of Chinese modes of thought, but with the preconceptions of
Western philosophy, can really help much towards the understanding of
an admittedly obscure system, involving terms and expressions on which
Chinese scholars are not yet agreed. But an attempt to point out
parallelisms of thought and reasoning between East and West may be of
use in two ways. It may stimulate those who are really competent to
understand both terms in the comparison to tell us where the parallelism
is real and where it is only apparent; and it may help to accustom
ordinary readers to look for and expect resemblances in systems in which
an earlier age would have seen nothing but contrasts.
There was a time when historians of Greek philosophy used to point out
what were considered to be the characteristics of Greek thought, and then
to put down to "Oriental influence" anything which did not at once agree
with these characteristics. How and through what channels this "Oriental
influence" was exercised, it was never easy to determine, nor was it
always thought worthy of much discussion. In recent times, however,
a greater knowledge of Eastern systems has familiarised us with much
which, on the same principle, ought to be attributed to "Greek influence."
And the result has been that we have learned to put aside theories of
derivation, and to content ourselves with tracing the evolution of reason
and of rational problems, and to expect parallelisms even where the circumstances
are widely different.
One instance may be worth quoting in illustration. We used to be
told that the Greek mind, in its speculation and its art, was characterised
by its love of order, harmony, and symmetry, in contrast with the monstrous
creations of the Oriental imagination, and the "colossal ugliness of the
Pyramids"; and it was said with reason that the Aristotelian doctrine of[xix]
"the mean" was the ripe fruit of the practical inquiries of the Greeks,
and was the ethical counterpart of their artistic development. But in
1861 we were introduced by Dr. Legge to a Confucianist work, attributed
to Tzŭ Tzŭ, grandson of Confucius and a contemporary of Socrates,
and entitled The Doctrine of the Mean,[21] which is there represented as
the true moral way in which the perfect man walks, while all else go
beyond or fall short of it. Yet even those who discovered the doctrine
of the Trinity in the Tâo-Tê-Ching have not, we believe, suggested
that Aristotle had private access to the Li Chi.
We may then, without bringing any charge of piracy or plagiarism
against either, point out some parallels between Chuang Tzŭ and a great
Greek thinker.
Chuang Tzŭ's first chapter is mainly critical and destructive, pointing
out the worthlessness of ordinary judgments, and the unreality of sense
knowledge. The gigantic Rukh, at the height of 90,000 li, is a mere
mote in the sunbeam. For size is relative. The cicada, which can just
fly from tree to tree, laughs with the dove at the Rukh's high flight. For
space also is relative. Compared with the mushroom of a day, P'êng Tsu
is as old as Methuselah; but what is his age to that of the fabled tree,
whose spring and autumn make up 16,000 years? Time, then, is relative
too. And though men wonder at him who could "ride upon the wind
and travel for many days," he is but a child to one who "roams through
the realms of For-Ever."
This doctrine of "relativity," which is a commonplace in Greek as it
is in modern philosophy, is made the basis, both in ancient and modern
times, of two opposite conclusions. Either it is argued that all sense
knowledge is relative, and sense is the only organ of knowledge, therefore
real knowledge is impossible; or else the relativity of sense knowledge
leads men to draw a sharp contrast between sense and reason and to turn
away from the outward in order to listen to the inward voice. The one
alternative is scepticism, the other idealism. In Greek thought the
earliest representatives of the former are the Sophists, of the latter
Heracleitus.
There is no doubt to which side of the antithesis Chuang Tzŭ belongs.
His exposure of false and superficial thinking looks at first like the
[xx]destruction of knowledge. Even Socrates was called a Sophist because of
his destructive criticism and his restless challenging of popular views.
But Chuang Tzŭ has nothing of the sceptic in him. He is an idealist and
a mystic, with all the idealist's hatred of a utilitarian system, and the
mystic's contempt for a life of mere external activity. "The perfect man
ignores self; the divine man ignores action; the true sage ignores reputation"
(p. 5). The Emperor Yao would have abdicated in favour of a
hermit, but the hermit replies that "reputation is but the shadow of reality,"
and will not exchange the real for the seeming. But greater than Yao
and the hermit is the divine being who dwells on the mysterious mountain
in a state of pure, passionless inaction.
For the sage, then, life means death to all that men think life, the
life of seeming or reputation, of doing or action, of being or individual selfhood.
This leads on to the "budget of paradoxes" in chap. II. As in
the moral and active region we escape from the world and self, and are able
to reverse and look down upon the world's judgments, so in the speculative
region we get behind and beyond the contradictions of ordinary thinking,
and of speech which stereotypes abstractions. The sage knows nothing
of the distinction between subjective and objective. It exists only
ex analogiâ hominis. "From the standpoint of Tao" all things are one.
People "guided by the criteria of their own mind," see only the contradiction,
the manifoldness, the difference; the sage sees the many
disappearing in the One, in which subjective and objective, positive and
negative, here and there, somewhere and nowhere, meet and blend. For
him, "a beam and a pillar are identical. So are ugliness and beauty,
greatness, wickedness, perverseness, and strangeness. Separation is the same
as construction: construction is the same as destruction" (pp. 19-20).
The sage "blends everything into one harmonious whole, rejecting the
comparison of this and that. Rank and precedence, which the vulgar
prize, the sage stolidly ignores. The universe itself may pass away, but
he will flourish still" (p. 29). "Were the ocean itself scorched up, he
would not feel hot. Were the milky way frozen hard he would not feel
cold. Were the mountains to be riven with thunder, and the great deep
to be thrown up by storm, he would not tremble" (pp. 27-28).
He is "embraced in the obliterating unity of God," and passing into the
realm of the Infinite finds rest therein (p. 31).
It is impossible in reading this chapter on "The Identity of Contraries"
not to be reminded of Heracleitus. The disparagement of sense knowledge,[xxi]
and the contempt for common views is indeed equally marked in
Eleaticism, and there is much in Chuang Tzŭ which recalls Parmenides,[22]
so far as the contrast between the way of truth and the way of error, the
true belief in the One and the popular belief in the Many, is concerned.
But it seems to me that the "One" of Chuang Tzŭ is not the dead Unit
of Eleaticism, which resulted from the thinking away of differences,
but the living Unity of Heracleitus, in which contraries co-exist.
Heracleitus, indeed, seems to have been a man after Chuang Tzŭ's own
heart, not only in his obscurity, which won for him the title of ὁ σκοτεινὸς,
but in his indifference to worldly position, shown in the fact that, like the
Emperor Yao, he abdicates in his brother's favour (Diog. Laert. ix. 1),
and in his supercilious disregard for the learned like Hesiod and Pythagoras
and Xenophanes and Hecataeus,[23] no less than for the common
people[24] of his day.
"Listen," says Heracleitus, "not to me, but to reason, and confess the
true wisdom that 'All things are One.'"[25] "All is One, the divided and
the undivided, the begotten and the unbegotten, the mortal and the immortal,
reason and eternity, father and son, God and justice."[26] "Cold is
hot, heat is cold, that which is moist is parched, that which is dried up is
wet."[27] "Good and evil are the same."[28] "Gods are mortal, men immortal:
our life is their death, our death their life."[29] "Upward and
downward are the same."[30] "The beginning and the end are one."[31]
"Life and death, sleeping and waking, youth and age are identical."[32]
This is what reason tells the philosopher. "All is One." The world
is a unity of opposing forces (παλίντροπος ἁρμονίη κόσμου ὅκωσπερ λύρας
καὶ τόξου).[33] "Join together whole and not whole, agreeing and different,
harmonious and discordant. Out of all comes one: out of one all."[34]
"God is day-night, winter-summer, war-peace, repletion-want."[35] The
very rhythm of nature is strife. War, which men hate and the poets would
banish, "is the father and lord of all."[36] But "men are without understanding,
they hear and hear not,"[37] or "they hear and understand not."[38]
[xxii]For they trust to their senses, which are "false witnesses."[39] They see
the contradictions, but know not that "the different is at unity with
itself."[40] They cannot see the "hidden harmony, which is greater than
the harmony which is seen."[41] For they live in the external, the commonplace,
the relative, and never rise above the life of the senses. "The sow
loves the mire."[42] "The ass prefers fodder to gold."[43] And men love their
"private conceits" instead of clinging to the universal reason which
orders all things,[44] and which even the sun obeys.[45]
Of the fragments which remain to us of Heracleitus, the greater number
belong to the region of logic and metaphysics, while Chuang Tzŭ devotes
much space to the more practical side of the question. He not only
ridicules those who trust their senses, or measure by utilitarian standards,
or judge by the outward appearance;—he teaches them how to pass from
the seeming to the true. The wonderful carver, who could cut where the
natural joints are,[46] is one who sees not with the eye of sense but with his
mind. When he is in doubt he "falls back upon eternal principles";
for he is "devoted to Tao" (chap. iii). There is something of humour,
as well as much of truth, in the rebuke which Confucius, speaking pro
hâc vice as a disciple of Lao Tzŭ, administers to his self-confident follower
who wanted to "be of use." "Cultivate fasting;—not bodily fasting, but
the fasting of the heart." Tao can only abide in the life which has got
rid of self. So the Duke of Shê is reminded that there is something
higher than duty,[47] viz., destiny, the state, that is, in which conscious obedience
has given way to that which is instinctive and automatic. The
parable of the trees (pp. 50-53), with its result in the survival of the good-for-nothing,
is again a reversal of popular outside judgments. For as the
first part of the chapter had taught the uselessness of trying to be useful,
so the last part teaches the usefulness of being useless. And the same
thought is carried on in the next chapter, which deals with the reversal of
common opinion as to persons. Its motto is:—Judge not by the appearance.
Virtue must prevail and outward form be forgotten. The loathsome
leper Ai T'ai To is made Prime Minister by the wise Duke Ai. The
[xxiii]mutilated criminal is judged by Lao Tzŭ to be a greater man than Confucius.
For the criminal is mutilated in body by man, while Confucius,
though men know it not, by the judgment of God is πεπηρωμένος πρὸς
ἀρετήν.
This protest of Chuang Tzŭ against externality, and judging only by
the outward appearance, might easily be translated into Christian language.
For Christianity also teaches inwardness, and, in common with all
idealism, resents the delimitation of human life and knowledge to "the
things which are seen." In its opposition to a mere practical system like
Confucianism, Taoism must have appealed to those deeper instincts of
humanity to which Buddhism appealed some centuries later. In practice,
Confucianism was limited to the finite. Action, effort, benevolence,
unselfishness,—all these have a place in it, and their theatre is the world
as we know it. Its last word is worldly wisdom; not selfishness, but an
enlarged prudentialism. To the Taoist such a system savours of "the
rudiments of the world." Its "charity and duty," its "ceremonies and
music," are the "Touch not, taste not, handle not," of an ephemeral
state of being, and perish in the using. And the sage seeks for the
Absolute, the Infinite, the Eternal. He seeks to attain to Tao.
It is here that we reach (in chaps. vi, vii) what properly constitutes the
mysticism of Chuang Tzŭ. Heracleitus is not a mystic, though he is the
founder of a long line, which through Plato, and Dionysius the Areopagite
and John the Scot in the ninth century, and Meister Eckhart in the
thirteenth, and Jacob Böhme in the sixteenth, reaches down to Hegel.
Heracleitus despises the world and shuns it; but he has not yet made
flight from the world a dogma. Even Plato, when in a well-known
passage in the Theaetetus,[48] he counsels flight from the present state of
things, explains that he means only "flee from evil and become like God."
Still less has Heracleitus got so far as to aim at self-absorption in God.
In Greek thought the attempt to get rid of consciousness, and to become
the unconscious vehicle of a higher illumination, is unknown till the time
of Philo. Yet this is the teaching of Chuang Tzŭ. "The true sage
takes his refuge in God, and learns that there is no distinction between
subject and object. This is the very axis of Tao" (p. 18). Abstraction
from self, then, is the road which leads to Tao (chap. vi). The pure
of old did not love life and hate death. They were content to be passive
vehicles of Tao. They had reached the state of sublime indifference,
[xxiv]they had become "oblivious of their own existence." Everything in
them was spontaneous; nothing the result of effort. "They made no
plans; therefore failing, they had no cause for regret; succeeding, no cause
for congratulation" (p. 69). "They cheerfully played their allotted parts,
waiting patiently for the end." They were free, for they were in perfect
harmony with creation (p. 71). For them One and not One are One;
God and Man. For they had attained to Tao, and Tao is greater than
God. "Before heaven and earth were, Tao was. It has existed without
change from all time. Spiritual beings draw their spirituality therefrom;
while the universe became what we see it now. To Tao the zenith is not
high, nor the nadir low; no point of time is long ago, nor by lapse of
ages has it grown old" (p. 76). The great legislators obtained TAO, and
laid down eternal principles. The sun and moon, and the Great Bear
are kept in their courses by Tao.
He who would attain to Tao must get rid of the thought of "charity
and duty," of "music and ceremonies," of body and mind. The flowers
and the birds do not toil, they simply live. That is Tao. And for man
a state of indifference and calm, the ἀταραξία not of the sceptic but of
the mystic, a passive reflecting of the Eternal, is the ideal end. "The
perfect man employs his mind as a mirror. It grasps nothing, it refuses
nothing. It receives but does not keep. And thus he can triumph over
matter without injury to himself." (See p. 98.)
It would of course be presumption to attempt to assign a meaning to Tao,
and still more to discover an equivalent in Western thought. But it may
be lawful to say that Heracleitus often speaks of Λόγος as Chuang
Tzŭ speaks of Tao. It is Necessity (ἀνάγκη), or Fate (εἱμαρμένη), or
Mind (γνώμη), or Justice (Δική). In nature it appears as balance and
equipoise; in the State as Law; in man as the universal Reason,
which is in him but not of him. Sometimes it is identified with the
mysterious name of Zeus, which may not be uttered;[49] sometimes like
the Ἀνάγκη of the Greek poets, it is supreme over gods and men. If
it is hard to say what is the relation of Tao to God, it is not less hard to
define the relation of Λόγος to Zeus. To speak of Chuang Tzŭ and
Heracleitus as pantheists is only to say that, so far as we can translate
[xxv]their language into ours, that name seems less inappropriate than Theist
or Deist. But it is doubtful whether the distinction between Pantheism
and Theism would have been intelligible to either philosopher, and certain
that if they could have understood it, they would have denied to it reality.
Both held the immanence of the Eternal Principle in all that is. Both
taught that the soul is an emanation from the Divine, and both, though in
very different degrees, seem to teach that a life is perfect in proportion as it
becomes one with that from which it came, and loses what is individual
in it.
In Chuang Tzŭ, as in all mystics, there is an element of antinomianism. That
"good and evil are the same," may contain a deep truth for the sage, but
"take no heed of time, nor of right and wrong" (p. 31) is, to say the least,
dangerous teaching for the masses. The mystic's utterances will not bear
translation into the language of the world, and to take them au pied de la
lettre can hardly fail to produce disastrous results. This is why antinomianism
always dogs the heels of mysticism. And this may perhaps
help to explain the debased Taoism of to-day. But of this I know
nothing.
It would be interesting to know whether in the undisputed utterances
of Lao Tzŭ (i. e. putting on one side the Tâo-Tê-Ching), Quietism and
the glorification of Inaction are as prominent as they are in Chuang Tzŭ.
One would be prepared à priori to find that they are not. Lao Tzŭ was
born at the end of the seventh century B.C., and was, therefore, some fifty
years older than Confucius, with whom in 517 B.C., he is said to have had
an interview.[50] By the time of Chuang Tzŭ, who was possibly contemporary
with Mencius, and therefore some two or three centuries after Lao Tzŭ,
Confucianism had become to some extent the established religion of China,
and Taoism, like Republicanism in the days of the Roman Empire, became
a mere opposition de salon. Under such circumstances any elements of
mysticism latent in Lao Tzŭ's system would develop rapidly. And the antagonism
between the representatives of Lao Tzŭ and Confucius would proportionately
increase. But philosophy does not become mystical and take
refuge in flight until it abandons all hope of converting the world. When
effort is useless, the mind idealises Inaction, and seeks a metaphysical
basis for it. For mysticism and scepticism flourish in the same atmosphere
though in different soils, both, though in different ways, implying
the abandonment of the rational problem. The Sceptic, the Agnostic
or Positivist of to-day, declares it insoluble, and settles down content to
[xxvi]take things as they are; the mystic retires into himself, and dreams of a
state of being which is the obverse of the world of fact.
The triumph of Confucianism in the centuries which intervened between
Lao Tzŭ and Chuang Tzŭ would account for the antagonism between
Taoism and Confucianism as we find it. But it fails to account for the way
in which Confucius is sometimes represented as playing into the hands of
Taoism. On p. 85 f. n. the translator explains it as a literary coup de main.
Dr. Chalmers, quoted by Dr. Legge,[51] says that both Chuang Tzŭ and Lieh
Tzŭ introduced Confucius into their writings "as the lords of the Philistines
did the captive Samson on their festive occasions, 'to make sport for
them.'" But there is not a hint of this given in the text, though
throughout one long chapter (chap. iv) we find Confucius giving a Taoist
refutation of Confucianist doctrines when defended by his own pupil
Yen Hui. It might seem like an attempt to draw a distinction
between Confucius and Confucianism, though elsewhere Confucius is
ridiculed as wanting in sense.
May not the explanation be as follows?—
(i.) Lao Tzŭ and Confucius were probably much nearer to one another
philosophically than the Taoism of Chuang Tzŭ and the Confucianism
of Mencius. The passages in which Confucius talks Taoism would, on
this hypothesis, represent a traditional survival of their real relations to
one another. The episode of Confucius' visit to Lao Tzŭ "to ask about
the Tao," would, whether it records a fact or not, tend in the same
direction.
(ii.) From the first we may assume that the one took an ideal, the
other a practical and utilitarian view of Tao "the Way"; Confucius
finding it in social duties and the work of practical life, Lao Tzŭ in the
hidden and the inward, the "interior life," as Christian mystics would call
it. Thus the historian Ssŭ-ma Ch'ien[52] says, "Lao Tzŭ cultivated the
Tao and virtue, his chief aim in his studies being how to keep himself
concealed and unknown. Seeing the decay of the dynasty he withdrew
himself out of sight, and no one knows where he died."
(iii.) The divergence between the two views, the ideal and the actual,
the mystical and the practical, would increase with time, each intensifying
the other by opposition and reaction, until the practical won its way to
security, and the mystical got left out in the cold, perhaps persecuted,
certainly suspected, and treated as heterodox, and naturally retaliating by
scornful criticism of the dominant view. When this stage is reached,
[xxvii]Mencius regards Lao Tzŭ as a heresiarch, while Chuang Tzŭ often treats
Confucius with contempt and ridicule. For "the Way that is walked
upon is not the Way," and "the Tao which shines forth is not Tao"
(p. 25). But Confucianism being "established," the Taoists are now
"dissenters," and not being strong enough to disestablish Confucianism
become more and more mystical, and content themselves with a policy
of protest.
If there is little direct evidence for this theory as to the relations of
Taoism and Confucianism, there is a curious parallel in Western thought.
When Plato was known only in a neo-Platonic disguise, and Aristotle
judged by the Organon, it was possible for partisans to represent the two
philosophers as typical opposites, and to assume that "every one is born a
Platonist or an Aristotelian," forgetting that Aristotle was Plato's pupil,
and both were followers of Socrates. Later on, when Aristotelianism
became "established" as the Christian philosophy, Platonism, which
survived in the more mystical schoolmen, fell under suspicion, and not
unfrequently justified the suspicion by developing in the direction of
Pantheism. It was not till the thirteenth century that the world appealed
from Platonists and Aristotelians to Plato and Aristotle, and discovered
that the divergent streams flowed from neighbouring springs. Such an
appeal, it is to be feared, is hardly possible in the case of Lao Tzŭ and
Confucius, especially as the authenticity of the Tao-Tê-Ching is still in
controversy among Sinologues.
My object, however, in this note, which has grown out of all proportion,
was not to suggest a theory as to the possible relations of Lao Tzŭ
and Confucius, but to point out what seemed to be a remarkable
parallel between the teaching of Chuang Tzŭ and Heracleitus. In doing
this I have accepted Mr. Giles's translation as an ultimate fact, for the
simple reason that I do not know a single Chinese character. So far,
therefore, as the translation prejudices or prejudges questions of Chinese
scholarship, I must leave the defence to the translator. It is also possible,
and more than possible, that my Western preconceptions may have
biassed my judgment of Chuang Tzŭ's philosophical teaching. Recent
attempts[53] to draw a parallel between the life of Gautama and the life of
[xxviii]Christ have shown how easy it is unconsciously to read between the lines,
and find parallelisms where they do not exist. If I have been guilty
in the same way, then, with Socrates in the Republic, I say, "I can
but suffer the penalty of ignorance; and that penalty is, to be taught
by those who know."

A. L. M.

[1]
Chuang Tzŭ.
Transcendental Bliss.
Argument:—Space infinite—Time infinite—Relativity of magnitudes,
physical and moral—The magnitude absolute—Usefulness as a test
of value—The usefulness of the useless.
In the northern ocean there is a fish, called the
Leviathan, many thousand li in size. This
leviathan changes into a bird, called the Rukh,
whose back is many thousand li in breadth. With
a mighty effort it rises, and its wings obscure the
sky like clouds.
At the equinox, this bird prepares to start for the
southern ocean, the Celestial Lake. And in the
Record of Marvels we read that when the rukh
flies southwards, the water is smitten for a space of
three thousand li around, while the bird itself
mounts upon a typhoon to a height of ninety
thousand li, for a flight of six months' duration.
Just so are the motes in a sunbeam blown aloft
by God. For whether the blue of the sky is its
real colour, or only the result of distance without[2]
end, the effect to the bird looking down would be
just the same as to the motes.
Distance being relative. The rukh at an altitude
of 90,000 li (three li to a mile) is no more than a
mote in a sunbeam a few feet from the ground.
If there is not sufficient depth, water will not
float large ships. Upset a cupful into a small hole,
and a mustard-seed will be your boat. Try to float
the cup, and it will stick, from the disproportion
between water and vessel.
So with air. If there is not a sufficient depth,
it cannot support large birds. And for this bird a
depth of ninety thousand li is necessary; and then,
with nothing save the clear sky above, and no
obstacle in the way, it starts upon its journey to
the south.
A cicada laughed, and said to a young dove,
"Now, when I fly with all my might, 'tis as much
as I can do to get from tree to tree. And sometimes
I do not reach, but fall to the ground midway.
What then can be the use of going up ninety
thousand li in order to start for the south?"
He who goes to Mang-ts'ang,
A short distance into the country.
taking three meals with him, comes back with his
stomach as full as when he started. But he who
travels a hundred li must grind flour enough for
a night's halt. And he who travels a thousand
li must supply himself with provisions for three
months. Those two little creatures,—what should[3]
they know? Small knowledge has not the compass
of great knowledge any more than a short year has
the length of a long year.
How can we tell that this is so? The mushroom
of a morning knows not the alternation of day
and night. The chrysalis knows not the alternation
of spring and autumn. Theirs are short
years.
But in the State of Ch'u there is a tortoise
whose spring and autumn are each of five hundred
years' duration. And in former days there was a
large tree which had a spring and autumn each of
eight thousand years' duration. Yet, P'êng Tsu
The Methusaleh of China. His age has not been
agreed upon by Chinese writers, but the lowest
computation gives him a life of eight hundred years.
is still, alas! an object of envy to all.
It was on this very subject that the Emperor
T'ang
B.C. 1766.
spoke to Chi, as follows:—"At the barren north
there is a great sea, the Celestial Lake. In it there
is a fish, several thousand li in breadth, and I
know not how many in length. It is called the
Leviathan. There is also a bird, called the Rukh,
with a back like Mount T'ai,
China's most famous mountain, situated in the
province of Shantung.
and wings like clouds across the sky. Upon a
typhoon it soars up to a height of ninety thousand[4]
li, beyond the clouds and atmosphere, with only the
clear sky above it. And then it directs its flight
towards the south pole.
"A quail laughed, and said: Pray, what may
that creature be going to do? I rise but a few
yards in the air, and settle again after flying around
among the reeds. That is the most I can manage.
Now, where ever can this creature be going to?"
The repetition of this story, coupled with its quotation
from the Record of Marvels, is considered to
give an air of authenticity to Chuang Tzŭ's illustration,
which the reader might otherwise suppose to
be of his own invention.
Such, indeed, is the difference between small and
great. Take, for instance, a man who creditably
fills some small office, or who is a pattern of virtue
in his neighbourhood, or who influences his prince
to right government of the State,—his opinion of
himself will be much the same as that quail's. The
philosopher Yung laughs at such a one. He, if the
whole world flattered him, would not be affected
thereby, nor if the whole world blamed him would
he lose his faith in himself. For Yung can distinguish
between the intrinsic and the extrinsic,
between honour and shame,—and such men are
rare in their generation. But even he has not
established himself.
Beyond the limits of an external world. His
achievements are after all only of the earth, earthy.
There was Lieh Tzŭ again.
[5]
A personage of whom nothing is really known.
He is considered by the best authorities to have been
of Chuang Tzŭ's own creation. This, however, did
not prevent some enterprising scholar, probably of
the Han dynasty, from discovering a treatise which
still passes under Lieh Tzŭ's name.
He could ride upon the wind, and travel whithersoever
he wished, staying away as long as fifteen
days. Among mortals who attain happiness, such
a man is rare. Yet although Lieh Tzŭ was able
to dispense with walking, he was still dependent
upon something.
Sc. the wind.
But had he been charioted upon the eternal fitness
of Heaven and Earth, driving before him the
elements as his team while roaming through the
realms of For-Ever,—upon what, then, would he
have had to depend?
That is, nourished upon the doctrines of inaction,
the continuity of life and death, etc., which will be
dealt with in later chapters.
Thus it has been said, "The perfect man ignores
self; the divine man ignores action; the true Sage
ignores reputation."
His—for the three are one—is a bliss "beyond all
that the minstrel has told." Material existences melt
into thin air; worldly joys and sorrows cease for him
who passes thus into the everlasting enjoyment of a
transcendental peace.
The Emperor Yao
[6]
B.C. 2356. His reign, coupled with that of Shun
who succeeded him, may be regarded as the Golden
Age of China's history. See p. 8.
wished to abdicate in favour of Hsü Yu,
A worthy hermit.
saying, "If, when the sun and moon are shining,
you persist in lighting a torch, is not that a misapplication
of fire? If, when the rainy season is at
its height, you still continue to water the ground,
is not this a waste of labour? Now, sir, do you
assume the reins of government, and the empire will
be at peace. I am but a dead body, conscious of my
own deficiency. I beg you will ascend the throne."
"Ever since you, sire, have directed the administration,"
replied Hsü Yu, "the empire has enjoyed
tranquillity. Supposing, therefore, that I were to
take your place now, should I gain any reputation
thereby? Besides, reputation is but the shadow of
reality; and should I trouble myself about the
shadow? The tit, building its nest in the mighty
forest, occupies but a single twig. The tapir slakes
its thirst from the river, but drinks enough only to
fill its belly. To you, sire, belongs the reputation:
the empire has no need for me. If a cook is unable
to dress his funeral sacrifices, the boy who
impersonates the corpse may not step over the
wines and meats and do it for him."
This illustrates rejection of reputation by the true
Sage. See ch. vii.
Chien Wu said to Lien Shu,
Both fictitious personages.
[7]
"I heard Chieh Yü utter something unjustifiably
extravagant and without either rhyme or reason.
This was an individual, named Lu T'ung, who feigned
madness in order to escape an official career. For
his interview with Confucius, see ch. iv, ad fin.
I was greatly startled at what he said, for it seemed
to me boundless as the Milky Way, though very
improbable and removed from the experiences of
mortals."
"What was it?" asked Lien Shu.
"He declared," replied Chien Wu, "that on the
Miao-ku-shê mountain
Which is as fabulous as the story.
there lives a divine man whose flesh is like ice or
snow, whose demeanour is that of a virgin, who
eats no fruit of the earth, but lives on air and dew,
and who, riding on clouds with flying dragons for
his team, roams beyond the limits of mortality.
This being is absolutely inert. Yet he wards off
corruption from all things, and causes the crops to
thrive. Now I call that nonsense, and do not
believe it."
"Well," answered Lien Shu, "you don't ask a
blind man's opinion of a picture, nor do you invite
a deaf man to a concert. And blindness and deafness
are not physical only. There is blindness and
deafness of the mind, diseases from which I fear
you yourself are suffering. The good influence
of that man fills all creation. Yet because a[8]
paltry generation cries for reform, you would have
him condescend to the details of an empire!
Not seeing that the greater contains the less.
"Objective existences cannot harm him. In a
flood which reached to the sky, he would not
be drowned. In a drought, though metals ran
liquid and mountains were scorched up, he would
not be hot. Out of his very dust and siftings
you might fashion two such men as Yao and
Shun. And you would have him occupy himself
with objectives!"
Illustrating the inaction of the divine man.
A man of the Sung State carried some sacrificial
caps into the Yüeh State, for sale. But the
men of Yüeh used to cut off their hair and paint
their bodies, so that they had no use for such
things. And so, when the Emperor Yao, the
ruler of all under heaven and pacificator of all
within the shores of ocean, paid a visit to the
four sages of the Miao-ku-shê mountain, on returning
to his capital at Fên-yang, the empire
existed for him no more.
This illustrates the rejection of self by the perfect
man. Yao had his eyes opened to the hollowness
and uselessness of all mortal possessions. He ceased,
therefore, to think any more of himself, and per
consequens of the empire.
Hui Tzŭ
[9]
A celebrated schoolman, contemporary with and
antagonistic to Chuang Tzŭ. For an account of his
theories, see ch. xxxiii.
said to Chuang Tzŭ, "The Prince of Wei gave me
a seed of a large-sized kind of gourd. I planted it,
and it bore a fruit as big as a five-bushel measure.
Now had I used this for holding liquids, it
would have been too heavy to lift; and had I cut
it in half for ladles, the ladles would have been ill
adapted for such purpose. It was uselessly large,
so I broke it up."
"Sir," replied Chuang Tzŭ, "it was rather you
who did not know how to use large things. There
was a man of Sung who had a recipe for salve for
chapped hands, his family having been silk-washers
for generations. Well, a stranger who had heard
of it, came and offered him 100 oz. of silver for
this recipe; whereupon he called together his
clansmen and said, 'We have never made much
money by silk-washing. Now, we can make 100 oz.
in a single day. Let the stranger have the recipe.'
"So the stranger got it, and went and informed
the Prince of Wu who was just then at war with
the Yüeh State. Accordingly, the Prince used it
in a naval battle fought at the beginning of winter
with the Yüeh State, the result being that the
latter was totally defeated.
They suffered from chapped hands, while their
rivals of the Wu State were protected by their
patent salve.
The stranger was rewarded with territory and a
title. Thus, while the efficacy of the salve to cure[10]
chapped hands was in both cases the same, its
application was different. Here, it secured a title;
there, a capacity for washing silk.
"Now as to your five-bushel gourd, why did
you not make a boat of it, and float about
over river and lake? You could not then have
complained of its not holding anything! But I
fear you are rather woolly inside."
Like it. This, of course, is a sneer. Hui Tzŭ
could not see that the greatness of a thing depends
upon the greatness of its application.
Hui Tzŭ said to Chuang Tzŭ, "Sir, I have a
large tree, of a worthless kind. Its trunk is so
irregular and knotty that it cannot be measured
out for planks; while its branches are so twisted
as to admit of no geometrical subdivision whatever.
It stands by the roadside, but no carpenter
will look at it. And your words, sir, are like
that tree;—big and useless, not wanted by anybody."
"Sir," rejoined Chuang Tzŭ, "have you never
seen a wild cat, crouching down in wait for its
prey? Right and left it springs from bough to
bough, high and low alike,—until perchance it
gets caught in a trap or dies in a snare. On the
other hand, there is the yak with its great huge
body. It is big enough in all conscience, but it
cannot catch mice.
The adaptability of a thing is oft-times its bane.
The inability of the yak to catch mice saves it from
the snare which is fatal to the wild cat.
[11]
"Now if you have a big tree and are at a
loss what to do with it, why not plant it in the
domain of non-existence,
Beyond the limits of our external world. Referring
to the conditions of mental abstraction in which
alone true happiness is to be found.
whither you might betake yourself to inaction by
its side, to blissful repose beneath its shade?
"Why does the horizon hold me fast, with my joy
and grief in this centre?"—Emerson.
There it would be safe from the axe and from
all other injury; for being of no use to others,
itself would be free from harm."
Illustrating the advantage of being useless. That
which is small and useful is thus shown to be inferior
to that which is large and useless.
The Identity of Contraries.
Argument:—Contraries spring from our subjective individuality—Identity
of subjective and objective—The centre where all distinctions are
merged in One—How to reach this point—Speech an obstacle—The
negative state—Light out of darkness—Illustrations.
Tzŭ Ch'i of Nan-kuo sat leaning on a table.
Looking up to heaven, he sighed and became
absent, as though soul and body had parted.
Yen Ch'êng Tzŭ Yu, who was standing by
him, exclaimed, "What are you thinking about
that your body should become thus like dry
wood, your mind like dead ashes? Surely the
man now leaning on the table is not he who was
here just now."
"My friend," replied Tzŭ Ch'i, "your question
is apposite. To-day I have buried myself....
Do you understand?... Ah! perhaps you only
know the music of Man, and not that of Earth.
Or even if you have heard the music of Earth,
you have not heard the music of Heaven."
"Pray explain," said Tzŭ Yu.
"The breath of the universe," continued Tzŭ
Ch'i, "is called wind. At times, it is inactive.
But when active, every aperture resounds to the[13]
blast. Have you never listened to its growing
roar?
"Caves and dells of hill and forest, hollows
in huge trees of many a span in girth;—these
are like nostrils, like mouths, like ears,
like beam-sockets, like goblets, like mortars, like
ditches, like bogs. And the wind goes rushing
through them, sniffing, snoring, singing, soughing,
puffing, purling, whistling, whirring, now
shrilly treble, now deeply bass, now soft, now
loud; until, with a lull, silence reigns supreme.
Have you never witnessed among the trees such
a disturbance as this?"
"Well, then," enquired Tzŭ Yu, "since the
music of earth consists of nothing more than
holes, and the music of man of pipes and flutes,—of
what consists the music of Heaven?"
"The effect of the wind upon these various
apertures," replied Tzŭ Ch'i, "is not uniform.
But what is it that gives to each the individuality,
to all the potentiality, of sound?
"Great knowledge embraces the whole:
Sees both "the upper and under side of the medal
of Jove" at once.
small knowledge, a part only. Great speech is
universal:
Speech, according to Chuang Tzŭ's ideal, always
covers the whole ground in question, leaving no room
for positive and negative to appear in antagonism.
small speech is particular.
[14]
"For whether when the mind is locked in
sleep or whether when in waking hours the
body is released, we are subject to daily mental
perturbations,—indecision, want of penetration,
concealment, fretting fear, and trembling terror.
Now like a javelin the mind flies forth, the arbiter
of right and wrong.
Thus recognising contraries.
Now like a solemn covenanter it remains firm, the
guardian of rights secured.
Adhering to an opinion formed.
Then, as under autumn and winter's blight, comes
gradual decay, a passing away, like the flow of
water, never to return. Finally, the block when
all is choked up like an old drain,—the failing
mind which shall not see light again.
"Joy and anger, sorrow and happiness, caution
and remorse, come upon us by turns, with ever-changing
mood. They come like music from
hollowness, like mushrooms from damp. Daily
and nightly they alternate within us, but we
cannot tell whence they spring. Can we then
hope in a moment to lay our finger upon their very
Cause?
"But for these emotions I should not be. But
for me, they would have no scope. So far we can
go; but we do not know what it is that brings them
into play. 'Twould seem to be a soul; but the clue
to its existence is wanting. That such a Power[15]
operates, is credible enough, though we cannot see
its form. It has functions without form.
As will be gathered later on, Chuang Tzŭ conceives
of the soul as an emanation from God, passing
to and from this earth through the portals of Life
and Death.
"Take the human body with all its manifold
divisions. Which part of it does a man love best?
Does he not cherish all equally, or has he a preference?
Do not all equally serve him? And do
these servitors then govern themselves, or are they
subdivided into rulers and subjects? Surely there
is some soul which sways them all.
"But whether or not we ascertain what are the
functions of this soul, it matters but little to the soul
itself. For coming into existence with this mortal
coil of mine, with the exhaustion of this mortal coil
its mandate will also be exhausted. To be harassed
by the wear and tear of life, and to pass rapidly
through it without possibility of arresting one's
course,—is not this pitiful indeed? To labour
without ceasing, and then, without living to enjoy
the fruit, worn out, to depart, suddenly, one
knows not whither,—is not that a just cause
for grief?
"What advantage is there in what men call not
dying? The body decomposes, and the mind goes
with it. This is our real cause for sorrow. Can
the world be so dull as not to see this? Or is it I
alone who am dull, and others not so?
[16]
"If we are to be guided by the criteria of our
own minds, who shall be without a guide?
The mind should be a tabula rasa, free from all
judgments or opinions of its own as to the external
world, and ready only to accept things as they are,
not as they appear to be.
What need to know of the alternations of passion,
As above described.
when the mind thus affords scope to itself?—verily
even the minds of fools! Whereas, for a mind
without criteria
As it should be.
to admit the idea of contraries, is like saying, I
went to Yüeh to-day, and got there yesterday.
One of Hui Tzŭ's paradoxes. See ch. xxxiii.
Or, like placing nowhere somewhere,—topography
which even the Great Yü
The famous engineer of antiquity (B.C. 2205), who
drained the empire of a vast body of water and
arranged its subdivision into nine provinces.
would fail to understand; how much more I?
"Speech is not mere breath. It is differentiated
by meaning. Take away that, and you cannot say
whether it is speech or not. Can you even distinguish
it from the chirping of young birds?
"But how can Tao be so obscured that we speak
of it as true and false? And how can speech be[17]
so obscured that it admits the idea of contraries?
How can Tao go away and yet not remain?
Being omnipresent.
How can speech exist and yet be impossible?
See p. 13.
"Tao is obscured by our want of grasp. Speech
is obscured by the gloss of this world.
I.e. by the one-sided meanings attached to words
and phrases.
Hence the affirmatives and negatives of the Confucian
and Mihist schools,
Mih Tzŭ was a philosopher of the fourth century
B.C., who propounded various theories which were
vigorously attacked by the Confucianists under
Mencius. We shall hear more of him by-and-by.
each denying what the other affirmed and affirming
what the other denied. But he who would reconcile
affirmative with negative and negative with
affirmative,
The "union of impossibilities," which Emerson
credits to Plato alone.
must do so by the light of nature.
I.e. Have no established mental criteria, and thus
see all things as ONE.
"There is nothing which is not objective: there
is nothing which is not subjective. But it is impossible
to start from the objective. Only from[18]
subjective knowledge is it possible to proceed to
objective knowledge. Hence it has been said,
By Hui Tzŭ.
'The objective emanates from the subjective; the
subjective is consequent upon the objective. This
is the Alternation Theory.' Nevertheless, when
one is born, the other dies. When one is possible,
the other is impossible. When one is affirmative
the other is negative. Which being the case, the
true sage rejects all distinctions of this and that.
He takes his refuge in God, and places himself in
subjective relation with all things.
It was to this end that Tzŭ Ch'i "buried himself."
"And inasmuch as the subjective is also objective,
and the objective also subjective, and as the
contraries under each are indistinguishably blended,
does it not become impossible for us to say whether
subjective and objective really exist at all?
What is positive under the one will be negative
under the other. Yet as subjective and objective
are really one and the same, their positives and
negatives must also be one and the same.
It is as though we were to view them through a
kind of mental Pseudoscope, by which means each
would appear to be the other.
"When subjective and objective are both without
their correlates, that is the very axis of Tao.
And when that axis passes through the centre at
which all Infinities converge, positive and negative
alike blend into an infinite One. Hence it has[19]
been said that there is nothing like the light of
nature.
Probably an allusion to Lao Tzŭ's "Use the light
that is within you to revert to your natural clearness
of sight." We should then be able to view things
in their true light. See Tao-Tê-Ching, ch. lii., and
The Remains of Lao Tzŭ, p. 34.
"To take a finger in illustration of a finger not
being a finger is not so good as to take something
which is not a finger. To take a horse in illustration
of a horse not being a horse is not so good as
to take something which is not a horse.
"So with the universe and all that in it is.
These things are but fingers and horses in this
sense. The possible is possible: the impossible is
impossible. Tao operates, and given results
follow. Things receive names and are what they
are. They achieve this by their natural affinity for
what they are and their natural antagonism to
what they are not. For all things have their own
particular constitutions and potentialities. Nothing
can exist without these.
These last few sentences are repeated in ch. xxvii.
ad init.
"We can never know anything but phenomena.
Things are what they are, and their consequences
will be what they will be."—J. S. Mill.
"Therefore it is that, viewed from the standpoint
of Tao, a beam and a pillar are identical.
The horizontal with the vertical.
So are ugliness and beauty, greatness, wickedness,[20]
perverseness, and strangeness. Separation is the
same as construction: construction is the same as
destruction. Nothing is subject either to construction
or to destruction, for these conditions are
brought together into One.
"Only the truly intelligent understand this principle
of the identity of all things. They do not
view things as apprehended by themselves, subjectively;
but transfer themselves into the position
of the things viewed.
Avoiding the fallacious channels of the senses.
And viewing them thus they are able to comprehend
them, nay, to master them;—and he who can
master them is near. So it is that to place oneself
in subjective relation with externals, without consciousness
of their objectivity,—this is Tao. But
to wear out one's intellect in an obstinate adherence
to the individuality of things, not recognising
the fact that all things are One,—this is called
Three in the Morning."
"What is Three in the Morning?" asked Tzŭ Yu.
"A keeper of monkeys," replied Tzŭ Ch'i, "said
with regard to their rations of chestnuts that each
monkey was to have three in the morning and four
at night. But at this the monkeys were very angry,
so the keeper said they might have four in the
morning and three at night, with which arrangement
they were all well pleased. The actual
number of the chestnuts remained the same, but
there was an adaptation to the likes and dislikes of[21]
those concerned. Such is the principle of putting
oneself into subjective relation with externals.
"Wherefore the true Sage, while regarding contraries
as identical, adapts himself to the laws of
Heaven. This is called following two courses at
once.
He is thus prevented from trying to walk through
walls, etc., as later Taoists have professed themselves
able to do, of course with a view to gull the public
and enrich themselves. "God," says Locke, "when
he makes the prophet, does not unmake the man."
So Carlyle in his essay on Novalis:—"To a Transcendentalist,
matter has an existence but only as a
Phenomenon.... It is a mere relation, or rather
the result of a relation between our living souls and
the great First Cause."
"The knowledge of the men of old had a limit.
It extended back to a period when matter did not
exist. That was the extreme point to which their
knowledge reached.
"The second period was that of matter, but of
matter unconditioned.
By time or space. "Being, in itself," says Herbert
Spencer, "out of relation, is itself unthinkable."
Principles of Psychology, iii. p. 258.
"The third epoch saw matter conditioned, but
contraries were still unknown. When these
appeared, Tao began to decline. And with the
decline of Tao, individual bias arose.
"Have then these states of falling and rising
real existences? Surely they are but as the falling[22]
and rising of Chao Wên's music,—the consequences
of his playing.
Chao Wên played the guitar. Shih K'uang
wielded the bâton.
To keep time.
Hui Tzŭ argued. Herein these three men excelled,
and in the practice of such arts they passed their
lives.
"Hui Tzŭ's particular views being very different
from those of the world in general, he was correspondingly
anxious to enlighten people. But he
did not enlighten them as he should have done,
By the cultivation and passive manifestation of his
own inward light.
and consequently ended in the obscurity of the
'hard and white.'
Hui Tzŭ regarded such abstractions as hardness and
whiteness as separate existences, of which the mind
could only be conscious separately, one at a time.
Subsequently, his son searched his works for some
clue, but never succeeded in establishing the principle.
And indeed if such were possible to be
established, then even I am established; but if not,
then neither I nor anything in the universe is
established!
"Therefore what the true Sage aims at is the
light which comes out of darkness. He does not
view things as apprehended by himself, subjectively,
but transfers himself into the position of the
things viewed. This is called using the light.
"There remains, however, Speech. Is that to be[23]
enrolled under either category of contraries, or not?
Whether it is so enrolled or not, it will in any case
belong to one or the other, and thus be as though it
had an objective existence. At any rate, I should
like to hear some speech which belongs to neither
category.
Contraries being disposed of, there remains the
vehicle Speech, i.e. the actual terms in which it is
stated that contraries have ceased to be.
"If there was a beginning, then there was a time
before that beginning. And a time before the time
which was before the time of that beginning.
"If there is existence, there must have been non-existence.
And if there was a time when nothing
existed, then there must have been a time before
that—when even nothing did not exist. Suddenly,
when nothing came into existence, could one really
say whether it belonged to the category of existence
or of non-existence? Even the very words I have
just now uttered,—I cannot say whether they have
really been uttered or not.
I.e. The words in the text, denying the existence of
contraries.
"There is nothing under the canopy of heaven
greater than the tip of an autumn spikelet. A vast
mountain is a small thing. Neither is there any
age greater than that of a child cut off in infancy.
P'êng Tsu himself died young. The universe and
I came into being together; and I, and everything
therein, are One.
"If then all things are One, what room is there[24]
for Speech? On the other hand, since I can utter
these words, how can Speech not exist?
"If it does exist, we have One and Speech = two;
and two and one = three. From which point onwards
even the best mathematicians will fail to reach:
Tao.
how much more then will ordinary people fail?
"Hence, if from nothing you can proceed to
something, and subsequently reach three, it follows
that it would be still more easy if you were to start
from something. To avoid such progression, you
must put yourself into subjective relation with the
external.
"Before conditions existed, Tao was. Before
definitions existed, Speech was. Subjectively, we
are conscious of certain delimitations which are,—

Right and Left
Relationship and Obligation
Division and Discrimination
Emulation and Contention

These are called the Eight Predicables.
Not, of course, in the strict logical sense.
For the true Sage, beyond the limits of an external
world, they exist, but are not recognised. By the
true Sage, within the limits of an external world,
they are recognised, but are not assigned. And so,
with regard to the wisdom of the ancients, as
embodied in the canon of Spring and Autumn,
Confucius' history of his native State. Now one of
the canonical books of China.
[25]
the true Sage assigns, but does not justify by argument.
And thus, classifying he does not classify;
arguing, he does not argue."
"How can that be?" asked Tzŭ Yu.
"The true Sage," answered Tzŭ Ch'i, "keeps
his knowledge within him, while men in general set
forth theirs in argument, in order to convince each
other. And therefore it is said that in argument he
does not manifest himself.
Others try to establish their own subjective view.
The true Sage remains passive, aiming only at the
annihilation of contraries.
"Perfect Tao does not declare itself. Nor does
perfect argument express itself in words. Nor does
perfect charity show itself in act. Nor is perfect
honesty absolutely incorruptible. Nor is perfect
courage absolutely unyielding.
"For the Tao which shines forth is not Tao.
Speech which argues falls short of its aim. Charity
which has fixed points loses its scope. Honesty
which is absolute is wanting in credit. Courage
which is absolute misses its object. These five are,
as it were, round, with a strong bias towards
squareness. Therefore that knowledge which stops
at what it does not know, is the highest knowledge.
"Who knows the argument which can be argued
without words?—the Tao which does not declare
itself as Tao? He who knows this may be said to
be of God. To be able to pour in without making
full, and pour out without making empty, in igno[26]rance
of the power by which such results are
accomplished,—this is accounted Light."
Of old, the Emperor Yao said to Shun, "I
would smite the Tsungs, and the Kueis, and the
Hsü-aos. Ever since I have been on the throne I
have had this desire. What do you think?"
"These three States," replied Shun, "are paltry
out-of-the-way places. Why can you not shake off
this desire? Once upon a time, ten suns came out
together, and all things were illuminated thereby.
How much more then should virtue excel suns?"
Illustrating the use of "light." Instead of active
force, substitute the passive but irresistible influence
of virtue complete. The sun caused the traveller to
lay aside his cloak when the north wind succeeded
only in making him draw it tighter around him.
Yeh Ch'üeh asked Wang I,
A disciple and tutor of remote antiquity. Said to
have been two of the four Sages on the Miao-ku-shê
mountain mentioned in ch. i.
saying, "Do you know for certain that all things
are subjectively the same?"
"How can I know?" answered Wang I. "Do
you know what you do not know?"
"How can I know?" replied Yeh Ch'üeh. "But
can then nothing be known?"
"How can I know?" said Wang I. "Nevertheless,
I will try to tell you. How can it be
known that what I call knowing is not really not
knowing, and that what I call not knowing is not[27]
really knowing? Now I would ask you this. If
a man sleeps in a damp place, he gets lumbago and
dies. But how about an eel? And living up in a
tree is precarious and trying to the nerves;—but
how about monkeys? Of the man, the eel, and
the monkey, whose habitat is the right one, absolutely?
Human beings feed on flesh, deer on
grass, centipedes on snakes, owls and crows on
mice. Of these four, whose is the right taste,
absolutely? Monkey mates with monkey, the
buck with the doe; eels consort with fishes, while
men admire Mao Ch'iang and Li Chi,
Beauties of the fifth and seventh centuries B.C., respectively.
The commentators do not seem to have
noted the very obvious anachronism here involved.
at the sight of whom fishes plunge deep down in
the water, birds soar high in the air, and deer
hurry away.
For shame at their own inferiority.
Yet who shall say which is the correct standard of
beauty? In my opinion, the standard of human
virtue, and of positive and negative, is so obscured
that it is impossible to actually know it
as such."
"If you then," asked Yeh Ch'üeh, "do not know
what is bad for you, is the Perfect Man equally
without this knowledge?"
"The Perfect Man," answered Wang I, "is a
spiritual being. Were the ocean itself scorched
up, he would not feel hot. Were the Milky Way[28]
frozen hard, he would not feel cold. Were the
mountains to be riven with thunder, and the great
deep to be thrown up by storm, he would not
tremble. In such case, he would mount upon the
clouds of heaven, and driving the sun and the
moon before him, would pass beyond the limits of
this external world, where death and life have no
more victory over man;—how much less what is
bad for him?"
Chü Ch'iao addressed Chang Wu Tzŭ
A disciple and tutor of antiquity.
as follows:—"I heard Confucius say, 'The true
sage pays no heed to mundane affairs. He neither
seeks gain nor avoids injury. He asks nothing at
the hands of man. He adheres, without questioning,
to Tao. Without speaking, he can speak;
and he can speak and yet say nothing. And so
he roams beyond the limits of this dusty world.
These,' added Confucius, 'are wild words.'
Han Fei Tzŭ tells us that Lao Tzŭ, whose doctrines
Confucius seems to be here deriding, said exactly
the opposite of this; viz: "The true Sage is beforehand
in his attention to mundane affairs," i.e. "takes
time by the forelock." Neither utterance, however,
appears in the Tao-Tê-Ching. See The Remains
of Lao Tzŭ, p. 44.
Now to me they are the skilful embodiment of
Tao. What, Sir, is your opinion?"
"Points upon which the Yellow Emperor[29]
doubted," replied Chang Wu Tzŭ, "how should
Confucius know?
Lao Tzŭ and the Yellow Emperor have always
been mixed up in the heads of Taoist writers, albeit
separated by a chasm of some two thousand years.
Confucius is here evidently dealing with the actual
doctrines of Lao Tzŭ.
You are going too fast. You see your egg,
and expect to hear it crow. You look at your
cross-bow, and expect to have broiled duck before
you. I will say a few words to you at random, and
do you listen at random.
"How does the Sage seat himself by the sun
and moon, and hold the universe in his grasp?
He blends everything into one harmonious whole,
rejecting the confusion of this and that. Rank
and precedence, which the vulgar prize, the Sage
stolidly ignores. The revolutions of ten thousand
years leave his Unity unscathed. The universe
itself may pass away, but he will flourish still.
"How do I know that love of life is not a
delusion after all? How do I know but that he
who dreads to die is not as a child who has lost
the way and cannot find his home?
"The lady Li Chi was the daughter of Ai Fêng.
A border chieftain.
When the Duke of Chin first got her, she wept
until the bosom of her dress was drenched with
tears. But when she came to the royal residence,
and lived with the Duke, and ate rich food, she[30]
repented of having wept. How then do I know
but that the dead repent of having previously
clung to life?
"Those who dream of the banquet, wake to
lamentation and sorrow. Those who dream of
lamentation and sorrow wake to join the hunt.
While they dream, they do not know that they
dream. Some will even interpret the very dream
they are dreaming; and only when they awake do
they know it was a dream. By and by comes the
Great Awakening, and then we find out that this
life is really a great dream. Fools think they are
awake now, and flatter themselves they know if
they are really princes or peasants. Confucius and
you are both dreams; and I who say you are
dreams,—I am but a dream myself. This is a
paradox. Tomorrow a sage may arise to explain
it; but that tomorrow will not be until ten
thousand generations have gone by.
"Granting that you and I argue. If you beat
me, and not I you, are you necessarily right and I
wrong? Or if I beat you and not you me, am I
necessarily right and you wrong? Or are we both
partly right and partly wrong? Or are we both
wholly right and wholly wrong? You and I cannot
know this, and consequently the world will be in
ignorance of the truth.
"Who shall I employ as arbiter between us? If
I employ some one who takes your view, he will
side with you. How can such a one arbitrate
between us? If I employ some one who takes my[31]
view, he will side with me. How can such a one
arbitrate between us? And if I employ some one
who either differs from, or agrees with, both of us,
he will be equally unable to decide between us.
Since then you, and I, and man, cannot decide,
must we not depend upon Another?
Upon God, in whose infinity all contraries blend
indistinguishably into One.
Such dependence is as though it were not dependence.
We are embraced in the obliterating unity of
God. There is perfect adaptation to whatever may
eventuate; and so we complete our allotted span.
"But what is it to be embraced in the obliterating
unity of God? It is this. With reference to
positive and negative, to that which is so and that
which is not so,—if the positive is really positive,
it must necessarily be different from its negative:
there is no room for argument. And if that which
is so really is so, it must necessarily be different
from that which is not so: there is no room for
argument.
"Take no heed of time, nor of right and wrong.
But passing into the realm of the Infinite, take
your final rest therein."
Our refuge is in God alone, the Infinite Absolute.
Contraries cannot but exist, but they should
exist independently of each other without antagonism.
Such a condition is found only in the all-embracing
unity of God, wherein all distinctions of positive and
negative, of right and wrong, of this and of that, are
obliterated and merged in One.
Herbert Spencer says, "The antithesis of subject[32]
and object, never to be transcended while consciousness
lasts, renders impossible all knowledge of the
Ultimate Reality in which subject and object are
united." Principles of Psychology, i. p. 272.
The Penumbra said to the Umbra, "At one
moment you move: at another you are at rest.
At one moment you sit down: at another you get
up. Why this instability of purpose?" "I depend,"
replied the Umbra, "upon something
which causes me to do as I do; and that something
depends in turn upon something else which
causes it to do as it does. My dependence is like
that of a snake's scales or of a cicada's wings.
Which do not move of their own accord.
How can I tell why I do one thing, or why I do
not do another?"
Showing how two or more may be the phenomena
of one.
Once upon a time, I, Chuang Tzŭ, dreamt I was
a butterfly, fluttering hither and thither, to all
intents and purposes a butterfly. I was conscious
only of following my fancies as a butterfly, and
was unconscious of my individuality as a man.
Suddenly, I awaked, and there I lay, myself again.
Now I do not know whether I was then a man
dreaming I was a butterfly, or whether I am now a
butterfly dreaming I am a man. Between a man
and a butterfly there is necessarily a barrier. The
transition is called Metempsychosis.
Showing how one may appear to be either of two.
Nourishment of the Soul.
Argument:—Life too short—Wisdom unattainable—Accommodation
to circumstances—Liberty paramount—Death a release—The soul
immortal.
My life has a limit, but my knowledge is without
limit. To drive the limited in search
of the limitless, is fatal; and the knowledge of
those who do this is fatally lost.
In striving for others, avoid fame. In striving
for self, avoid disgrace. Pursue a middle course.
Thus you will keep a sound body, and a sound
mind, fulfil your duties, and work out your allotted
span.
Prince Hui's cook was cutting up a bullock.
Every blow of his hand, every heave of his
shoulders, every tread of his foot, every thrust
of his knee, every whshh of rent flesh, every
chhk of the chopper, was in perfect harmony,—rhythmical
like the dance of the Mulberry
Grove, simultaneous like the chords of the Ching
Shou.
Commentators are divided in their identifications
of these ancient morceaux.
[34]
"Well done!" cried the Prince. "Yours is
skill indeed."
"Sire," replied the cook; "I have always devoted
myself to Tao. It is better than skill. When
I first began to cut up bullocks, I saw before me
simply whole bullocks. After three years' practice,
I saw no more whole animals.
Meaning that he saw them, so to speak, in sections.
And now I work with my mind and not with my
eye. When my senses bid me stop, but my mind
urges me on, I fall back upon eternal principles.
I follow such openings or cavities as there may
be, according to the natural constitution of the
animal. I do not attempt to cut through joints:
still less through large bones.
For a curious parallelism, see Plato's Phædrus, 265.
"A good cook changes his chopper once a year,—because
he cuts. An ordinary cook, once a
month,—because he hacks. But I have had this
chopper nineteen years, and although I have cut
up many thousand bullocks, its edge is as if fresh
from the whetstone. For at the joints there are
always interstices, and the edge of a chopper
being without thickness, it remains only to insert
that which is without thickness into such an
interstice.
These words help to elucidate a much-vexed passage
in ch. xliii of the Tao-Tê-Ching. See The
Remains of Lao Tzŭ, p. 30.
[35]
By these means the interstice will be enlarged,
and the blade will find plenty of room. It is thus
that I have kept my chopper for nineteen years as
though fresh from the whetstone.
"Nevertheless, when I come upon a hard part
where the blade meets with a difficulty, I am all
caution. I fix my eye on it. I stay my hand, and
gently apply my blade, until with a hwah the part
yields like earth crumbling to the ground. Then I
take out my chopper, and stand up, and look
around, and pause, until with an air of triumph I
wipe my chopper and put it carefully away."
"Bravo!" cried the Prince. "From the words
of this cook I have learnt how to take care of my
life."
Meaning that which informs life, sc. the soul.
When Hsien, of the Kung-wên family, beheld a
certain official, he was horrified, and said, "Who is
that man? How came he to lose a foot? Is this
the work of God, or of man?
"Why, of course," continued Hsien, "it is the
work of God, and not of man. When God brought
this man into the world, he wanted him to be
unlike other men. Men always have two feet.
From this it is clear that God and not man made
him as he is.
It was by God's will that he took office with a view
to personal aggrandisement. That he got into
trouble and suffered the common punishment of loss
of feet, cannot therefore be charged to man.
[36]
"Now, wild fowl get a peck once in ten steps, a
drink once in a hundred. Yet they do not want to
be fed in a cage. For although they would thus be
able to command food, they would not be free."
And had our friend above kept out of the official
cage he would still have been independent as the
fowls of the air.
When Lao Tzŭ died, Ch'in Shih went to mourn.
He uttered three yells and departed.
A disciple asked him saying, "Were you not our
Master's friend?"
"I was," replied Ch'in Shih.
"And if so, do you consider that a sufficient expression
of grief at his loss?" added the disciple.
"I do," said Ch'in Shih. "I had believed him
to be the man of all men, but now I know that he
was not. When I went in to mourn, I found old
persons weeping as if for their children, young ones
wailing as if for their mothers. And for him to
have gained the attachment of those people in this
way, he too must have uttered words which should
not have been spoken, and dropped tears which
should not have been shed, thus violating eternal
principles, increasing the sum of human emotion,
and forgetting the source from which his own life
was received. The ancients called such emotions
the trammels of mortality. The Master came,
because it was his time to be born; he went, because
it was his time to die. For those who accept the
phenomenon of birth and death in this sense,[37]
lamentation and sorrow have no place. The
ancients spoke of death as of God cutting down a
man suspended in the air. The fuel is consumed,
but the fire may be transmitted, and we know not
that it comes to an end."
The soul, according to Chuang Tzŭ, if duly
nourished and not allowed to wear itself out with
the body in the pursuits of mortality, may become
immortal and return beatified to the Great Unknown
whence it came.
Man Among Men.
Argument:—Man must fall in with his mortal environment—His virtue
should be passive, not active—He should be rather than do—Talents
a hindrance—But of petty uselessness great usefulness is achieved.
Yen Hui went to take leave of Confucius.
A disciple of the Sage. Also known as Tzŭ Yüan.
"Whither are you bound?" asked the Master.
"I am going to the State of Wei," was the
reply.
"And what do you propose to do there?" continued
Confucius.
"I hear," answered Yen Hui, "that the Prince
of Wei is of mature age, but of an unmanageable
disposition. He behaves as if the State were of no
account, and will not see his own faults. Consequently,
the people perish; and their corpses lie
about like so much undergrowth in a marsh. They
are at extremities. And I have heard you, Sir,
say that if a State is well governed it may be
neglected; but that if it is badly governed, then we
should visit it.
In the Lun Yü, Confucius says exactly the opposite
of this.
[39]
The science of medicine embraces many various
diseases. I would test my knowledge in this
sense, that perchance I may do some good to that
State."
"Alas!" cried Confucius, "you will only
succeed in bringing evil upon yourself. For Tao
must not be distributed. If it is, it will lose its
unity. If it loses its unity, it will be uncertain;
and so cause mental disturbance,—from which
there is no escape.
"The sages of old first got Tao for themselves,
and then got it for others. Before you possess this
yourself, what leisure have you to attend to the
doings of wicked men? Besides, do you know
what Virtue results in and where Wisdom ends?
Virtue results in a desire for fame; Wisdom ends
in contentions. In the struggle for fame men crush
each other, while their wisdom but provokes rivalry.
Both are baleful instruments, and may not be
incautiously used.
"Besides, those who, before influencing by their
own solid virtue and unimpeachable sincerity, and
before reaching the heart by the example of their
own disregard for name and fame, go and preach
charity and duty to one's neighbour to wicked
men,—only make these men hate them for their
very goodness' sake. Such persons are called evil
speakers. And those who speak evil of others are
apt to be evil spoken of themselves. That, alas!
will be your end.
"On the other hand, if the Prince loves the good[40]
and hates the bad, what object will you have in
inviting him to change his ways? Before you have
opened your mouth to preach, the Prince himself
will have seized the opportunity to wrest the victory
from you. Your eye will fall, your expression fade,
your words will stick, your face will change, and
your heart will die within you. It will be as
though you took fire to quell fire, water to quell
water, which is popularly known as 'pouring oil on
the flames.' And if you begin with concessions,
there will be no end to them. Neglect this sound
advice, and you will be the victim of that violent
man.
"Of old, Chieh murdered Kuan Lung Fêng, and
Chou slew Prince Pi Kan. Their victims were both
men who cultivated virtue themselves in order to
secure the welfare of the people. But in doing
this they offended their superiors; and therefore,
because of that very moral culture, their superiors
got rid of them, in order to guard their own
reputations.
Chieh and Chou are the two typical tyrants of
Chinese history.
"Of old, Yao attacked the Ts'ung-chih and
Hsü-ao countries, and Yü attacked the Yu-hu
country. Homes were desolated and families destroyed
by the slaughter of the inhabitants. Yet
they fought without ceasing, and strove for victory
to the last. These are instances known to all.
Now if the Sages of old failed in their efforts
against this love of fame, this desire for victory,—[41]are
you likely to succeed? But of course you have
a scheme. Tell it to me."
"Gravity of demeanour," replied Yen Hui, "and
dispassionateness; energy and singleness of purpose,—will
this do?"
"Alas!" said Confucius, "that will not do. If you
make a show of being perfect and obtrude yourself,
the Prince's mood will be doubtful. Ordinarily, he
is not opposed, and so he has come to take actual
pleasure in trampling upon the feelings of others.
And if he has thus failed in the practice of routine
virtues, do you expect that he will take readily
to higher ones? You may insist, but without
result. Outwardly you will be right, but inwardly
wrong. How then will you make him
mend his ways?"
"Just so," replied Yen Hui. "I am inwardly
straight, and outwardly crooked, completed after
the models of antiquity.
"He who is inwardly straight is a servant of God.
And he who is a servant of God knows that the Son
of Heaven
The Emperor.
and himself are equally the children of God. Shall
then such a one trouble whether man visits him
with evil or with good? Man indeed regards him
as a child; and this is to be a servant of God.
(1) Children are everywhere exempt.—This is the
first limb of a threefold argument.
"He who is outwardly crooked is a servant of[42]
man. He bows, he kneels, he folds his hands;—such
is the ceremonial of a minister. What all
men do, shall I dare not to do? What all men do,
none will blame me for doing. This is to be a
servant of man.
(2) The individual is not punished for the faults of
the community.
"He who is completed after the models of
antiquity is a servant of the Sages of old.
Although I utter the words of warning and take
him to task, it is the Sages of old who speak, and
not I. Thus my uprightness will not bring me
into trouble, the servant of the Sages of old.—Will
this do?"
(3) The responsibility rests, not with the mouthpiece,
but with the authors of the doctrines
enunciated.
"Alas!" replied Confucius, "No. Your plans
are too many, and are lacking in prudence. However,
your firmness will secure you from harm; but
that is all. You will not influence him to such an
extent that he shall seem to follow the dictates of
his own heart."
"Then," said Yen Hui, "I am without resource,
and venture to ask for a method."
Confucius said, "FAST.... Let me explain.
You have a method, but it is difficult to practise.
Those which are easy are not from God."
"Well," replied Yen Hui, "my family is poor,[43]
and for many months we have tasted neither wine
nor flesh. Is not that fasting?"
"The fasting of religious observance it is,"
answered Confucius, "but not the fasting of the
heart."
"And may I ask," said Yen Hui, "in what consists
the fasting of the heart?"
"Cultivate unity," replied Confucius.
Make of the mind as it were an undivided indivisible
ONE.
"You hear not with the ears, but with the mind;
not with the mind, but with your soul.
The vital fluid which informs your whole being;
in fact, "with your whole self."
But let hearing stop with the ears. Let the working
of the mind stop with itself. Then the soul
will be a negative existence, passively responsive
to externals. In such a negative existence, only
Tao can abide. And that negative state is the
fasting of the heart."
"Then," said Yen Hui, "the reason I could not
get the use of this method is my own individuality.
If I could get the use of it, my individuality would
have gone. Is this what you mean by the negative
state?"
"Exactly so," replied the Master. "Let me tell
you. If you can enter this man's domain without
offending his amour propre, cheerful if he hears
you, passive if he does not; without science, with[44]out
drugs, simply living there in a state of complete
indifference,—you will be near success. It is
easy to stop walking: the trouble is to walk without
touching the ground. As an agent of man, it
is easy to deceive; but not as an agent of God.
You have heard of winged creatures flying. You
have never heard of flying without wings. You
have heard of men being wise with wisdom. You
have never heard of men wise without wisdom.
Wise of God, without the wisdom of man.
"Look at that window. Through it an empty
room becomes bright with scenery; but the landscape
stops outside. Were this not so, we should
have an exemplification of sitting still and running
away at one and the same time.
An empty room would contain something,—a paradox
like that in the text.
"In this sense, you may use your ears and eyes
to communicate within, but shut out all wisdom
from the mind.
Let the channels of your senses be to your mind
what a window is to an empty room.
And there where the supernatural
Something which is and yet is not, like the landscape
seen in, and yet not in, a room.
can find shelter, shall not man find shelter too?
This is the method for regenerating all creation.
By passive, not by active, virtue.
[45]
It was the instrument which Yü and Shun employed.
It was the secret of the success of Fu
Hsi and Chi Chü. Shall it not then be adopted by
mankind in general?"
Who stand much more in need of regeneration than
such worthies as were these ancient Emperors.
Tzŭ Kao, Duke of Shê,
A district of the Ch'u State.
being about to go on a mission to the Ch'i State,
asked Confucius, saying, "The mission my
sovereign is sending me on is a most important
one. Of course, I shall be received with all due
respect, but they will not take the same interest in
the matter that I shall. And as an ordinary person
cannot be pushed, still less a Prince, I am in a
state of great alarm.
"Now you, Sir, have told me that in all undertakings
great and small, Tao alone leads to a
happy issue. Otherwise that, failing success, there
is to be feared punishment from without, and with
success, punishment from within; while exemption
in case either of success or non-success falls only
to the share of those who possess the virtue
required.
I.e. those to whom the issue, as regards their own
reward or punishment, is a matter of the completest
indifference.
The term virtue, here as elsewhere unless specially
notified, should be understood in the sense of exemplification
of Tao.
[46]
"Well, I am not dainty with my food; neither
am I always wanting to cool myself when hot.
However, this morning I received my orders, and
this evening I have been drinking iced water. I
am so hot inside. Before I have put my hand to
the business I am suffering punishment from
within; and if I do not succeed I am sure to suffer
punishment from without. Thus I get both
punishments, which is really more than I can bear.
Kindly tell me what there is to be done."
"There exist two sources of safety," Confucius
replied. "One is Destiny: the other is Duty. A
child's love for its parents is destiny. It is inseparable
from the child's life. A subject's allegiance
to his sovereign is duty. Beneath the canopy of
heaven there is no place to which he can escape from
it. These two sources of safety may be explained
as follows. To serve one's parents without reference
to place but only to the service, is the acme of
filial piety. To serve one's prince without reference
to the act but only to the service, is the perfection
of a subject's loyalty. To serve one's own heart
so as to permit neither joy nor sorrow within, but
to cultivate resignation to the inevitable,—this is
the climax of Virtue.
"Now a minister often finds himself in circumstances
over which he has no control. But if
he simply confines himself to his work, and is
utterly oblivious of self, what leisure has he for
loving life or hating death? And so you may
safely go.
[47]
"But I have yet more to tell you. All intercourse,
if personal, should be characterised by
sincerity. If from a distance, it should be carried
on in loyal terms. These terms will have to be
transmitted by some one. Now the transmission
of messages of good- or ill-will is the hardest thing
possible. Messages of good-will are sure to be
overdone with fine phrases; messages of ill-will
with harsh ones. In each case the result is
exaggeration, and a consequent failure to carry
conviction, for which the envoy suffers. Therefore
it was said in the Fa-yen,
Name of an ancient book.
'Confine yourself to simple statements of fact,
shorn of all superfluous expression of feeling, and
your risk will be small.'
"In trials of skill, at first all is friendliness; but
at last it is all antagonism. Skill is pushed too far.
So on festive occasions, the drinking which is in
the beginning orderly enough, degenerates into riot
and disorder. Festivity is pushed too far. It is
in fact the same with all things: they begin with
good faith and end with contempt. From small
beginnings come great endings.
"Speech is like wind to wave. Action is liable
to divergence from its true goal. By wind, waves
are easily excited. Divergence from the true goal
is fraught with danger. Thus angry feelings rise
up without a cause. Specious words and dishonest
arguments follow, as the wild random cries of an[48]
animal at the point of death. Both sides give way
to passion. For where one party drives the other
too much into a corner, resistance will always be
provoked without apparent cause. And if the
cause is not apparent, how much less will the
ultimate effect be so?
"Therefore it is said in the Fa-yen, 'Neither
deviate from nor travel beyond your instructions.
"Travel beyond your instructions," is literally,
"urge a settlement."
To pass the limit is to go to excess.'
"To deviate from, or to travel beyond instructions,
may imperil the negotiation. A settlement
to be successful must be lasting. It is too late to
change an evil settlement once made.
"Therefore let yourself be carried along without
fear, taking refuge in no alternative to preserve
you from harm on either side. This is the utmost
you can do. What need for considering your
obligations? Better leave all to Destiny, difficult
as this may be."
It is passing strange that this exposition of the
laissez-aller inaction doctrine of Tao should be placed
in the mouth of Confucius, who is thus made in some
measure to discredit his own teachings. The commentators,
however, see nothing anomalous in the
position here assigned to the Sage.
Yen Ho
A philosopher from the Lu State.
[49]
was about to become tutor to the eldest son of
Prince Ling of the Wei State. Accordingly he
observed to Chü Poh Yü,
Prime Minister of the Wei State.
"Here is a man whose disposition is naturally
of a low order. To let him take his own unprincipled
way is to endanger the State. To try to
restrain him is to endanger one's personal safety.
He has just wit enough to see faults in others, but
not to see his own. I am consequently at a loss
what to do."
"A good question indeed," replied Chü Poh Yü,
"You must be careful, and begin by self-reformation.
Outwardly you may adapt yourself, but
inwardly you must keep up to your own standard.
In this there are two points to be guarded against.
You must not let the outward adaptation penetrate
within, nor the inward standard manifest itself
without. In the former case, you will fall, you
will be obliterated, you will collapse, you will lie
prostrate. In the latter case, you will be a sound,
a name, a bogie, an uncanny thing. If he would
play the child, do you play the child too. If he
cast aside all sense of decorum, do you do so too.
As far as he goes, do you go also. Thus you will
reach him without offending him.
"Don't you know the story of the praying mantis?
In its rage it stretched out its arms to prevent a
chariot from passing, unaware that this was beyond
its strength, so admirable was its energy![50]
Be cautious. If you are always offending others
by your superiority, you will probably come to
grief.
"Do you not know that those who keep tigers
do not venture to give them live animals as food,
for fear of exciting their fury when killing the
prey? Also, that whole animals are not given,
for fear of exciting the tigers' fury when rending
them? The periods of hunger and repletion are
carefully watched in order to prevent such outbursts.
The tiger is of a different species from
man; but the latter too is manageable if properly
managed, unmanageable if excited to fury.
"Those who are fond of horses surround them
with various conveniences. Sometimes mosquitoes
or flies trouble them; and then, unexpectedly to
the animal, a groom will brush them off, the result
being that the horse breaks his bridle, and hurts
his head and chest. The intention is good, but
there is a want of real care for the horse. Against
this you must be on your guard."
A certain artisan was travelling to the Ch'i State.
On reaching Ch'ü-yüan, he saw a sacred li tree,
A worthless species of oak.
large enough to hide an ox behind it, a hundred
spans in girth, towering up ten cubits over the
hill top, and carrying behind it branches, many
tens of the smallest of which were of a size
for boats. Crowds stood gazing at it, but our
artisan took no notice, and went on his way with[51]out
even casting a look behind. His apprentice
however gazed his fill, and when he caught up
his master, said, "Ever since I have handled an
adze in your service, I have never seen such a
splendid piece of timber as that. How was
it that you, sir, did not care to stop and look
at it?"
"It's not worth talking about," replied his
master. "It's good for nothing. Make a boat of
it,—'twould sink. A coffin,—'twould rot. Furniture,—'twould
soon break down. A door,—'twould
sweat. A pillar,—'twould be worm-eaten. It is
wood of no quality, and of no use. That is why
it has attained its present age."
When the artisan reached home, he dreamt that
the tree appeared to him in a dream and spoke
as follows:—"What is it that you compare me
with? Is it with the more elegant trees?—The
cherry-apple, the pear, the orange, the pumelo,
and other fruit-bearers, as soon as their fruit
ripens are stripped and treated with indignity.
The great boughs are snapped off, the small ones
scattered abroad. Thus do these trees by their
own value injure their own lives. They cannot
fulfil their allotted span of years, but perish prematurely
in mid-career from their entanglement
with the world around them. Thus it is with
all things. For a long period my aim was to
be useless. Many times I was in danger, but
at length I succeeded, and so became useful as
I am to-day. But had I then been of use, I[52]
should not now be of the great use I am. Moreover,
you and I belong both to the same category
of things. Have done then with this criticism of
others. Is a good-for-nothing fellow whose dangers
are not yet passed a fit person to talk of a good-for-nothing
tree?"
When our artisan awaked and told his dream,
his apprentice said, "If the tree aimed at uselessness,
how was it that it became a sacred tree?"
Which of course may be said to be of use.
"What you don't understand," replied his
master, "don't talk about. That was merely to
escape from the attacks of its enemies. Had it
not become sacred, how many would have wanted to
cut it down! The means of safety adopted were
different from ordinary means,
In order to reach the somewhat extraordinary goal
of uselessness.
and to test these by ordinary canons leaves one far
wide of the mark."
Tzŭ Ch'i of Nan-poh
Said to be identical with the individual mentioned
at the beginning of ch. ii.
was travelling on the Shang mountain when he saw
a large tree which astonished him very much. A
thousand chariot teams could have found shelter
under its shade.
"What tree is this?" cried Tzŭ Ch'i. "Surely it[53]
must have unusually fine timber." Then looking
up, he saw that its branches were too crooked for
rafters; while as to the trunk he saw that its
irregular grain made it valueless for coffins. He
tasted a leaf, but it took the skin off his lips; and
its odour was so strong that it would make a man
as it were drunk for three days together.
"Ah!" said Tzŭ Ch'i. "This tree is good for
nothing, and that is how it has attained this size.
A wise man might well follow its example."
And so escape danger from his surroundings.
In the State of Sung there is a place called
Ching-shih, where thrive the beech, the cedar, and
the mulberry. Such as are of a one-handed span
or so in girth are cut down for monkey-cages.
Those of two or three two-handed spans are cut
down for the beams of fine houses. Those of seven
or eight such spans are cut down for the solid sides
of rich men's coffins.
To this day, the very best kinds of wood are still
reserved for the "planks of old age."
Thus they do not fulfil their allotted span of years,
but perish in mid-career beneath the axe. Such is
the misfortune which overtakes worth.
For the sacrifices to the River God, neither bulls
with white cheeks, nor pigs with large snouts, nor
men suffering from piles, were allowed to be used.
This had been revealed to the soothsayers, and these
characteristics were consequently regarded as inaus[54]picious.
The wise, however, would regard them as
extremely auspicious.
Readers of Don Juan will recollect how the master's
mate had reason to share his view.
There was a hunchback named Su. His jaws
touched his navel. His shoulders were higher than
his head. His hair knot looked up to the sky.
His viscera were upside down. His buttocks were
where his ribs should have been. By tailoring, or
washing, he was easily able to earn his living. By
sifting rice he could make enough to support a
family of ten.
In all of which occupations a man would necessarily
stoop.
When orders came down for a conscription, the
hunchback stood unconcerned among the crowd.
And similarly, in matters of public works, his
deformity shielded him from being employed.
On the other hand, when it came to donations
of grain, the hunchback received as much as three
chung,
An ancient measure of uncertain capacity.
and of firewood, ten faggots. And if physical
deformity was thus enough to preserve his body
until its allotted end, how much more would not
moral and mental deformity avail!
A moral and mental deviation would be still more
likely to condemn a man to that neglect from his
fellows which is so conducive to our real welfare.
[55]
When Confucius was in the Ch'u State, the
eccentric Chieh Yü passed his door, saying, "O
phœnix, O phœnix, how has thy virtue fallen!—
By thus issuing forth out of due season.
unable to wait for the coming years or to go back
into the past.
When you might be, or might have been, of use.
The idea conveyed is that Confucianism was unsuited
to its age. See Lun-yü, ch. xviii.
If Tao prevails on earth, prophets will fulfil their
mission. If Tao does not prevail, they will but
preserve themselves. At the present day they will
but just escape.
"The honours of this world are light as feathers,
yet none estimate them at their true value. The
misfortunes of this life are weighty as the earth
itself, yet none can keep out of their reach. No
more, no more, seek to influence by virtue. Beware,
beware, move cautiously on! O ferns, O ferns,
wound not my steps! Through my tortuous
journey wound not my feet! Hills suffer from the
trees they produce. Fat burns by its own combustibility.
Cinnamon trees furnish food: therefore
they are cut down. The lacquer tree is felled
for use. All men know the use of useful things;
but they do not know the use of useless things."
The Evidence of Virtue Complete.
Argument:—Correspondence between inward virtue and outward influence—The
virtuous man disregards externals—The possession of virtue
causes oblivion of outward form—Neglect of the human—Cultivation
of the divine.
In the State of Lu there was a man, named
Wang T'ai, who had had his toes cut off. His
disciples were as numerous as those of Confucius.
Ch'ang Chi
One of the latter.
asked Confucius, saying, "This Wang T'ai has
been mutilated, yet he divides with you, Sir, the
teaching of the Lu State. He neither preaches nor
discusses; yet those who go to him empty, depart
full. He must teach the doctrine which does not
find expression in words;
The doctrine of Tao. These words occur in chs. ii
and xliii of the Tao-Tê-Ching. See The Remains
of Lao Tzŭ, p. 7.
and although his shape is imperfect, his mind is
perhaps complete. What manner of man is
this?"
"He is a prophet," replied Confucius, "whose[57]
instruction I have been late in seeking. I will
go and learn from him. And if I,—why not
those who are not equal to me? And I will take
with me, not the State of Lu only, but the whole
world."
"The fellow has been mutilated," said Ch'ang
Chi, "and yet people call him Master. He must
be very different from the ordinary run. But how
does he use his mind in this sense?"
"Life and Death are all powerful," answered
Confucius, "but they cannot affect it.
The mind, or soul, which is immortal. See ch. iii.
Heaven and earth may collapse, but that will
remain. If this is found to be without flaw, it will
not share the fate of all things. It can cause other
things to change, while preserving its own constitution
intact."
"How so?" asked Ch'ang Chi.
"From the point of view of difference," replied
Confucius, "we distinguish between the liver and
the gall, between the Ch'u State and the Yüeh
State. From the point of view of sameness, all
things are ONE. Such is the position of Wang
T'ai. He does not trouble about what reaches him
through the senses of hearing and sight, but directs
his whole mind towards the very climax of virtue.
He beholds all things as though ONE, without
observing their discrepancies. And thus the discrepancy
of his toes is to him as would be the loss
of so much mud."
[58]
"He devotes himself in fact to himself," said
Ch'ang Chi, "and uses his wisdom to perfect his
mind, until it becomes perfect. But how then is it
that people make so much of him?"
His virtue being wholly, as it were, of a selfish
order.
"A man," replied Confucius, "does not seek to
see himself in running water, but in still water.
For only what is itself still can instil stillness into
others.
"The grace of earth has reached only to pines
and cedars;—winter and summer alike they are
green. The grace of God has reached to Yao and
to Shun alone;—the first and foremost of all creation.
Happily they were able to regulate their own
lives and thus regulate the lives of all mankind.
"By nourishment of physical courage, the sense
of fear may be so eliminated that a man will, single-handed,