# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2004
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Greenwood, Arthur, 1880-1954, The War and Democracy, World War, 1914-1918
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10668.html.noimages
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Rotterdam).]

[Footnote 3: Letter quoted in the Westminster Gazette.]
With such a philosophy of human progress as this, German thinkers and
statesmen look out into the future and behold nothing but conflict—eternal
conflict between rival national "cultures," each seeking to impose its
domination. "In the struggle between Nationalities," writes Prince
Bülow,[1] in defence of his Polish policy, putting into a cruder form the
philosophy of Wilamowitz, "one nation is the hammer and the other the
anvil; one is the victor and the other the vanquished. It is a law of life
and development in history that where two national civilisations meet they
fight for supremacy."
[Footnote 1: Imperial Germany, p. 245 (1st ed.).]
Here we have the necessary and logical result of the philosophy of culture.
In the struggle between cultures no collaboration, no compromise even, is
possible. German is German: Flemish is Flemish: Polish is Polish: French is
French. Who is to decide which is the "more civilised," which is the fitter
to survive? Force alone can settle the issue. A Luther and Goethe may be
the puppets pitted in a contest of culture against Maeterlinck and Victor
Hugo. But it is Krupp and Zeppelin and the War-Lord that pull the strings.
As Wilamowitz reminds us, it was the Roman legions, not Virgil and Horace,
that stamped out the Celtic languages and romanised Western Europe. It is
the German army, two thousand years later, that is to germanise it. It is
an old, old theory; Prussia did not invent it, nor even Rome. "You know as
well as we do," said the Athenians in 416 B.C. to the representatives of
a small people of that day,[1] "that right, as the world goes, is only in
question between equals in power, while the strong do what they can and the
weak suffer what they must"; and they went on, like the Kaiser, to claim
the favour of the gods, "neither our pretensions nor our conduct being
in any way contrary to what men believe of the gods, or practise amongst
themselves." There is, in fact, to be no Law between Nations but the Rule
of the Stronger.
[Footnote 1: Thucydides, Book v. 89 and 105.]
§6. The Principle of the Commonwealth.—Such seems to many the meaning
of the present European situation—a stern conflict between nations and
cultures, to be decided by force of arms. The bridges between the nations
seem broken down, and no one can tell when they will be repaired. The hopes
that had gathered round international movements, the cosmopolitan dreams
of common action between the peoples across the barriers of States and
Governments, seem to have vanished into limbo; and the enthusiastic
dreamers of yesterday are the disillusioned soldiers and spectators of
to-day. Nationality, that strange, inarticulate, unanalysable force that
can call all men to her tents in the hour of crisis and danger, seems to
have overthrown the international forces of to-day, the Socialists, the
Pacifists, and, strongest of all, the Capitalists, as it overthrew Napoleon
and his dreams of Empire a hundred years ago. What Law is there but force
that can decide the issue between nation and nation? And, in the absence
of a Law, what becomes of all our hopes for international action, for the
future of civilisation and the higher life of the human race?
But in truth the disillusionment is as premature as the hopes that preceded
it. We are still far off from the World-State and the World-Law which
formed the misty ideal of cosmopolitan thinkers. But only those who are
blind to the true course of human progress can fail to see that the day of
the Nation-State is even now drawing to a close in the West. There is in
fact at present working in the world a higher Law and a better patriotism
than that of single nations and cultures, a Law and a patriotism that
override and transcend the claims of Nationality in a greater, a more
compelling, and a more universal appeal. The great States or Powers of
to-day, Great Britain, the United States, France, and (if they had eyes
to sec it) Russia, Germany and Austria-Hungary, are not Nation-States but
composite States—States compacted of many nationalities united together by
a common citizenship and a common law. Great Britain, the United States,
the German Empire, and Austria-Hungary bear in their very names the
reminder of the diverse elements of which they are composed; but France
with her great African Empire, and Russia with her multitudinous
populations, from Poland to the Pacific, from Finland to the Caucasus, are
equally composite. In each of these great States nations have been united
under a common law; and where the wisdom of the central government has not
"broken the bruised reed or quenched the smoking flax" of national life,
the nations have been not only willing but anxious to join in the work
of their State. Nations, like men, were made not to compete but to work
together; and it is so easy, so simple, to win their good-hearted devotion.
It takes all sorts of men, says the old proverb, to make a world. It takes
all sorts of nations to make a modern State. "The combination of different
nations in one State is as necessary a condition of civilised life as the
combination of men in society. … It is in the cauldron of the State that
the fusion takes place by which the vigour, the knowledge, and the capacity
of one portion of mankind may be communicated to another…. If we take the
establishment of liberty for the realisation of moral duties to be the end
of civil society, we must conclude that those States are substantially the
most perfect which, like the British and Austrian Empires, include various
distinct nationalities without oppressing them." So wrote Lord Acton,
the great Catholic historian, fifty years ago, when the watchwords of
Nationality were on all men's lips, adding, in words that were prophetic of
the failure of the Austrian and the progress of the British Commonwealth
of Nations: "The coexistence of several nations under the same State is a
test as well as the best security of its freedom. It is also one of the
chief instruments of civilisation; and, as such, it is in the natural and
providential order, and indicates a state of greater advancement than the
national unity which is the ideal of modern liberalism."[1]
[Footnote 1: Essay on Nationality, in The History of Freedom and other

Essays, pp. 290, 298.]

Of the Great Powers which between them control the destinies of
civilisation Great Britain is at once the freest, the largest, and the
most various. If the State is a "cauldron" for mingling "the vigour, the
knowledge, and the capacity" of the portions of mankind—or if, to use an
apter metaphor, it is a body whose perfection consists in the very variety
of the functions of its several members—there has never been on the earth
a political organism like the British Empire. Its 433 million inhabitants,
from Great Britain to Polynesia, from India and Egypt to Central Africa,
are drawn from every division of the human race. Cut a section through
mankind, and in every layer there will be British citizens, living under
the jurisdiction of British law. Here is something to hearten those who
have looked in vain to the Hague. While international law has been
brought to a standstill through the absence of a common will and a common
executive, Great Britain has thrown a girdle of law around the globe.
§7. The Future of Civilisation.—What hopes dare we cherish, in this hour
of conflict, for the future of civilisation?
The great, the supreme task of human politics and statesmanship is to
extend the sphere of Law. Let others labour to make men cultured or
virtuous or happy. These are the tasks of the teacher, the priest, and the
common man. The statesman's task is simpler. It is to enfold them in a
jurisdiction which will enable them to live the life of their souls'
choice. The State, said the Greek philosophers, is the foundation of the
good life; but its crown rises far above mere citizenship. "There where the
State ends," cries Nietzsche,[1] echoing Aristotle and the great tradition
of civilised political thought, "there men begin. There, where the State
ends, look thither, my brothers! Do you not see the rainbow and the bridge
to the Overman?" Ever since organised society began, the standards of the
individual, the ideals of priest and teacher, the doctrines of religion and
morality, have outstripped the practice of statesmanship. For the polestar
of the statesman has not been love, but law. His not the task of exhorting
men to love one another, but the simpler duty of enforcing the law, "Thou
shalt not kill." And in that simple, strenuous, necessary task statesmen
and political thinkers have watched the slow extension of the power of Law,
from the family to the tribe, from the tribe to the city, from the city to
the nation, from the nation to the Commonwealth. When will Law take its
next extension? When will warfare, which is murder between individuals and
"rebellion" between groups of citizens, be equally preventable between
nations by the common law of the world?
[Footnote 1: Also sprach Zarathustra, Speech xi. (end).]
The answer is simple. When the world has a common will, and has created a
common government to express and enforce that will.
In the sphere of science and invention, of industry and economics, as
Norman Angell and others have taught us, the world is already one Great
Society. For the merchant, the banker, and the stockbroker political
frontiers have been broken down. Trade and industry respond to the
reactions of a single, world-wide, nervous system. Shocks and panics pass
as freely as airmen over borders and custom-houses. And not "big business"
only, but the humblest citizen, in his search for a livelihood, finds
himself caught in the meshes of the same world-wide network. "The widow
who takes in washing," says Graham Wallas,[1] in his deep and searching
analysis of our contemporary life, "fails or succeeds according to her
skill in choosing starch or soda or a wringing machine under the influence
of half a dozen competing world-schemes of advertisement…. The English
factory girl who is urged to join her Union, the tired old Scotch
gatekeeper with a few pounds to invest, the Galician peasant when the
emigration agent calls, the artisan in a French provincial town whose
industry is threatened by a new invention, all know that unless they find
their way among world-wide facts, which only reach them through misleading
words, they will be crushed." The Industrial Revolution of the past
century, steam-power and electricity, the railway and the telegraph, have
knit mankind together, and made the world one place.
[Footnote 1: The Great Society (1914), p. 4.]
But this new Great Society is as yet formless and inarticulate. It is not
only devoid of common leadership and a common government; it lacks even the
beginnings of a common will, a common emotion, and a common consciousness.
Of the Great Society, consciously or unconsciously, we must all perforce be
members; but of the Great State, the great World-Commonwealth, we do not
yet discern the rudiments. The economic organisation of the world has
outstripped the development of its citizenship and government: the economic
man, with his farsighted vision and scientific control of the resources
of the world, must sit by and see the work of his hands laid in ashes by
contending governments and peoples. No man can say how many generations
must pass before the platitudes of the market and the exchange pass into
the current language of politics.
§8. The Two Roads of Advance: Inter-State Action and Common
Citizenship.—In the great work which lies before the statesmen and
peoples of the world for the extension of law and common citizenship and
the prevention of war there are two parallel lines of advance.
One road lies through the development of what is known as International,
but should more properly be called Inter-State Law, through the revival,
on a firmer and broader foundation, of the Concert of Europe conceived by
the Congress of Vienna just a hundred years ago—itself a revival, on
a secular basis, of the great mediaeval ideal of an international
Christendom, held together by Christian Law and Christian ideals. That
ideal faded away for ever at the Reformation, which grouped Europe into
independent sovereign States ruled by men responsible to no one outside
their own borders. It will never be revived on an ecclesiastical basis. Can
we hope for its revival on a basis of modern democracy, modern nationality,
and modern educated public opinion? Can Inter-State Law, hitherto a mere
shadow of the majestic name it bears, almost a matter of convention and
etiquette, with no permanent tribunal to interpret it, and no government
to enforce it, be enthroned with the necessary powers to maintain justice
between the peoples and governments of the world?
Such a Law the statesmen of Great Britain and Russia sought to impose on
Europe in 1815, to maintain a state of affairs which history has shown to
have been intolerable to the European peoples. There are those who hope
that the task can be resumed, on a better basis, at the next Congress.
"Shall we try again," writes Professor Gilbert Murray,[1] "to achieve
Castlereagh's and Alexander's ideal of a permanent Concert, pledged to make
collective war upon the peace-breaker? Surely we must. We must, at all
costs and in spite of all difficulties, because the alternative means
such unspeakable failure. We must learn to agree, we civilised nations of
Europe, or else we must perish. I believe that the chief council of wisdom
here is to be sure to go far enough. We need a permanent Concert, perhaps a
permanent Common Council, in which every awkward problem can be dealt with
before it has time to grow dangerous, and in which outvoted minorities must
accustom themselves to giving way."
[Footnote 1: Hibbert Journal, Oct. 1914, p. 77.]
Other utterances by public men, such as Mr. Roosevelt and our own Prime
Minister, might be cited in the same sense; but Professor Murray's has been
chosen because he has had the courage to grasp the nettle. In his words the
true position is quite clearly set forth. If Inter-State Law is to become
a reality we must "be sure to go far enough." There is no half-way house
between Law and no Law, between Government and no Government, between
Responsibility and no Responsibility. If the new Concert is to be effective
it must be able to compel the submission of all "awkward problems" and
causes of quarrel to its permanent Tribunal at the Hague or elsewhere; and
it must be able to enforce the decision of its tribunal, employing for
the purpose, if necessary, the armed forces of the signatory Powers as an
international police. "Out-voted minorities must accustom themselves to
giving way." It is a bland and easy phrase; but it involves the whole
question of world-government. "Men must accustom themselves not to demand
an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth," the earliest law-givers might
have said, when the State first intervened between individuals to make
itself responsible for public order. Peace between the Powers, as between
individuals, is, no doubt, a habit to which cantankerous Powers "must
accustom themselves." But they will be sure to do so if there is a Law,
armed with the force to be their schoolmaster towards peaceable habits. In
other words, they will do so because they have surrendered one of the most
vital elements in the independent life of a State—the right of conducting
its own policy—to the jurisdiction of a higher Power. An Inter-State
Concert, with a Judiciary of its own and an Army and Navy under its own
orders, is, in fact, not an Inter-State Concert at all; it is a new State:
it is, in fact, the World-State. There is no middle course between Law and
no Law: and the essence of Statehood, as we have seen, is a Common Law.
Will this new State have the other attributes of Government—a Common
Legislature and a Common Executive—as well as a Common Judiciary? Let us
go back to Professor Murray's words. He speaks of "outvoted minorities."
Let us suppose the refractory country to be Great Britain, outvoted on some
question relating to sea-power. Of whom will the outvoted minority consist?
Of the British members on the "Common Council" of the Concert. But the
question at once arises, what are the credentials of these British members?
Whom do they represent? To whom are they responsible? If they are the
representatives of the British people and responsible to the democracy
which sent them, how can they be expected to "accustom themselves to giving
way"—perhaps to a majority composed of the representatives of undemocratic
governments? Their responsibility is, not to the Concert, but to their
own Government and people. They are not the minority members of a
democratically-elected Council of their own fellow-citizens. They are the
minority members of a heterogeneous Council towards which they owe no
allegiance and recognise no binding responsibility. There is no half-way
house between Citizenship and no Citizenship, between Responsibility and
no Responsibility. No man and no community can serve two masters. When the
point of conflict arises men and nations have to make the choice where
their duty lies. Not the representatives of Great Britain on the
International Concert, but the people of Great Britain themselves would
have to decide whether their real allegiance, as citizens, was due to the
World-State or to their own Commonwealth: they would find themselves at the
same awful parting of the ways which confronted the people of the Southern
States in 1861. When at the outbreak of the Civil War General Lee was
offered by Lincoln the Commandership of the Northern armies and refused
it, to become the Commander-in-Chief on the side of the South, he did so
because "he believed," as he told Congress after the war, "that the act of
Virginia in withdrawing herself from the United States carried him along
with it as a citizen of Virginia, and that her laws and acts were binding
on him." In other words, unless the proposed Common Council is to be made
something more than a Council of the delegates of sovereign States (as the
Southern States believed themselves to be till 1861), a deadlock sooner or
later is almost inevitable, and the terrible and difficult question—so
familiar to Americans and recently to ourselves on the smaller stage of
Ulster—of the right of secession and the coercion of minorities
will arise. But if the Common Council is framed in accordance with a
Constitution which binds its representatives to accept its decisions and
obey its government, then the World-State, with a World-Executive, will
already have come into being. There will be no more war, but only Rebellion
and Treason.
Such is the real meaning of proposals to give a binding sanction to the
decisions of an Inter-State Concert. Anything short of this—treaties and
arbitration-agreements based upon inter-State arrangements without any
executive to enforce them—may give relief for a time and pave the way
for further progress, but can in itself provide no permanent security, no
satisfactory justification for the neglect of defensive measures by the
various sovereign governments on behalf of their peoples. Mr. Bryan, for
the United States, has within the last eighteen months concluded twenty-six
general arbitration treaties with different Governments, and may yet
succeed in his ambition of signing treaties with all the remainder. Yet no
one imagines that, when the immunity of the United States from attack is
guaranteed by the promise of every Government in the world, America will
rely for her defence upon those promises alone.
In discussing proposals for a European Council, then, we must be quite
sure to face all that it means. But let us not reject Professor Murray's
suggestion off-hand because of its inherent difficulties: for that men
should be discussing such schemes at all marks a significant advance in our
political thought. Only let us be quite clear as to what they presuppose.
They presuppose the supremacy, in the collective mind of civilised mankind,
of Law over Force, a definite supremacy of what may be called the civilian
as against the military ideal, not in a majority of States, but in every
State powerful enough to defy coercion. They presuppose a world map
definitely settled on lines satisfactory to the national aspirations of the
peoples. They presuppose a status quo which is not simply maintained,
like that after 1815, because it is a legal fact and its disturbance would
be inconvenient to the existing rulers, but because it is inherently
equitable.[1] They presuppose a similar democratic basis of citizenship
and representation among the component States. They presuppose, lastly,
an educated public opinion incomparably less selfish, less ignorant, less
unsteady, less materialistic, and less narrowly national than has been
prevalent hitherto. Let us work and hope for these things: let us use our
best efforts to remove misunderstandings and promote a sense of common
responsibilities and common trusteeship for civilisation between the
peoples of all the various sovereign States; but meanwhile let us work
also, with better hopes of immediate if less ambitious successes, along the
other parallel road of advance.
[Footnote 1: The same applies to proposals for ensuring permanent peace in
the industrial sphere. Neither capital nor labour will abide by "scraps
of paper" if they do not feel the status quo (i.e. the conditions under
which wage-contracts are made) to be equitable and inherently just.]
The other road may seem, in this hour of dreams and disaster, of extremes
of hope and disillusionment, a long and tedious track: it is the old slow
high road of civilisation, not the short cut across the fields. It looks
forward to abiding results, not through the mechanical co-operation of
governments, but through the growth of an organic citizenship, through the
education of the nations themselves to a sense of common duty and a common
life. It looks forward, not to the definite establishment, in our day, of
the World-State, but only to the definite refutation of the wicked
theory of the mutual incompatibility of nations. It looks forward to the
expression in the outward order of the world's government of what we may
call "the Principle of the Commonwealth," of Lord Acton's great principle
of the State composed of free nations, of the State as a living body which
lives through the organic union and free activity of its several national
members. And it finds its immediate field of action in the deepening and
extension of the obligations of citizenship among the peoples of the great,
free, just, peace-loving, supra-national Commonwealths whose patriotism has
been built up, not by precept and doctrine, but on a firm foundation of
older loyalties.
The principle of the Commonwealth is not a European principle: it is a
world-principle. It does not proceed upon the expectation of a United
States of Europe; for all the Great Powers of Europe except Austria-Hungary
(and some of the smaller, such as Holland, Belgium, and Portugal) are
extra-European Powers also. Indeed if we contract our view, with Gladstone
and Bismarck and the statesmen of the last generation, to European issues
alone, we shall be ignoring the chief political problem of our age—the
contact of races and nations with wide varieties of social experience and
at different levels of civilisation. It is this great and insistent problem
(call it the problem of East and West, or the problem of the colour-line)
in all its difficult ramifications, political, social, and, above all,
economic, which makes the development of the principle of the Commonwealth
the most pressing political need of our age. For the problems arising out
of the contact of races and nations can never be adjusted either by the
wise action of individuals or by conflict and warfare; they can only be
solved by fair and deliberate statesmanship within the bosom of a single
State, through the recognition by both parties of a higher claim than their
own sectional interest—the claim of a common citizenship and the interest
of civilisation.[1] It is here, in the union and collaboration of diverse
races and peoples, that the principle of the Commonwealth finds its
peculiar field of operation. Without this principle, and without its
expression, however imperfect, in the British Empire, the world would be in
chaos to-day.
[Footnote 1: The most recent example of this is the settlement of the very
difficult dispute between India and South Africa.]
We cannot predict the political development of the various Great Powers who
between them control the destinies of civilisation. We cannot estimate
the degree or the manner in which France, freed at last from nearer
preoccupations, will seek to embody in her vast dominion the great
civilising principles for which her republic stands. We cannot foretell
the issue of the conflict of ideas which has swayed to and fro in Russia
between the British and the Prussian method of dealing with the problem of
nationality. Germany, Italy, Japan—here, too, we are faced by enigmas.
One other great Commonwealth remains besides the British. Upon the United
States already lies the responsibility, voluntarily assumed and, except
during a time of internal crisis,[1] successfully discharged, of securing
peace from external foes for scores of millions of inhabitants of the
American continent. Yet with the progress of events her responsibilities
must yearly enlarge: for both the immigrant nationalities within and the
world-problems without her borders seem to summon her to a deeper education
and to wider obligations.
[Footnote 1: French occupation of Mexico, 1862, during the American Civil

War, when the Monroe Doctrine was temporarily in abeyance.]

But upon the vast, ramifying, and inchoate Commonwealth of Great Britain
lies the heaviest responsibility. It is a task unequally shared between
those of her citizens who are capable of discharging it. Her task within
the Commonwealth is to maintain the common character and ideals and to
adjust the mutual relations of one quarter of the human race. Her task
without is to throw her weight into the scales of peace, and to uphold and
develop the standard and validity of inter-State agreements. It is a task
which requires, even at this time of crisis, when, by the common sentiment
of her citizens, the real nature and purpose of the Commonwealth have
become clear to us, the active thoughts of all political students. For to
bring home to all within her borders who bear rule and responsibility, from
the village headman in India and Nigeria, the Basutu chief and the
South Sea potentate, to the public opinion of Great Britain and the
self-governing Dominions, the nature of the British Commonwealth, and the
character of its citizenship and ideals, and to study how those ideals
may be better expressed in its working institutions and executive
government—that is a task to which the present crisis beckons the minds
of British citizens, a task which Britain owes not only to herself but to
mankind.
Note.—A friendly critic who saw this chapter in MS. remarked: "I think
the author has been very successful in ignoring some of the shady methods
by which the British Empire has been extended." The criticism is not
strictly relevant to the subject of the chapter, but as it may occur to
other readers it may be well to deal with it in a brief note. I would
answer:
(1) The "shady methods" of which he speaks were not the result of British
Imperialism, or of a desire for conquest on the part of the British
State. They were the result, melancholy but inevitable, of the contact of
individuals and races at different levels of development. This contact
between the stronger and the weaker (which can be illustrated from what is
said about the sandalwood traders in the New Hebrides on p. 215 above) was
the direct result of the explorations of the sixteenth century, which threw
the seas of the world open to Western pioneers and traders. The extension
of the authority of Western governments (Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch,
French, and British), and the collisions between them, followed inevitably
on the activities of their citizens, as has been pointed out on p. 216
above. All the Western governments have made mistakes in dealing with this
unfamiliar situation; but the wise course for democratic public opinion,
instead of railing at "Imperialism," would seem to be to familiarise itself
with its problems and control its injurious tendencies.
(2) In any case, the mistakes of the past do not entitle us to wash our
hands of responsibilities in the present. This war has shown that the
non-self-governing parts of the Commonwealth are not, as our enemies
supposed, a weakness to Great Britain in time of trouble, but a strength.
In other words, whatever may have happened in the past, Great Britain
has now won the consent of the ruled to the fact—not necessarily to the
methods—of British rule. To use what is doubtless unduly constitutional
language, we are now faced in India and elsewhere, not with a Revolutionary
Movement, but with an Opposition. That is a great incentive to further
development.
BERNHARDI, Germany and the Next War (2s.), has become familiar. But this
is only one application of a doctrine which has found expression in many
spheres, as, for example, in the writings of the French Syndicalists, who
claim to be copying the methods of Capitalism, and the principles of
Bergson's philosophy—with what justification must be left to the reader
to determine. See G. SOREL, Reflexions sur la Violence (Paris, Marcel
Rivière, 1910, 5 francs), and Sorel's other writings. "Bernhardi-ism" is,
in fact, not a German product: it has been before the public for some years
under the name of "militancy," in connection with various causes, though
it has never been put into execution on so tremendous a scale as by the
Prussian Government. Nor is its philosophical basis to be found only, if at
all, in Nietzsche.
The insistence on "Culture" as the main factor in the life and development
of peoples is to be found in practically every German history, and in a
great many non-German writers. It has received an additional vogue from
the development of the study of Sociology, which naturally seeks out, in
tracing the development of societies in the past, the elements which lend
themselves to measurement and description, and these are inevitably, from
the nature of the evidence, rather "cultural" than moral. It would be
invidious to mention instances.
For Dr. SADLER'S articles see p. 119, above. See also PAULSEN, German

Education: Past and Present. 1908. 5s. net.

The best philosophical book on the relations of advanced and backward races
is The Basis of Ascendancy: a Discussion of certain Principles of Public
Policy involved in the Development of the Southern States, by EDGAR
GARDNER MURPHY (a clergyman living at Montgomery, Alabama) (1909, 6s. net).
Though written with reference to the peculiar American problem, the book
has a far wider significance. There is no good book which covers the ground
either on India or the British Empire. E.R. BEVAN'S little volume on
Indian Nationalism (2s. 6d. net) may be mentioned. An article on India
and the Empire in the Round Table for September 1912 is also worth
mention (and worth reprinting).
WALLAS, The Great Society (1914, 7s. 6d. net), and NORMAN ANGELL, The
Great Illusion (1910, 2s. 6d. net), are the standard works—the former as
a psychologist and a philosopher, the latter as a pamphleteer with a very
acute vision within a limited field.
See LINDSAY, The War against War (Oxford pamphlets, 2d.), a model of
clear argument, so far as it goes. Also ALISON PHILLIPS, The Confederation
of Europe: A Study of the European Alliance, 1813-1823, as an Experiment
in the International Organisation of Peace, (1914, 7s. 6d. net), the
best book on the Congress of Vienna and the problems connected with it,
especially on the subject of an International Tribunal and Universal Peace.
The Prime Minister's speeches will be familiar. See also Mr. Roosevelt's
pamphlet on the United States and the Hague Convention (Newnes, 2d.).
See an article by L.S. ROWE in the Political Quarterly, October 1914.
Accepting houses

Acton, Lord

Adalia

Adrianople

Adriatic, Serb access to

Aegean

Aehrenthal, Count

Agadir crisis

Agram

Agriculture, German

Albania

Albion, perfidious

Alexander I., Tsar

Alexander II.

Alexander III.

Alexander, King of Serbia

Alexandretta

Alsace-Lorraine

American Jews

Angell, Mr. Norman

Antivari

Arab movement

Armaments

Army, Austro-Hungarian

Arnold, Matthew

Asia Minor

Asquith, Mr.

Athenians

Auffenberg, General

Australia

Austria, genesis of

Austrian Note to Serbia

Austrian Question

Azev

Baden

Balance of Power

Balkan League

  situation

  wars

Ballads, Serb

Ballplatz

Banat of Temesvár

Bank of England

Baring, Maurice

Bebel, August

Belgium

Belgrade

Berchtold, Count

Berlin, Congress of

Bernhardi, General

Bessarabia

Bethmann-Hollveg

Bismarck

Bobrikoff, General

Bohemia

Bojana river

Bosnia

Bosnian annexation

Brandenburg

Britain, aims of

Britain and Germany

Brunswick

Brussa

Bucarest, Treaty of

Budapest

Bukovina

Bulgaria

Bülow, Prince

Bund, Jewish

Byzantium

Cabrinovic

Canadian trade

Carbonari

Carinthia

Carlyle

Carniola

Castlereagh

Catherine II.

Catholic Church

Cattaro

Cavour

Centre party

Cetinje

Charlemagne

Charles Albert

Charles V.

Charles the Bold

Charles, King of Roumania

Cilicia

Civil War, American

Coalition, Serbo-Croat

Cobden

Coleridge

Colonies, German

Comenius

Committee of Union and Progress

Commonwealth, a European

Concert of Europe

Conscription

Constantine, King

Constantinople

Constitution, German

Consular service

Cotton industry

Cramb, Professor

Credit

Crimean War

Croatia

Culture

Cuvaj

Cyprus

Czechs

Dalmatia

Danzig

Dardanelles

Debreczen

Delegations

Democracy

Denmark

Diplomatic Service

Disraeli

Dmowski, M.

Dobrudja

Dostoieffsky

Downing Street

Draga, Queen

Dual System

Duma

Dvorák

Economic policy

Education

Enver Pasha

Epirus

Eucken, Rudolf

Eugene, Prince

Europe, map of

Federalism in Austria

Fénelon

Ferdinand, King of Bulgaria

Fichte

Finance, Haute

Finland

Flemings

Flensburg

Florence

Foreign Office

Foreign Policy

Forgách, Count

Förstner, Lieutenant von

Francis Ferdinand, Archduke

  assassination,

Francis Joseph

Frankfurt, Diet of

Frederick III.

Frederick the Great

Fremdenblatt, article

French Revolution

  Constitution

Friedjung Trial

Galicia

Garibaldi

German Confederation

Germanisation

German Navy

Germans in Austria

Goethe

Gogol

Gold reserve

Gore, Bishop

Graham, Stephen

Greece

Grey, Sir Edward

Grosswardein

Habsburg, House of

Haeckel

Hague Congress

  Conventions

Hanotaux, Gabriel

Hanover

Hanseatic League

Harnack

Harvey, T.E.

Hauptmann, Gerhart

Heine

Hermannstadt

Herzl, Theodor

Hohenzollern, House of

Holland

Holy Alliance

  Synod

Humboldt, Wilhelm von

Hungarian Constitution

  electoral system

Hungary, kingdom of

Hurban, Svetozar

Hus, John

Ibsen

Industry and war

Inter-State Law

Ionian Islands

Ipek

Ireland

Irredentism, Italian

Islam

Istria,

Italian culture in Dalmatia

Italy

Ivan the Terrible

Izvolsky

Jena, battle of

Jerusalem

Jews

Joseph II.

Jugoslavia

Junkers

Kara George

Karageorgevitch dynasty

Karlowitz

Kavala

Kennard, Dr.

Khalifate

Kiel Canal

Konieh

Königgrätz

Königsberg

Konrad von Hoetzendorf

Kosovo, battle of

Kossuth

Kosziusko

Landmarks

Lebanon

Legitimacy

Leipzig, battle of

Leopold I., Emperor

Leopold II

Leopold I. of Belgium

Lessing

Lloyd George, Mr.

Lodz

Louis XIV.

Luxemburg

Macara, Sir Charles

Macedonia

Magyarisation

Magyars

Maria Theresa

Marienburg

Marx, Karl

Masaryk, Professor

Maximilian I

Mazurian lakes

Mazzini

Metkovic

Metternich

Metz

Michael, Prince

Milan, King

Militarism

Military Frontiers

Mill, On Liberty

Milosh Obrenovitch

Mohács

Moltke

Monastir

Montenegro

Moscow

Murray, Gilbert

Napoleon

Napoleon III.

Napoleonic Wars

Nationalities, Hungarian Law of

Nationality, idea of

  false conceptions of

Nazim Pasha

Nemanja dynasty

Neusatz (Novi Sad)

New Guinea

Nicholas II.

Nicholas, Grand Duke

Nietzsche

Nihilism

Norway

Novara

Obrenovitch dynasty

Orthodox Church

Palermo

Palestine

Pan-Germans

Panslavism

Peter the Great

Peter, King of Serbia

Petrograd

Piedmont

Pig War

Pius IX.

Plevna

Pobiedonostsev

Pola

Poland

Poles, Austrian

  Prussian

Police state

Polish Partition

Ponsonby, Mr. A.

Posen

Prague

Princip, murderer

Protestantism in Germany

Prussia

Prussian education

Pushkin

Radicalism

Radkersburg

Ragusa

Ramsay MacDonald, Mr.

Reichstag, German

Relief Fund, National

Revolution, French

  of 1848

  Russian

Reynolds, Rothay

Rhodes

Rolland, Romain

Roosevelt, President

Roumania

Roumanians of Hungary

Rousseau

Russia and Prussia

Russian Church

Russification

Russo-Japanese War

Ruthenes

Sadler, Dr.

Salonica

Samoa

Sarajevo

Sarolea, Dr.

Savoy, House of

Saxons in Transylvania

Schleswig-Holstein

School strikes

Schurz, Carl

Scotland

Scott

Serbia

Serbo-Croat unity

Serb Patriarchate

Sicilies, Two

Silesia

Silistria

Slav and Teuton

Slavophilism

Slavs of Austria

Slovak Academy

Slovaks

Slovenes

Smyrna

Social effects of war

Socialism, State

Socialists, German

Sombart, Professor

Southern Slavs

State aid

Stephen Dushan

Stock Exchange

Stolypin

Sugar Commission

Sweden

Swinburne

Switzerland

Sybel

Syria

Szekels

Teutonic Knights

Tirol

Tisza, Count

Tomanovic, Dr.

Trade effects of war

Traders, South Sea

Trade Unions and war

Transylvania

Treitschke

Trentino

Trieste

Triple Alliance

  Entente

Tripoli

Tschirschky

Turkification

Turks

Ukraine

Ulster

Unemployment

Ungvár

Uniate Church

Universal Suffrage

Valona

Vardar valley

Vatican

Venice

Victor Emanuel II.

Vienna

  Congress of

Violence, Philosophy of

Virginia

Vistula

Voltaire

Wallas, Graham

Walloons

Warsaw, Grand-Duchy of

Weimar

Wells, H.G.

Westphalia

Wied, William of

Wilamowitz-Moellendorff

William I.

William II.

William I. of Holland

W.E.A.

World-Policy, German

Wordsworth

Würtemberg

Young Turks
Zabern

Zionism

Zollverein

Zvonomir


by
R.W. SETON-WATSON, D.Litt.

J. DOVER WILSON

ALFRED E. ZIMMERN

and

ARTHUR GREENWOOD

1915
       *       *       *       *       *
TO
The Workers' Educational Association
       *       *       *       *       *
  When wilt Thou save the people?

    O God of mercy, when?

  Not kings and lords, but nations!

    Not thrones and crowns, but men!

  Flowers of Thy heart, O God, are they;

  Let them not pass, like weeds, away—

  Their heritage a sunless day.

    God save the people!

"To remake the map of Europe, and to rearrange the peoples in accordance
with the special mission assigned to each of them by geographical, ethnical
and historical conditions—this is the first essential step for all."
       *       *       *       *       *
For many years past the prospect of universal war has haunted the dreams of
pacificists and militarists alike. Many of us, without denying its growing
menace, hoped against hope that it might be averted by the gradual
strengthening of international goodwill and mutual intercourse, and the
steady growth of democratic influences and political thought. But our
misgivings proved more prophetic than our hopes; and last August the great
war came upon us like a thief in the night. After four months of war we
feel that, in spite of the splendid response of the nation at large, in
spite of a unanimity which has no parallel in our previous history, there
are still large sections of the community who fail to realise the vastness
of the issues at stake, the formidable nature of the forces ranged against
us, and the true inner significance of the struggle. And yet all that is
worth living for depends upon the outcome of this war—for ourselves the
future of the democratic ideal in these islands and in the British Empire
at large, for the peoples of Europe deliverance from competing armaments
and the yoke of racial tyranny. But before our future can be secured,
sacrifices will be required of every citizen, and in a free community
sacrifice can only spring from knowledge. Moreover, if we are to put an end
to the intolerable situation of an unwilling Europe in arms, public opinion
must think out very carefully the great problems which have been thrown
into the melting-pot and be prepared for the day of settlement.
The present volume has been written as a guide to the study of the
underlying causes and issues of the war. It does not pretend to cover the
whole of so vast a field, and it will have attained its aim if it provides
the basis for future discussion. It originated in the experience of its
five writers at the Summer Schools for working-class students held in
connection with the Workers' Educational Associations. In the early days of
August, at the outbreak of the war, Summer Schools were in full swing
at Oxford, Cambridge, Eton, Bangor, and Durham, and it at once became
apparent, not merely that the word "citizen" had suddenly acquired a new
depth and significance for the men and women of our generation, but also
that for the individual citizen himself a large new field of study and
discussion had been opened up on subjects and issues hitherto unfamiliar.
This book was planned to meet the need there expressed, but it is hoped
that it may be found useful by a wider circle of readers.
We have called the book The War and Democracy, because our guiding idea
throughout has been the sense of the great new responsibilities, both of
thought and action, which the present situation lays upon British Democracy
and on believers in democracy throughout the world.
In devoting one chapter to a survey of the issues raised for settlement by
the war, we must disclaim most emphatically all idea of dividing the
lion's skin before the animal has been killed. Our object has not been to
prophesy, but merely to stimulate thought and discussion. The field is so
vast and complicated that unless public opinion begins to mobilise without
further delay and to form clear ideas as to how the principles laid down
by our statesmen are to be converted into practice, it may find itself
confronted, as it was confronted in 1814, with a situation which it can
neither understand nor control, and with a settlement which will perpetuate
many of the abuses which this war ought to remove. Our best excuse is
supplied by the attitude of many leaders of German political thought—men
like Franz von Liszt, Ostwald; and Paul Rohrbach—who are already mapping
out the world according to their victorious fancies.
December 1914.
By ALFRED E. ZIMMERN, M.A., late Fellow and Tutor of New College, Oxford;

Author of The Greek Commonwealth

THE NATIONAL IDEA IN EUROPE, 1789-1914 By J. DOVER WILSON, M.A., Gonville
and Cains College, Cambridge, late Lecturer in the University of
Helsingfors, Finland
GERMANY By ALFRED E. ZIMMERN
AUSTRIA-HUNGARY AND THE SOUTHERN SLAVS By R.W. SETON-WATSON, D.Litt., New

College, Oxford, author of Racial Problems in Hungary, The Southern Slav

Question, etc.

RUSSIA By J. DOVER WILSON
FOREIGN POLICY [Contributed]
THE ISSUES OF THE WAR By R.W. SETON-WATSON
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC ASPECTS OF THE WAR By ARTHUR GREENWOOD, B.Sc., Lecturer
in Economics at the University of Leeds
GERMAN CULTURE AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH By ALFRED E. ZIMMERN
"It seems to me that the amount of lawlessness and crime, the amount of
waste and futility, the amount of war and war possibility and war danger
in the world are just the measure of the present inadequacy of the world's
system of collective organisations to the purpose before them. It follows
from this very directly that only one thing can end war on the earth, and
that is a subtle mental development, an idea, the development of the idea
of the world commonweal in the collective mind."—H.G. WELLS in 1908.
THIS is a testing time for Democracy. The people of Great Britain and the
Dominions, to whom all the world looks as the trustees, together with
France and America, of the great democratic tradition, are brought face
to face, for the first time, with their full ultimate responsibility as
British citizens. Upon the way in which that responsibility is realised
and discharged depends the future of the democratic principle, not only in
these islands, but throughout the world.
Democracy is not a mere form of government. It does not depend on ballot
boxes or franchise laws or any constitutional machinery. These are but its
trappings. Democracy is a spirit and an atmosphere, and its essence is
trust in the moral instincts of the people. A tyrant is not a democrat, for
he believes in government by force; neither is a demagogue a democrat, for
he believes in government by flattery. A democratic country is a country
where the government has confidence in the people and the people in the
government and in itself, and where all are united in the faith that the
cause of their country is not a mere matter of individual or national
self-interest, but is in harmony with the great moral forces which rule the
destinies of mankind. No form of government is so feeble as a democracy
without faith. But a democracy armed with faith is not merely strong: it
is invincible; for its cause will live on, in defeat and disaster, in the
breast of every one of its citizens. Belgium is a living testimony to that
great truth.
British Democracy has carried this principle of confidence to the furthest
possible point. Alone among the States of Europe, Great Britain relies for
her existence and for the maintenance of her world-wide responsibilities
upon the free choice of her citizens. Her privileges are extended to all:
her active obligations are forced upon none. Trusting in the principle of
individual freedom, and upon the sound instinct and understanding of her
people, she leaves it to each citizen to make his choice whether, and in
what manner, he shall serve his country. Never have responsibilities so
arduous and so urgent been laid upon the citizens of any community: and
never have the citizens been so free to choose or to decline the burden.
The world will judge Great Britain, and judge Democracy, according to the
measure of our free response.
What is the nature of the responsibility cast upon us at this crisis?
It is threefold. It concerns the present, the past, and the future. There
are three questions which every citizen must needs ask, and try to answer,
for himself. The first and most urgent is a matter of present decision:
What is my duty here and now? The second involves a judgment of past
events: Why is it that we are at war? Are we fighting in a just cause? The
third involves an estimate of the future and of the part which British
public opinion can and should play in shaping it: What are the issues
involved in the various belligerent countries? What should be the
principles of a just settlement? How can Great Britain best use her
influence in the cause of human progress and for the welfare of the peoples
involved in the war?
It is with the second and especially with the third of these
responsibilities that this volume is concerned.
"What is the war about?" "Are we fighting in a just cause?" Every one by
now has asked himself this question, and most people have studied some at
least of the evidence, and tried to satisfy themselves as to the answer.
The Foreign Office White Paper and numberless books and pamphlets have
enlightened the public on many of the questions at issue. Yet the fact
remains that the necessity of this educative campaign involves a confession
of failure—or at least of grave neglect—on the part of British democracy.
Under our democratic constitution the people of Great Britain have assumed
the responsibility for the management of their own affairs. One great
department of those affairs, the most vital of all, they and their
representatives have systematically neglected. Deeply engaged and
interested in domestic problems, they have left the control of their
foreign relations in the hands of expert advisers. And so it was with
something like stupefaction that they discovered, one day in August, that
they were called upon to honour the obligations contracted in their name.
There has been no desire to evade those obligations. But there has been a
very real desire to understand them, and also a fixed determination never
again to allow such a lack of contact, on vital issues, between the mind of
the people and the activities of their ministers.
But no mere changes in the machinery of democratic control can avail to
save the people from the consequences of their own ignorance and neglect.
There is only one way in which we can achieve full Democracy in this
country, and that is through Education.
In the sphere of domestic affairs, particularly in connection with social
and industrial questions, the people have slowly realised this hard truth.
After a generation or more of attempts and failures and disillusionments
many thousands of workpeople have learnt the lesson that power without
knowledge is not power at all, and that knowledge, whether for public
affairs or for any other purpose, cannot be gained without effort and
discipline. They have come to realise that Democracy needs, for its full
working, not only schools in which to train its young, but also—what
no Democracy save those of the ancient world has ever possessed—such
facilities for the education for its adult citizens, engaged in the active
work of the community, as will enable them to maintain unimpaired their
intellectual freshness and vigour, and to face with wisdom and courage the
problems for which, as citizens, they have assumed responsibility. They
have come to think of Education, not as a time of tutelage or training, but
as a part of active life itself, woven of the same texture and concerned
with the same issues, as being, in fact, the effort to understand the world
in which they live. But they have naturally tended to confine those issues
within the limits of their own domestic interests and experience. They
are called upon now to widen their horizon, and to apply the democratic
conception of education to the new problems which have arisen owing to the
part which Great Britain is now playing in the affairs of Europe.
It is never easy to think things out clearly and coldly. But it is hardest
of all in the crisis of a great war, when men's minds are blurred by
passionate emotions of sorrow, anxiety, and indignation. Hence a time of
war is the heyday of fallacies and delusions, of misleading hopes and
premature disillusionments: men tend to live in an unreal world of phrases
and catchwords. Yet never is it more necessary than at such a period, in
the old Greek phrase, "to follow the argument whithersoe'er it leads,"
to look facts squarely in the face, and, particularly, the great ugly
outstanding fact of war itself, the survival of which democrats, especially
in Great Britain and the United States, have of recent years been so
greatly tempted to ignore.
People speak as if war were a new sudden and terrible phenomenon. There is
nothing new about the fact of war. What is new about this war is the scale
on which it is waged, the science and skill expended on it, and the fact
that it is being carried on by national armies, numbering millions, instead
of by professional bodies of soldiers. But war itself is as old as the
world: and if it surprises and shocks us this is due to our own blindness.
There are only two ways of settling disputes between nations, by law or
by war. As there is as yet no World-State, with the power to enforce
a World-law between the nations, the possibility of war, with all its
contingent horrors, should have been before our eyes all the time. The
occasion of this war was no doubt a surprise. But that it could happen at
all should not be a surprise to us, still less a disillusionment. It does
not mark a backward step in human civilisation. It only registers the
fact that civilisation is still grievously incomplete and unconsolidated.
Terrible as this war is in its effect on individual lives and happiness, it
ought not to depress us—even if, in our blindness, we imagined the world
to be a far better organised place than it actually is. The fact that many
of the combatants regard war as an anachronism adds to the tragedy, but
also to the hope, of the struggle. It shows that civilised opinion is
gathering strength for that deepening and extension of the meaning and
range of citizenship which alone can make war between the nations of the
world as obsolete as it has become between the nations of the British
Empire or between the component parts of the United States.
It was perhaps inevitable that British citizens in particular, removed from
the storm centres of Continental Europe, and never very logical in their
thinking, should have failed to realise the possibility of another great
war, similar to the Napoleonic struggle of a hundred years ago. For nearly
half a century the great European States had been at peace: and we had come
to look upon their condition, and the attachment of their peoples, as being
as ancient and as stable as our own. We had grown used to the map of Europe
as it had been left by the great convulsions between 1848 and 1871. Upon
the basis of that map and of the governments represented on it, and in
response to the growing needs of the world as a whole, we had embarked on
every kind of international co-operation and cosmopolitan effort. The Hague
Congress, convened by the Tsar of Russia, looked forward to the day when
war, and the causes of war, should be obsolete. The Socialist Movement, a
growing force in all industrial communities, stood for the same ideal, and
for the international comradeship of the working class. Law and medicine,
science and scholarship followed suit; and every summer, in quest of
health and change, thousands of plain citizens have crossed international
frontiers with scarcely greater sense of change than in moving from
province to province in a single State. Commerce and industry, the greatest
material forces of our time, have become inextricably international, and
in the palpable injury in which a war would involve them some thinkers
of clear but limited vision saw the best hope of averting a European
conflagration.
And yet, throughout these two generations of economic and social
development, the fear of war has never been absent from the mind of Europe.
Her emperors and statesmen have talked of peace; but they have prepared for
war, more skilfully and more persistently than ever before in the history
of Europe or of the world. Almost the entire manhood of every European
nation but England has been trained to arms; and the annual war budget of
Europe rose, in time of peace, to over 300 million pounds. The States of
Europe, each afraid to stand alone against a coalition of possible rivals,
formed themselves into opposing groups; and each of the groups armed
feverishly against the other, fearful lest, by any change in the diplomatic
or political situation, they might be caught unawares and suffer loss.
Thus, it ought not to have surprised us that finally, through the accident
of a royal murder, the spark should be fired and the explosion ensue,
and that merchants and manufacturers, propagandists and philanthropists,
scholars and scientists, should find the ground shaken beneath their
feet and the projects patiently built up through years of international
co-operation shattered by the events of a few days.
Now that the war has come it is easy to see that they were mistaken. They
had built up the structure of a cosmopolitan society without looking to
the foundations. The economic activities of mankind have indeed brought a
World-Society and a World-Industry into being; but its political analogue,
a World-State, can only be formed, not through the co-operation of
individuals or groups of individuals, but through the union of nations and
the federation of national governments. The first task of our time for
Europe, as we shall try to show in the next chapter, is to lay firm the
foundations of those nations by carrying to victory the twin principles of
Nationality and Democracy—to secure that the peoples of Europe shall be
enabled to have governments corresponding to their national needs and
responsible to their own control, and to build up, under the care
and protection of those governments, the social institutions and the
civilisation of their choice. So long as there are peoples in Europe under
alien governments, curtailed in the use of their own language,[1] in the
propagation of their literature and ideas, in their social intercourse, in
their corporate life, in all that we in Great Britain understand by civil
liberty, so long will there be men who will mock at the very idea of
international peace, and look forward to war, not as an outworn instrument
of a barbarous age, but as a means to national freedom and self-expression.
Englishmen sometimes forget that there are worse evils than open war, both
in political and industrial relations, and that the political causes for
which their fathers fought and died have still to be carried to victory on
the Continent. Nationality and their national institutions are the very
life-blood of English people. They are as natural to them as the air
they breathe. That is what makes it sometimes so difficult for them to
understand, as the history of Ireland and even of Ulster shows, what
nationality means to other peoples. And that is why they have not realised,
not only that there are peoples in Europe living under alien governments,
but that there are governments in Europe so foolish as to think that men
and women deprived of their national institutions, humiliated in their
deepest feelings, and forced into an alien mould, can make good citizens,
trustworthy soldiers, or even obedient subjects.
[Footnote 1: The German official communiqué on August 26, 1914, reports
as follows: "All the newspapers in Belgium, with the exception of those in
Antwerp, are printed in the German language." This, of course, is on the
model of the Prussian administration of Poland. The Magyars are more
repressive even than the Germans. See the bibliography given in General
Books below.]
The political causes of the present war, then, and of the half century
of Armed Peace which preceded it are to be found, not in the particular
schemes and ambitions of any of the governments of Europe, nor in their
secret diplomacy, nor in the machinations of the great armament interests
allied to them, sinister though all these may have been, but in the nature
of some of those governments themselves, and in their relation to the
peoples over whom they rule.
"If it were possible," writes Prince Büllow, who directed German policy
as Imperial Chancellor from 1900 to 1909, "for members of different
nationalities, with different language and customs, and an intellectual
life of a different kind, to live side by side in one and the same State,
without succumbing to the temptation of each trying to force his own
nationality on the other, things on earth would look a good deal more
peaceful. But it is a law of life and development in history that where
two national civilisations meet they fight for ascendancy. In the struggle
between nationalities one nation is the hammer and the other the anvil; one
is the victor and the other the vanquished."[1] No words could indicate
more clearly the cause that is at stake in the present war. They show us
that there are still governments in Europe so ignorant as to believe that
the different nationalities of mankind are necessarily hostile to one
another, and so foolish and brutal as to think that national civilisation,
or, as the German Professors call it, "culture," can and indeed must be
propagated by the sword. It is this extraordinary conception which is at
the back of protests like that of Professor Haeckel and Professor Eucken
(men whom, in the field of their own studies, all Europe is proud to
honour) against "England fighting with a half-Asiatic power against
Germanism."[2]
[Footnote 1: Imperial Germany, by Prince Bernhard von Bülow, English
translation, 1st ed. pp. 245-6 (London, 1914).]
[Footnote 2: Protest of Professors Ernst Haeckel and Rudolf Eucken of Jena,
quoted in The Times from the Vossische Zeitung of August 20, 1914.]
There are not only half-Asiatics, there are real Asiatics side by side with
England; and England is not ashamed of it. For she does not reckon the
culture of Europe as higher than the culture of Asia, or regard herself as
the hammer upon the anvil of India.
Prince Bülow's words, and the theory of policy underlying them, really go
to the root of the whole trouble in European politics. They explain
the Balance of Power, the competition in armaments, the belief in the
inevitability and the moral value of war, and all those common European
shibboleths which seem so inexplicable to citizens of the more
modern-minded States and communities of the world. Why should Germany and
Austria arm against France and Russia when Canada does not arm against
the United States? Why should a Balance of Power be necessary to the
maintenance of European Peace when we do not consider the preponderance
of a single Power, such as the United States in North, Central and South
America, or Great Britain in the Pacific or Southern Asia dangerous to the
peace of the whole world? Why, finally, to press Prince Bülow's logic home,
if members of different nationalities cannot live side by side without
playing the game of Hammer and Anvil together, are not the English spending
the whole of their energy fighting the Welsh, the Scotch, and the Irish in
the United Kingdom, the Dutch in South Africa, and the French in Canada,
not to speak of the Jews in every part of the British Empire? The fact is
that the statesmen of Germany and Austria-Hungary, and of Russia also, have
missed the chief lesson of recent history and politics: that in the growing
complexity of world-relations power is falling more and more, of necessity,
into the hands of States which are not Nations but Commonwealths of
Nations, States composed, like the British Empire and the United States, of
a variety of nationalities and "cultures," living peacefully, each with its
own institutions, under a single law and a single central government.
But the time is not ripe yet for a Commonwealth of Europe. The peoples of
Europe have yet to win their liberties before they can be free to dream of
a United States of Europe. So long as the Emperors and statesmen of Central
Europe believe, like the Mahomedans of old, that propaganda can be imposed
by the sword, they can only be met by the sword, and controlled by the
sword. Not till they have been conquered and rendered harmless, or
displaced by the better mind of the peoples whom they have indoctrinated,
can Europe proceed along the natural course of her development.
So far we have been concerned—as we shall be concerned throughout this
book—with the political causes underlying the war. But it would not be
right to ignore the fact that there are other deeper causes, unconnected
with the actions of governments, for which we in this country are jointly
responsible with the rest of the civilised world.
This war is not simply a conflict between governments and nations for the
attainment of certain political ends, Freedom and Nationality on the one
side and Conquest and Tyranny on the other. It is also a great outburst
of pent-up feeling, breaking like lava through the thin crust of European
civilisation. On the political side, as we have said just now, the war
reveals the fact that civilisation is still incomplete and ill-organised.
But on the moral side it reveals the fact that modern society has broken
down, that the forces and passions that divide and embitter mankind have
proved stronger, at the moment of strain, than those which bind them
together in fellowship and co-operation. "What we are suffering from,"
says one of the greatest of living democrats,[1] "is something far more
widespread than the German Empire. Is it not the case that what we are in
face of is nothing less than the breakdown in a certain idea and hope of
civilisation, which was associated with the liberal and industrial movement
of the last century? There was to be an inevitable and glorious progress
of humanity of which science, commerce, and education were to be the main
instruments, and which was to be crowned with a universal peace. Older
prophets like Thomas Carlyle expressed their contempt for the shallowness
of this prevailing ideal, and during this century we have been becoming
more and more doubtful of its value. But we are now witnessing its
downfall. Science, commerce, and education have done, and can do, much for
us. But they cannot expel the human spirit from human nature. What is
that? At bottom, love of self, self-interest, selfishness individual and
corporate. As a theory, the philosophy of selfishness has often been
exposed. But, to an extent that is difficult to exaggerate, it has been the
motive, acknowledged and relied upon without shame or apology in commerce,
in politics and in practical life. Our civilisation has been based on
selfishness, our commerce on competition and the unrestricted love of
wealth, our education on the motive of self-advancement. And science and
knowledge, made the instrument of selfishness and competition, have armed
man against man, class against class, and nation against nation, with
tenfold the power of destruction which belonged to a less educated and
highly organised age."
[Footnote 1: The War and the Church, by Charles Gore (Oxford, Mowbray,
1914).]
The civilised world has been shocked during the past months at the
spectacle of the open adoption by a great Power of this philosophy
of selfishness. Men had not realised that the methods and principles
underlying so much of our commercial and industrial life could be
transferred so completely to the field of politics or so ruthlessly pressed
home by military force. But it is well for us to remember that it is not
Prussia, even in the modern world, who invented the theory of Blood and
Iron or the philosophy of Force. The Iron Law of Wages is a generation
older than Bismarck: and "Business is Business" can be no less odious a
watchword than "War is War." Treitschke and Nietzsche may have furnished
Prussian ambitions with congenial ammunition; but Bentham with his purely
selfish interpretation of human nature and Marx with his doctrine of the
class-struggle—the high priest of Individualism and the high priest of
Socialism—cannot be acquitted of a similar charge. If the appeal has been
made in a less crude and brutal form, and if the instrument of domination
has been commercial and industrial rather than military, it is because
Militarism is not the besetting sin of the English-speaking peoples. Let
us beware, therefore, at this moment, of anything savouring of
self-righteousness.
"Some of us," says Bishop Gore, "see the chief security" against
this disease which has infected our civilisation "in the progress of
Democracy—the government of the people really by the people and for the
people. I am one of those who believe this and desire to serve towards the
realising of this end. But the answer does not satisfy me. I do not know
what evils we might find arising from a world of materialistic democracies.
But I am sure we shall not banish the evil spirits which destroy human
lives and nations and civilisations by any mere change in the methods
of government. Nothing can save civilisation except a new spirit in the
nations."
The task before Europe, then, is a double one—a task of development and
construction in the region of politics, and of purification and conversion
in the region of the spirit. "For the finer spirits of Europe," says the
great French writer, Romain Rolland, who is none the less a patriot because
he is also a lover of Germany, "there are two dwelling-places: our earthly
fatherland, and that other, the City of God. Of the one we are the guests,
of the other the builders. To the one let us give our lives and our
faithful hearts; but neither family, friend, nor fatherland, nor aught that
we love has power over the spirit which is the light. It is our duty to
rise above tempests and thrust aside the clouds which threaten to obscure
it; to build higher and stronger, dominating the injustice and hatred of
nations, the walls of that city wherein the souls, of the whole world may
assemble."[1]
[Footnote 1: Article in the Journal de Genève, translated in the
Cambridge Magazine and reprinted in Public Opinion, Nov. 27, 1914.
Those who hold that Christianity and war are incompatible would seem to be
committed to a monastic and passively anarchist view of life, inconsistent
with membership in a political society. But whatever the relation between
Christianity and war, there can be no question of the relation between
Christianity and hatred. Hatred (which is not the same thing as moral
indignation) is a poison which corrodes and embitters, and so degrades, and
thereby weakens, the national spirit. It is a pity that some of our most
prominent newspaper-proprietors do not understand this.]
Internationalism as a political theory has broken down: for it was based on
a false conception of the nature of government and of the obligations of
citizenship. The true internationalism—a spirit of mutual understanding
and fellowship between men and nations, to replace the suspicions, the
competition, and the watchful selfishness of the past generation—is the
moral task that lies before Europe and America to-day. If Great Britain is
to lead the way in promoting "a new spirit between the nations" she needs a
new spirit also in the whole range of her corporate life. For what Britain
stands for in the world is, in the long run, what Britain is, and, when
thousands are dying for her, it is more than ever the duty of all of us to
try to make her worthier of their devotion.
  Europe, what of the night?—

    Ask of heaven, and the sea,

    And my babes on the bosom of me,

  Nations of mine, but ungrown.

  There is one who shall surely requite

  All that endure or that err:

  She can answer alone:

    Ask not of me, but of her.

  Liberty, what of the night?—

    I feel not the red rains fall,

    Hear not the tempest at all,

  Nor thunder in heaven any more.

  All the distance is white

    With the soundless feet of the sun.

  Night, with the woes that it wore,

    Night is over and done.

            A.C. SWINBURNE, A Watch in the Night.
Sixty-two years ago reaction reigned supreme in Europe after the great
national and social uprisings of 1848, and England looked on passively
while the hopes of freedom were crushed in Bohemia, Hungary, and Italy.
Mazzini, the noblest of Italian patriots, the most prophetic soul among
nineteenth-century nationalists, selected this moment of profound despair
to publish an essay, entitled Europe, Its Condition and Prospects, which,
burning with the passion of an inextinguishable faith, pierced the veil of
the future and foreshadowed in an almost miraculous fashion the situation
which faces Europe and England to-day. Nothing printed in this country
since the war broke out expresses more clearly the real issues of the
mighty conflict and the part our country is called to play in it than the
following words, in reference to the unredeemed peoples of Europe, uttered
by the great Italian more than half a century ago:
"They struggled, they still struggle, for country and liberty; for a word
inscribed upon a banner, proclaiming to the world that they also live,
think, love, and labour for the benefit of all. They speak the same
language, they bear about them the impress of consanguinity, they kneel
beside the same tombs, they glory in the same tradition; and they demand to
associate freely, without obstacles, without foreign domination, in order
to elaborate and express their idea, to contribute their stone also to the
great pyramid of history. It is something moral which they are seeking;
and this moral something is in fact, even politically speaking, the most
important question in the present state of things. It is the organisation
of the European task. In principle, nationality ought to be to humanity
that which division of labour is in a workshop—the recognised symbol of
association; the assertion of the individuality of a human group called by
its geographical position, its traditions, and its language, to fulfill a
special function in the European work of civilisation.
"The map of Europe has to be re-made. This is the key to the present
movement; herein lies its initiative. Before acting, the instrument for
action must be organised; before building, the ground must be one's own.
The social idea cannot be realised under any form whatsoever before this
reorganisation of Europe is effected; before the peoples are free to
interrogate themselves, to express their vocation, and to assure its
accomplishment by an alliance capable of substituting itself for the
absolute league which now reigns supreme.
"If England persist in maintaining a neutral, passive, selfish part, she
will have to expiate it. A European transformation is inevitable. When it
shall take place, when the struggle shall burst forth at twenty places at
once, when the old combat between fact and right is decided, the peoples
will remember that England stood by, an inert, immovable, sceptical witness
of their sufferings and efforts. The nation must rouse herself and shake
off the torpor of her government. She must learn that we have arrived at
one of those supreme moments in which one world is destroyed and another
is to be created; in which, for the sake of others and for her own, it is
necessary to adopt a new policy."
England to-day has adopted this "new policy"; she has responded to
Mazzini's appeal by stepping into the arena and declaring herself ready to
take part in "the organisation of the European task"; her sons are dying on
the Continent in defence of the principle of nationality, in support of
the rights of other nations to that liberty which her insular position has
secured for herself for many centuries, the liberty "to associate freely,
without obstacles, without foreign domination, in order to elaborate and
express their idea." She is fighting, moreover, not only on behalf of the
threatened freedom of Belgium, France, and Serbia, on behalf of the
unborn freedom of Poland, Alsace-Lorraine, and the subject races of the
Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires, but also on her own behalf. It is not
merely that she recognises that her Empire is in danger; she recognises
also that she is unable to work out her own salvation, unable to carry on
her industrial development and her schemes for the betterment of her people
in security, while the Continent at her doors remains in constant peril
of change. "The social idea cannot be realised under any form whatsoever
before this reorganisation of Europe is effected."
§1. Nation and Nationality.—The social idea and the national idea have
been for a century past the twin pivots of European development. The
political structure of the Continent has oscillated this way and that
according as these ideas have in turn assumed ascendancy over men's minds;
and when, as in 1848, both claimed attention at the same time, the whole
edifice was shaken to its very foundations. In England, on the other hand,
it is the social idea alone which has been a motive force in the nineteenth
century, although she has always had to reckon with the national idea
across the St. George's Channel. Owing to her fortunate geographical
situation, she acquired national unity many centuries ago and has always
been able to defend it successfully against the danger of external
aggression. The national idea, therefore, has long ceased to be an
aspiration, and consequently a revolutionary force, among us; it has
been realised in actual fact, we have grown as accustomed to it and as
unconscious of it as of the air we breathe. Thus Englishmen, as their
attitude towards Ireland has shown, find it difficult to understand exactly
what the principle of nationality means to those who have never possessed
national freedom or are in constant danger of losing it. This is perhaps
especially true of the English working classes, who grew to the full
stature of political consciousness some fifty years after the last serious
threat to our national existence was made by Napoleon, and upon whom the
burden of the social idea presses with peculiar weight. And yet, unless
the significance of the principle of nationality and the part which it has
played in the history of modern Europe be realised, it is impossible to
enter fully into the true meaning of the present tremendous conflict.
What then is nationality? The question is more difficult to answer than
appears at first sight. A nationality is not quite the same thing as a
nation. For example, there is a German nation, ruled by the Kaiser
Wilhelm II., but this does not include twelve million people of German
nationality who are the subjects of the Emperor of Austria; or again,
there is the Swiss nation, which is made up of no less than three distinct
nationalities. Still less are the terms state and nationality synonymous;
for, if they were, then the natives of India might claim to be of the same
nationality as ourselves, or, vice versa, the United States would be
regarded as part of the British Empire because a large proportion of their
inhabitants happen to be of British descent. The word "race" brings us
somewhat nearer to the point, but even this will not satisfy us when we
remember that the Slavonic race, for example, consists of a large number of
nationalities, such as the Russians, the Poles, the Czechs, the Serbs, the
Montenegrins, etc., or that the English (as distinguished from the other
three nations of the United Kingdom) belong to the same Teutonic race as
the Germans. Nevertheless, a belief, whether well grounded or not, in
a common racial origin is one of the root principles of the idea of
nationality.
"What is a nation?" the great Magyar nationalist, Kossuth, asked a Serb
representative at the Hungarian Diet of 1848. The reply was: "A race
which possesses its own language, customs, and culture, and enough
self-consciousness to preserve them." "A nation must also have its own
government," objected Kossuth. "We do not go so far," explained his
interlocutor; "one nation can live under several different governments, and
again several nations can form a single state."[1] Both the Magyar and the
Serb wore right, though the latter was speaking of "nationality" and the
former of "nation." The conversation is in fact instructive in more
ways than one. It would be difficult to find a better definition of
nationality than that given by the Serb speaker. A common language, a
common culture, and common customs: these are the outward and visible signs
which make a people conscious of its common race, which make it, in other
words, a nationality.
[Footnote 1: R.W. Seton-Watson, The Southern Slav Question, p. 46.]
The element of "consciousness" is all-important. There are, for example,
members of the Finnish race scattered all over northern Russia, but they
evince no consciousness of any kind that they are allied to the nationality
which inhabits the country of Finland. Again, it is only within recent
years that the Serbs and the Croats in the south-west corner of the
Austro-Hungarian Empire have begun to realise that the only things
which divide them one from the other are a difference of religion and a
difference of alphabet; and now that the realisation of this fact has
spread from the study to the market-place, we see the formation of a new
nationality, that of the Serbo-Croats. The researches of historians and
other learned men have done an immense deal to stimulate the development of
nationalities during the past century, but they are unable of themselves
to create them. The fact of kinship is not enough; community of language,
customs, and culture is not even enough; to be a real nationality a people
must be conscious of all these things, and not merely conscious, but
sufficiently conscious to preserve them and, if need be, to die for them.
Now the interesting thing for us about a nationality is that it is always
striving to become a nation. A nation, as we have seen, may be composed
of several nationalities; but such cases are rare, and are due to peculiar
geographical conditions, as for example in Switzerland and Great Britain,
or to external pressure, as in Belgium, which have as it were welded
together the different racial elements into a single whole. In general,
therefore, a nation is simply a nationality which has acquired
self-government; it is nationality plus State. "Ireland a nation," the
warcry of the Irish Nationalist party, is a claim, not a statement of
fact; Ireland will become a nation when its desire for self-government
is satisfied. The case is instructive because it shows that it is not
necessary for a nationality to become a sovereign State in order to be in
the full sense of the word a nation. It is perfectly possible, as our Serb
remarked, for several nations to form a single sovereign state; but as a
general rule all such nations will be allowed to manage their own internal
affairs. The self-governing Dominions of the British Empire and the Magyars
of Hungary are nations, though they are subordinate to their respective
imperial governments in questions of peace and war, treaty obligations,
etc.
The real test of national existence is ultimately a sentimental one. Does
the nationality inhabiting a given country regard the government under
which it lives as a true expression of its peculiar genius and will? Does
the State, of which it forms a part, exist by its consent, or has it been
imposed upon it by some alien authority or nationality? Is it a territorial
unity, or has it been split up into sections by artificial frontiers? All
these questions must be answered before we can say of any nationality that
it is also a nation. The "national idea," therefore, which has been one of
the chief factors in modern history, is essentially an idea of development.
Its root is the conception of nationality, that is of a people consciously
united by race, language, and culture; and from this springs the larger
conception of nationhood, that is of a nationality possessing its own
political institutions, governed by its own consent, and co-extensive with
its natural boundaries. As we shall see later, political development
does not always stop at the Nation-State. Further growth, however, is
extra-national in character; it may either take the parasitical form of one
nation imposing its will and its "culture" upon other nations, or it may
assume the proportions of that highest type of polity yet known to mankind,
a commonwealth of nations freely associating together within the confines
of a single sovereign State.[1]
[Footnote 1: See Chapter IX. for further treatment of this.]
§2. The Birth of Nationalism: Poland and the French Revolution.—With
these general principles in mind let us now consider the national idea at
work in the nineteenth century. Nations, in the sense just defined, have
of course long existed in Europe. England, Scotland, and Switzerland are
nations whose life-histories date right back to the Middle Ages. Joan of
Are was a nationalist, and France has been a nation since the end of the
Hundred Years' War in 1453. Spain became a nation a few years later by the
expulsion of the Moors and the union of Castille and Aragon under Ferdinand
and Isabella. Holland, again, acquired her national freedom in her great
struggle against Spain in the sixteenth century. But it was not until the
end of the eighteenth century that nationalism became a real force in
Europe, an idea for which men died and in whose name monarchies were
overthrown. "In the old European system," writes Lord Acton, "the rights of
nationalities were neither recognised by governments nor asserted by the
people. The interest of the reigning families, not those of the nations,
regulated the frontiers, and the administration was conducted generally
without any reference to popular desires. Where all liberties were
suppressed, the claims of national independence were necessarily ignored,
and a princess, in the words of Fénelon, carried a monarchy in her wedding
portion."[1] The State was, in short, regarded as a purely territorial
affair; it was the property, the landed property, of the monarch, who in
his capacity of owner controlled the destinies of the people who happened
to live upon that territory. Conquest or marriage might unite in the hands
of a single monarch the most diverse peoples and countries, the notorious
case of the kind being that of the Emperor Charles V., who in the sixteenth
century managed to hold sway over Germany, Spain, the Netherlands, Naples,
and a large part of the New World.
[Footnote 1: History of Freedom, p. 273.]
The golden age of the dynastic principle was, however, the eighteenth
century, and the long and tedious wars of that period were nearly all
occasioned by the aggrandisement of some royal house. The idea of a nation
as a living organism, as something more than a collection of people
dwelling in the same country, speaking the same language and obeying
the same ruler, had not yet dawned upon the world. Apart from England,
Scotland, Switzerland, and Holland, no European nation had really become
conscious of its personality as distinct from that of its hereditary
monarch. And as we have seen, until nationality becomes keenly
self-conscious, the national idea remains unborn. Only some great internal
cataclysm or an overwhelming disaster inflicted by a foreign power could
evoke this consciousness in a nation; and fate ordained that the two
methods should be tried simultaneously at opposite ends of Europe. France,
"standing on the top of golden hours," and Poland, crushed, dismembered,
downtrodden—it would be difficult to say which of these contributed the
more to the great national awakening in Europe.
Poland was the first and greatest martyr of the nationalist faith. By its
constitution, which was that of an oligarchical republic with an elective
king, Poland was placed beyond the pale of a Europe ruled upon dynastic
principles. Its very existence was an insult to the accepted ideals
of legitimacy and hereditary monarchy, and it was impossible for any
particular house to acquire it in the honest way of marriage. This was
particularly annoying to its immediate neighbours, Prussia, Russia, and
Austria, all of whom had grown into great powers while Poland, torn by
internal dissension, sank lower and lower in the political scale. It is
significant that the earliest suggestion of partition came from Frederick
the Great of Prussia, who was obliged to take Russia and Austria into his
counsels, as he knew that they would never allow him to annex the whole
country himself. Indeed, from first to last, the story of the Polish
partitions is a good example of Prussian Realpolitik. At length, after
much hesitation on the part of Russia and Austria, the Powers agreed among
themselves in 1772 to what is known as the First Partition, whereby the
three monarchs enriched their respective territories by peeling, as it
were, the unfortunate republic on all its frontiers. Perhaps the most
remarkable fact about the whole disgraceful concern is that it did not
appear in the least disgraceful, either morally or politically, to the
public opinion of the age. Meanwhile Poland by a heroic effort converted
herself in self-defence into a hereditary constitutional monarchy on the
model of England. Prussia, playing the part of Judas, pretended to welcome
these reforms at first and lent the Poles its encouragement; but when
Russia took up arms on behalf of the Polish reactionary party, and the
country turned to Prussia to aid it in defending the constitution, the
treacherous Frederick William not only declined to do so, but began to
send his troops to occupy Polish territory. The upshot was the further
dismemberment of Poland known as the Second Partition (1793). "No sophistry
in the world," writes Mr. Nisbet Bain, "can extenuate the villainy of the
Second Partition. The theft of territory is its least offensive feature. It
is the forcible suppression of a national movement of reform, the hurling
back into the abyss of anarchy and corruption of a people who, by
incredible efforts and sacrifices, had struggled back to liberty and order,
which makes this great political crime so wholly infamous. Yet here again
the methods of the Russian Empress were less vile than those of the
Prussian King. Catherine openly took the risk of a bandit who attacks an
enemy against whom he has a grudge; Frederick William II. came up, when the
fight was over, to help pillage a victim whom he had sworn to defend."[1]
After this the end came rapidly. The heroic patriot Kosciuszko headed a
popular rising against Russia; but after a remarkable resistance to the
combined forces of the three partitioning powers, the insurrection was
finally suppressed in torrents of blood. The crowned bandits nearly
quarrelled between themselves over the booty, but eventually in 1795
Austria, Russia, and Prussia signed a treaty which left nothing of Poland
on the map at all.
[Footnote 1: Slavonic Europe, p. 404.]
The effect upon the subsequent history of the world of this crime against
humanity, carried out by the three most absolute dynasties in Europe, was
incalculable. "The annihilation of the Polish nationality has probably
done more to endanger the monarchies of Europe than any one political act
accomplished since the monarchies of Europe were first founded. To trace
its effects in all their various ramifications would lead us a long way.
It is sufficient here to notice that the destruction of Poland, like the
destruction of Jerusalem, produced a "dispersion," and that as the Jews
of the dispersion have discharged a peculiar office in the economy of the
world as usurers and financiers, so, too, have the Poles of the dispersion
as agents and vectors of revolution. In all the republican movements of the
Continent the Poles have taken a leading part. They are to be found in
the Saxon riots of '48; in the Berlin barricades; in the struggle for the
Republic in Baden; in the Italian and Hungarian wars of liberation; in
the Chartist movement, and in the French Commune. Homeless and fearless,
schooled in war and made reckless by calamity, they have been the nerve
of revolution wherever they have been scattered by the winds of
misfortune."[1] And what Mr. Fisher, in this passage, puts in a concrete
fashion, Lord Acton has expressed with equal emphasis, if more abstractly.
"This famous measure," he writes of the final partition, "the most
revolutionary act of the old absolutism, awakened the theory of nationality
in Europe, converting a dormant right into an aspiration, and a sentiment
into a political claim. 'No wise or honest man,' wrote Edmund Burke, 'can
approve of that partition, or can contemplate it without prognosticating
great mischief from it to all countries at some future date.' Thenceforward
there was a nation demanding to be united in a State—a soul, as it were,
wandering in search of a body in which to begin life over again; and
for the first time a cry was heard that the arrangement of States was
unjust—that their limits were unnatural, and that a whole people was
deprived of its right to constitute an independent community. Before that
claim could be efficiently asserted against the overwhelming power of its
opponents—before it gained energy, after the last partition, to overcome
the influence of long habits of submission, and of the contempt which
previous disorders had brought upon Poland—the ancient European system was
in ruins, and a new world was rising in its place."[2]
[Footnote 1: The Republican Tradition in Europe, pp. 212-213.]
[Footnote 2: History of Freedom, p. 276.]
[Illustration: Present State Boundaries—THE PARTITION OF POLAND.]
The last sentence reminds us that, while in the East the dynastic principle
was displaying with cynical indifference its true character to the world,
events were occurring in the West which threatened to shake its very
foundations. If Poland was the first martyr of the national idea,
Revolutionary France was its first evangelist, for the new gospel which
France preached was the gospel of Liberty, and nationalism is an extension,
a variant of this gospel. In France itself, at the time of the
Revolution, the doctrine of Liberty was interpreted in its individual and
constitutional sense, which involved the abolition of class privileges
and of political institutions that conflicted with or did not adequately
express what Rousseau called the "general will." There was no national
question to be settled in France, and she could therefore devote herself
exclusively to the development of the "social idea," the establishment of
democratic government, the foundation of a republic, and in general the
determination of what should be the relations between the individual and
the State, a question which in course of time led on to the problem of
Socialism.
But indirectly the French Revolution did an enormous deal to promote the
national idea in Europe. In the first place, the execution of Louis XVI.
and the proclamation of the Republic administered a blow to the theory of
legitimacy upon which the dynastic principle rested, from which it never
recovered. If the French nation could rise and abolish its native dynasty,
was there not hope that some day the Italian, Hungarian, and Polish nations
might also rise and throw off the still more objectionable yoke of their
foreign rulers? In the second place, the Revolution in and for itself
produced a tremendous effect upon the rest of Europe, and in every country
men awoke from the long sleep of feudalism to the desire of sweeping away
antiquated constitutions and rebuilding them upon a democratic basis.
It is, however, sufficient to glance at a map of Europe at the end of the
eighteenth century to see why these dreams could not be at once realised.
Of what real value were ideals of democratic reform to the peoples dwelling
in Italy, Germany, or the Austrian Empire? Look, for example, at Germany,
split up like a jig-saw puzzle into over three hundred different States,
each with its petty prince or grand-duke. Her poets and philosophers might
sing of liberty and dream Utopian dreams, and here and there an experiment
in popular government might be tried by some princeling who had caught
the liberal fashion; but her political fabric, together with the rivalry
between Prussia and Austria, kept her disunited and strangled all real
hopes of reform. In short, the first and most crying need of Europe was not
the abolition of antiquated constitutions, but the redrawing of anomalous
frontiers.
The doctrine of the sovereignty of the people proclaimed in France
presupposed the doctrine of the solidarity of the people proclaimed by the
dismembered nations of Europe. France could set its house in order; but
Belgium, Germany, Italy, Bohemia, Hungary, etc., had as yet no house of
their own. The house had to be built before it could be furnished on the
latest democratic lines; and before it could be even built, the ground had
to be wrested from the hands of absentee landlords or cleared of the little
dynastic State-shanties which cumbered it. The Polish nationalists became
the backbone of the republican movement in Europe; the French republicans
proclaimed the independence of nations as one of their cardinal principles.
Thus the social idea and the national idea were originally intimately
connected. They were the twin children of Poland and the French Revolution,
and in their cradle it was hard to tell them apart, so strongly were the
features of each stamped with the likeness of Liberty.
For a time it seemed that the new ideas would carry all before them. Even
before France had herself abolished the monarchy, Belgium threw off the
Austrian rule and declared for a republic. And when in 1792 France found
herself at war with the Austrian and Prussian governments, and in the
following year with practically all the governments of Europe, her
victorious armies were everywhere greeted as saviours by the subject
peoples. But the old dynastic states proved to be of tougher material than
was expected. Moreover, it was not long before France found herself in
conflict with the national aspirations which she had called into existence.
The various republics which France set up all over Europe soon discovered
that they were nothing but tributary states of their "deliverer"; and when
Napoleon began his career of undisguised conquest, he unwittingly did even
more than the Revolution to strengthen the national idea in Europe, for the
nationalities had now become thoroughly hostile to France and fought in
alliance with their old dynasties to throw off the yoke of the hated
foreign tyrant.
This strange change in France from liberator to despot is worthy of some
attention. It is not good for a nation, any more than for an individual,
to be too successful. Moreover, the doctrine of liberty, whether in the
individualist or nationalist sense, if carried to extreme, is liable to
abuse. All to-day are aware that sheer individualism in the economic sphere
is an almost unmitigated evil; sheer individualism in the political sphere
and sheer nationalism are equally evil. France at the beginning of last
century was suffering from too much success, too much political liberty,
too much nationalism. Having overthrown the old régime within the State
quickly and easily, she began to think she could do without the State
altogether: the result was anarchy, for which the only remedy is despotism.
Having, again, suddenly become conscious of her power and mission as a
nation, she began to send her armies across her frontiers to carry the
gospel of her peculiar "culture" to other and more benighted nations: the
result was occupation, which degenerated into conquest. Despotism within
and conquest without, both being summed up in the one word Napoleon—such
was the fate of the Mother of Liberty, who had loved her child "not
wisely but too well." Yet Napoleonism was a very necessary stage in the
development of modern Europe. It was the tramp of the invader which
did more than anything else to awake sleeping nationalism all over the
Continent; it was before the roar of Napoleon's cannon that the artificial
boundaries which had divided peoples crumbled to dust. Napoleon cleared the
ground, and even did something toward laying the foundations of the great
modern Nation-States, Germany and Italy. What Napoleon did for Europe at
the beginning of the nineteenth century, Germany, the Napoleon-State among
nations to-day, is doing for Europe at the beginning of the twentieth
century.
§3. The Congress of Vienna and the International Idea.—The overthrow of
Napoleon was due in a large measure to the spirit of nationalism which his
conquests had evoked against him among the various peoples of Europe; the
rewards of that overthrow, however, were reaped not by the peoples, but by
the dynasties and State-systems of the old régime. The Congress of the
Powers which met at Vienna in 1814 to resettle the map of Europe, after
the upheavals and wars of the previous twenty-five years, was a terrible
disappointment; and we, who are now hopefully looking forward to a similar
Congress at the end of the present war, cannot do better than study the
great failure of 1814, and take warning from it. The phrases which heralded
the approaching Congress were curiously and disquietingly similar to those
on the lips of our public men and journalists to-day when they speak of
the "settlement" before us. "The Parliament of Man, the Federation of the
World," which had become a remote dream when Tennyson first coined the
expression in 1842, seemed in 1814 on the eve of accomplishment. The work
of the Congress was to be no less than "the reconstruction of the moral
order," "the regeneration of the political system of Europe," the
establishment of "an enduring peace founded on a just redistribution
of political forces," the institution of an effective and a permanent
international tribunal, the encouragement of the growth of representative
institutions, and, last but not least, an arrangement between the Powers
for a gradual and systematic disarmament. "It seemed," writes Sir A.W.
Ward, "as if the states composing the European family, free once more to
take counsel together on terms of independence, were also free to determine
their own destinies."[1] The Congress of Vienna was to inaugurate a
New Era. Such of these views, however, as pointed in a democratic or
nationalistic direction represented the expectations of the peoples,
not the intentions of the crowned heads and diplomatists who met at the
Austrian capital. Among the members of the Congress the only man who at
first voiced these aspirations of the world at large was the Russian Tsar,
Alexander I., and such concessions to popular opinion as were made were due
to what the English plenipotentiary, Lord Castlereagh, described as the
"sublime mysticism and nonsense" of the Emperor.
[Footnote 1: Cambridge Modern History, vol. ix. p. 577.]
Instead, therefore, of establishing a new era, the Congress did its utmost
to restore the old one. Everything which had happened in Europe since
the outbreak of the French Revolution was regarded as a bad dream, the
principles of popular freedom and national liberty were completely ignored,
and an attempt was made to rivet again on the limbs of Europe the shackles
of the antiquated frontiers which had been struck off by the hammer of
Napoleon. Everywhere the "national idea" was trampled upon. Germany and
Italy were put back again into the eighteenth century, Austria's territory
in the latter country being largely increased; Norway was unwillingly yoked
with Sweden, and Belgium with Holland; Switzerland was made to surrender
her democratic constitution and to return to the aristocratic cantonal
system of the past; and, lastly, Poland remained dismembered.
The Allies, while fighting Napoleon, had issued the following proclamation
to the world, couched in language almost identical with that used by the
Allies who are now fighting Germany: "Nations will henceforth respect their
mutual independence; no political edifices shall henceforth be erected on
the ruins of formerly independent States; the object of the war, and of the
peace, is to secure the rights, the freedom, and the independence of
all nations."[1] The Congress of Vienna failed to redeem these pledges:
firstly, because its members had not grasped the principle of nationality,
and used "nation" and "State" as if they were synonymous terms; secondly,
because they did not represent the peoples whose destinies they took it
upon them to determine, and made no attempt whatever to consult the
views of the various masses of population which they parcelled out among
themselves like so much butter. They honestly tried to lay the foundations
of a permanent peace; but their method of doing so was not to satisfy the
natural aspirations of the European nations and so leave them nothing to
fight about, but to establish such an exact equipoise among the great
States, by a nice distribution of the aforesaid butter in their respective
scales, that they would be afraid to go to war with each other, lest they
might upset the so-called "balance of power." The "settlement" of 1814,
therefore, left a heritage of future trouble behind it which has kept
Europe disturbed throughout the nineteenth century, and is directly
responsible for the present war. The real settlement is yet to come; and if
we of this generation are to make it a final one we must avoid the errors
committed by the Congress of a hundred years ago.
[Footnote 1: Alison Phillips, Modern Europe, p. 8.]
Yet, when all is said, the Congress of Vienna represents an important
milestone along the road of progress. It is a great precedent. As a
disillusioned contemporary admitted, it "prepared the world for a more
complete political structure; if ever the powers should meet again to
establish a political system by which wars of conquest would be rendered
impossible and the rights of all guaranteed, the Congress of Vienna, as
a preparatory assembly, will not have been without use."[1] There is a
prophetic ring about this, very welcome to us of the twentieth century.
We cannot think altogether unkindly of our great-grandfathers' ill-judged
attempt to avert the calamity which has now broken over us.
[Footnote 1: Friedrich von Gentz, quoted in Camb. Mod. Hist. vol. x. p.
2.]
Nor was the Congress altogether barren of positive result; for it gave
birth to that conception of a "Confederation of Europe," which, though
never realised, has been one of the guiding ideas of nineteenth-century
politics. As this solution of the world's problems is likely to be urged
upon us with great insistency at the conclusion of the present war, it will
be well to look a little more closely into it and to see why it failed to
secure the allegiance of Europe a hundred years ago. The Congress had met
at Vienna and settled all outstanding questions, to the satisfaction of
its members; why should it not meet periodically, and constitute itself
a supreme international tribunal? The question had only to be asked to
receive the approbation of all concerned. The dreamer, Alexander I., at
once saw the destinies of the world entrusted to a Holy Alliance, which
would rule according to "the sacred principles of the Christian religion";
and even the more practical mind of Castlereagh conceived that a council of
the great powers, "endowed with the efficiency and almost the simplicity of
a single State," was a possibility.
Yet, it is quite clear to-day that, at that time and under those
conditions, the establishment of a permanent and effective Confederation of
Europe would have proved disastrous to the world. The Congress of Vienna
was followed by further congresses in 1818, 1819, 1820, and 1822; and each
succeeding conference revealed to Europe more clearly the true character
of the new authority into whose hands the power was slipping. Certain very
dangerous tendencies became, for example, apparent. The first conference
had assembled to confer the blessings of order upon a continent ravaged by
the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars of France. Hence the Confederation of
Europe started life as a kind of anti-Jacobin society, whose main business
it was to suppress revolution, whether it took the nationalistic or
democratic form. Furthermore, the interference with the internal affairs of
France in 1814 and 1815 tended to establish a precedent for interference
with the internal affairs of any country. The Holy Alliance, therefore,
soon assumed the character of a "Trust" of absolute monarchs, determined
to aid each other when threatened by risings or agitations among their
peoples, and to crush liberal aspirations wherever they were to be found in
other parts of Europe. The popular desire for peace was exploited in the
interests of unpopular government; settlement by conference in regard
to international matters was extended to settlement by a cabal of
irresponsible crowned heads in regard to internal constitutional and
national questions; a clique of despots threatened the liberties of the
world and proposed to back up their decisions by using their armies as
police. One government, however, even in that period of reaction, refused
to lend its countenance to such proceedings. England at first protested and
at length took up an attitude of complete opposition, and it is due to her
that the Confederation never became really effective. She had to choose
between peace and liberty, and she chose the latter.[1]
[Footnote 1: See Alison Phillips, The Confederation of Europe, together
with his chapter on "The Congresses, 1815-1822" in vol. x. of the
Cambridge Modern History. The whole subject of the Concert of Europe,
which can only be touched upon here, is of great importance. It is again
referred to in Chap. VIII.; see pp. 374 ff.]
The truth is that there were three ideas in the air at the beginning of the
nineteenth century, all excellent in themselves, but quite impossible to be
realised at one and the same period. Two of these, the social or democratic
idea and the national idea, were made, as we have seen, living issues by
the French Revolution; the third, which may be called the international
idea, was raised by the Congress of Vienna. It was an old idea, of course,
for it had been embodied in that shadowy "Holy Roman Empire" which was the
medieval dream of Rome the Great; but its form was new, and now for the
first time it became a dream of the future rather than a dream of the past.
What men did not see then, and still for the most part fail to see, is that
the human race can only work out these three ideas properly in a certain
order. Democracy and nationhood may, as in the case of Italy, be acquired
by a people at the same moment; but without the realisation of the national
idea it is hardly possible to conceive of democratic government for any
country. The national idea, therefore, precedes the social idea, as Mazzini
rightly insists. Still more must it precede the international idea. By
this it is not meant that every nation in the world must have grown to
self-consciousness and have possessed itself of freedom before we come
within sight of a world-concert and world-peace. But certainly in Europe
itself the national question had to be settled before there could be any
chance of establishing an international tribunal. It is equally certain
that the social idea also claims preference of the international idea. The
great danger of setting up "an effective machine for regulating the affairs
of Europe" is that the machine may get into the wrong hands. The Holy
Alliance is a warning, which should not be forgotten. It became an
obstruction to progress, a strait-waistcoat which threatened to strangle
the liberties of Europe, because it got into the hands of a "vested
interest," the dynastic interest, which was hostile both to nationalism and
democracy.
Since 1814, however, there have been great strides along the paths both of
democracy and of nationalism. And if Germany loses this war, the congress
of the settlement will meet in a very different atmosphere from that in
which its predecessor assembled at Vienna. It will be a conference of
powers victorious over Reaction not Revolution, and pledged to the support
of a liberal programme. And yet if such a conference became a permanent
feature of European life, if, in other words, a new attempt were made to
set up an international tribunal, it might easily become as dangerous to
the liberties of the people as ever was the Holy Alliance. The dynastic
principle it is to be hoped, will never again threaten the world's peace or
progress; but there are other vested interests besides the dynastic one.
During the nineteenth century economic development has given an enormous
impetus to international movements and cosmopolitanism generally.
Unfortunately political development, though great, has not by any means
kept pace with the economic; in other words, it is still possible in most
countries, and in some more possible than in others, for a small oligarchy
to gain control of the political machine.
Again, if there is one thing in the world more international than Labour,
it is Capital; and, as Mr. Norman Angell has shown, it is the capitalist
who is hardest hit by international war and who stands to gain most from
its abolition. European capital is almost certain to have a large say in
the settlement, and considerable influence in the counsels of any new
Concert of Europe that might come into existence. Now suppose—a not
impossible contingency—that a ring of capitalists gained complete control
of some politically backward country like Russia, and suppose a grave
crisis arose in the Labour world in England or France, what would be easier
than for arrangements to be made at the international conference for the
transference of Russian troops to the west, "to preserve the sacred rights
of property and the peace of Europe"? This may seem a somewhat fantastic
supposition, yet it was precisely in this way and on grounds like these
that the Holy Alliance interfered with the internal affairs of European
countries during the second and third decade of last century, and even as
late as 1849 we have Russia, still faithful to the principles of thirty
years before, coming to the assistance of Austria in her suppression of the
liberties of Hungary. It was a healthy instinct in the English people that
led them to break up the Concert of Europe in 1818—"a system which not
only threatened the liberties of others, but might, in the language of
the orators of the Opposition, in time present the spectacle of Cossacks
encamped in Hyde Park to overawe the House of Commons";[1] and, if the
prevailing "internationalism" has not quite blinded their eyes to-day,
they will scrutinise with the greatest possible care any new proposals to
re-erect the Concert of Europe as a permanent and authoritative tribunal.
What the world needs at present is more nationalism and more democracy. And
it is only after these two great nineteenth-century movements have worked
themselves out to the full, at least on the continent of Europe, that
mankind will be able safely to make experiments towards the realisation of
the third and crowning principle, the principle of a European Commonwealth.
[Footnote 1: Cambridge Modern History, vol. x. p. 16.]
[Illustration: EUROPE IN 1815]
The national problems which the Congress of Vienna bequeathed to posterity
may be seen at a glance by looking at a political map of Europe in 1815.
The entire centre of the Continent from Ostend to Palermo, and from
Königsberg to Constantinople, was left a political chaos. And it is not too
much to say that the history of Europe from 1814 to 1914 is the history of
the settlement of this vast area. The only State whose frontiers have not
altered during this period is Switzerland, and even that country seized the
opportunity which a disturbed Europe offered her in 1848, to substitute a
unified federal system for the constitution imposed upon her in 1815.
The rest of the area falls into six sections: (1) The kingdom of the
Netherlands, containing the two distinct and often antagonistic nations,
Belgium and Holland; (2) the German nationality split up into no less
than thirty-eight[2] sovereign States, loosely held together in a
"confederation"; (3) the Italian nationality, distributed under eight
independent governments, including four duchies, two kingdoms, the Papal
States, and the provinces under Austrian rule; (4) the Polish nationality,
divided up between the three Powers, Prussia, Russia, and Austria; (5) the
Austrian Empire, comprising a dozen distinct nationalities; and (6) the
Ottoman Empire, in which at least five different Christian peoples groaned
beneath the sway of the Mohammedan Turk. Thus, if we may regard the
inhabitants of the southern Netherland provinces, for the moment, as of one
nationality, there were roughly ten great nationalities, the Germans, the
Italians, the Belgians, the Poles, the Bohemians, the Hungarians, the
Southern Slavs, the Rumanians, the Bulgarians, and the Greeks, all left
with national aspirations unsatisfied, all hampered by State frontiers
which had no correspondence with their natural boundaries. Can we wonder
that there have been wars in the nineteenth century? Should we not rather
wonder that those wars have not been greater and more numerous? For the
Congress of the Powers in 1814 having failed to give the nationalities what
they wanted, nothing remained for them but to seize it for themselves. The
only alternative to settlement by conference is "blood and iron," and it
is with "blood and iron" that nearly every nationality which has attained
nationhood in the last hundred years has cemented the structure of its
State.
[Footnote 2: Napoleon had succeeded in reducing the number from 360 to 38.]
It is not our purpose in the present chapter to deal with the whole of this
vast area; the three eastern sections, Poland, the Austrian Empire, and
Turkey, present special problems of their own, and therefore need special
treatment. Still less do we intend to write a history of the nineteenth
century, or even to adhere to a chronological treatment. Rather our object
is to exemplify the principle of nationality by watching it at work in
the three western sections of the central European area; to show how the
national idea has been moulded in Belgium, Italy, and Germany, by the
various problems which the nationalities in these countries have had to
face, and the forces which they have overcome; and, lastly, to indicate the
part which an over-developed nationalism in Germany has played in bringing
about the war of 1914.
§4. The National Idea in Belgium and the Problem of Small Nations.—The
problem of the Netherlands, which it will be convenient to deal with first,
introduces us to an aspect of nationhood which we have hitherto not touched
upon. "The chief forces which hold a community together and cause it
to constitute one state," wrote Sir John Seeley, "are three,—common
nationality, common religion, and common interest. These may act in various
degrees of intensity, and they may also act singly or in combination."[1]
In the Low Countries religion has up to the present been a stronger
nation-making force than nationality. Three nationalities, each with its
own language, live there side by side,—the Dutch, the Flemings, and the
Walloons; but of these the Dutch and the Flemings are very closely allied
racially, Flemish being only a slight variant of the Dutch language. It
would therefore seem natural on the face of it that these two sections
would amalgamate together, leaving the Walloons to attach themselves
to their French cousins. That it is not so is due to the fact that the
Flemings and the Dutch are adherents of two different and mutually hostile
creeds, and that this distinction in their faith has been stamped upon
the national memories by the whole history of their past. Holland, the
stronghold of Calvinism, had at the end of the sixteenth century thrown off
the yoke of Catholic Spain and asserted its independence, while the Belgic
provinces, after Alva had cruelly crushed out such Protestantism as existed
among their peoples, returned to the faith and the allegiance of their
fathers, and remained part of the Hapsburg inheritance until the Congress
of Vienna. Thus the cleavage between Protestantism and Catholicism has made
two nations out of one Low German nationality in the Netherlands, as it
threatens to do with one Celtic nationality in Ireland. On the other hand,
their common Catholic faith has welded Flemings and Walloons together,
making one nation out of two nationalities far more racially distinct than
the Flemings and the Dutch, and this amalgamation has acquired a certain
flavour of common nationality from the fact that the language of the upper
classes is French.
[Footnote 1: Expansion of England, p. 59.]
It is obvious therefore that the attempt of the diplomatists in 1814 to
ignore both historical and religious differences and to combine Holland
and Belgium into a single State was doomed at the outset. Fifteen years of
constant friction were followed in 1830 by a rising in Brussels against
"Dutch supremacy," which quickly spread to the rest of Belgium. The Great
Powers, recognising the inevitable, interfered on behalf of Belgium, she
was declared a neutral State, separate from Holland, and took to herself a
king in the person of Leopold I. It is, however, highly significant that
directly the Dutch menace was removed from Belgium the internal cleavage of
nationality began to be felt. "In 1815 the differences between Flemish and
Walloon were to a large extent concealed beneath a veneer of French culture
and French manners. Among the upper and commercial classes no language but
French was ever spoken; and in their dislike of Dutch supremacy the Flemish
Belgians took a sort of patriotic pride in their borrowed speech, and for a
time relegated their native tongue to the level of a rustic patois."[1]
And yet, on the other hand, "the separation of Belgium from Holland had no
sooner taken place than the newly aroused national spirit began to show
itself among the Flemish-speaking part of the people by a revival of
interest in their ancestral Teutonic language…. King William I.'s attempt
to make Dutch the official language had met with universal opposition; but
as early as 1840 a demand was put forward for the use of the Flemish tongue
(which is closely akin to the Dutch) on equal terms with French in the
Legislature, the Law Courts, and the Army. As the years passed by, the
movement gathered ever-increasing numbers of adherents, and the demand was
repeated with growing insistence."[2] In 1897 the Flemish party attained
its ambition, and Flemish became the official language of the country, side
by side with French. The remarkable thing about this Teutonising movement
is that its mainstay has always been the extreme Catholic party, which
on religious grounds had been the most violent opponent of the attempted
Teutonification by the Dutch. The opposition between Flemish and Walloon,
indeed, became so marked in recent years that many feared that the Belgian
nation was about to split into two. Germany has, however, postponed this
national calamity for generations if not for ever, and the Belgium
which arises like a phoenix from the ashes of this third attempt at
Teutonification will, we cannot doubt, be a Belgium indissolubly knit
together by common memories of a glorious struggle for freedom and cemented
by the blood and tears of the whole population. Germany, like Napoleon a
century ago, will call many nations into being; the first and not the least
of her creations is a transfigured and united Belgium.
[Footnote 1: Cambridge Modern History, vol. x. p. 521.]
[Footnote 2: Ibid. vol. xi. p. 693.]
As a frontier State, a link between the Latin and Teutonic races to both of
which her peoples are akin, Belgium offers an extremely interesting study
of the national idea at work. The peoples of Germany and France, which have
been perpetually at war with each other since the times of Julius Caesar,
have almost always met on her fair and prosperous plains to fight their
battles, since she is geographically the gateway from one to the other.
Neither could afford to let the other occupy her territory, and so she
has won her independence as a State; both have constantly threatened her
existence in times past, and so have forced upon her bi-lingual population
that consciousness of common interests which if strong enough may become as
firm a basis for national unity as actual community of nationality.
It should be noticed further that it has become the practice in recent
times to guarantee the neutrality of small frontier States like Belgium
which lie at the mercy of their greater neighbours, a practice intended
not only to preserve the integrity of such States but also to prevent
the frequent occurrence of war by closing, as it were, the military gate
between the hostile countries.[1] It remains to be seen whether the
violation of these principles by Germany has the effect of strengthening
them in the future, rather than the reverse. In any case, we may expect to
see attempts to apply the same principles to other parts of Europe. Already
the northern and southern ends of the frontier between Germany and France
are neutralised by the existence of Belgium and Switzerland; why, it may
be asked, should not the whole frontier be treated in the same way by
neutralising the disputed territory of Alsace-Lorraine? Perhaps, too, a
neutral Poland would form a useful buffer between Germany and Russia. Such
neutralisation, it should be noted, need not necessarily carry with it
independence. Poland and Alsace-Lorraine might form part of Russia and
France respectively, and still be neutralised by a guarantee of other
powers. A precedent exists for this in the terms of the cession of the
Ionian Islands to Greece in 1864, while Savoy, though a province of France,
is technically neutralised territory.[2] Cases like these, however, it must
be admitted, are extremely anomalous and could hardly stand the strain of
a serious war. But, then, as recent experience has shown us, not even
independent neutralised States are safe when all Europe is aflame. The
truth is that the whole conception of neutrality implies the existence of
some power above and beyond the State, it may be simply a group of powerful
States who are able to impose their will upon the rest of Europe, it may
be a general Congress, like the Congress of Vienna. Since the Concert of
Europe disappeared and gradually gave place to the two opposing alliances
of great powers, there has been no such authority in the civilised world.
The results are before us in the ruined cities and starving population of
violated Belgium.
[Footnote 1: The neutralisation of sovereign States is very recent in
origin. Switzerland and Luxembourg are the only other instances. The former
was neutralised in 1815, the latter in 1867.]
[Footnote 2: Cambridge Modern History, xi. 642. See for the whole
question of neutralised States, Lawrence, Principles of International
Law, §§ 246-248.]
As independent States, therefore, small nations can only survive, in
the long run, if their neutrality is permanently guaranteed by some
international authority, which is itself permanently capable of enforcing
its decrees upon recalcitrant States. Sovereignty and independence,
however, are not, as we have seen, essential to full nationhood, provided
the nation possesses a certain amount of "home-rule" and regards the
government under which it lives as a true expression of its genius and
will. For example, from 1809 till the setting in of Russian reaction in
1899, the Finnish nation enjoyed all the privileges of complete nationhood
except actual sovereignty. There is, therefore, a future for small nations,
either as autonomous protégés of great powers, like Russia, or as partners
in some commonwealth of nations, like the British Empire.
But there is yet another consideration to be faced. Why, it is asked,
should we trouble ourselves about the preservation of small nationalities
at all? "The State is power," and it is only the really powerful State,
therefore, that can and ought to survive. There is something laughable in
the idea of a small State; it is weakness trying to pose as strength. And
as for nations which have lost their independence and have bowed to the
yoke of the conqueror, their fate is incorporation. How can they hope or
expect to retain their separate existence and their peculiar culture when
they have surrendered the power upon which these privileges depend? "No
nation can permit the Jews to have a double nationality"; and the same
applies to Poles, Finns, Alsatians, Irishmen, and Belgians.[1] This is the
point of view of Bernhardi, Treitschke, and the German Government. This
is the theory which is said to justify the practice of Prussianisation,
Russianisation, Magyarisation, and so on. It raises the whole question
of the value and significance to civilisation of the existence of small
nations. Treitschke, of course, and his school are convinced that they
possess neither value nor significance. In small States there is developed
that beggarly frame of mind which judges the State by the taxes that it
raises; there is completely lacking in small States the ability of the
great State to be just; all real masterpieces of poetry and art arose upon
the soil of great nationalities—such are a few of Treitschke's dogmatic
utterances on this subject.[2] But it is not merely the Germans who think
small beer of small nationalities. Listen to Sir John Seeley: "The question
whether large states or small states are best is not one which can be
answered or ought to be discussed absolutely. We often hear abstract
panegyrics upon the happiness of small states. But observe that a small
state among small states is one thing, and a small state among large states
quite another. Nothing is more delightful to read of than the bright days
of Athens and Florence, but those bright days lasted only so long as the
states with which Athens and Florence had to do were states on a similar
scale of magnitude. Both states sank at once as soon as large country
states of consolidated strength grew up in their neighbourhood. The lustre
of Athens grew pale as soon as Macedonia arose, and Charles V. speedily
brought to an end the great days of Florence. Now if it be true that a
larger type of state than any hitherto known is springing up in the world,
is not this a serious consideration for those states which rise only to the
old level of magnitude?"[3] The answer to which is, "Yes, indeed, if
                                            the good old plan
             That he should take who has the power,
             And he should keep who can
is to be the guiding principle in European politics of the future." But
surely Sir John Seeley's argument, though undoubtedly telling as regards
the sovereign independence of small States, tells for and not against the
preservation of small nations. Was it to the interest of the world as a
whole that Athens and Florence should be crushed? Is it not true, in spite
of Treitschke, that the great things of earth have been the product of
small peoples? We owe our conceptions of law to a city called Rome, our
finest output of literature and art to small communities like Athens,
Florence, Holland, and Elizabethan England, our religion to an
insignificant people who inhabited a narrow strip of land in the Eastern
Mediterranean. And small nations are as valuable to the world to-day as
they have ever been. Denmark has enriched our educational experience by the
establishment of her famous high schools, which we can hardly imagine her
doing had she been a province of Prussia; Norway has given us the greatest
of modern dramatists, Henrik Ibsen; and Belgium has not only produced
Maeterlinck and Verhaeren, but is industrially the most highly developed
country on the continent. The world cannot afford to do without her small
peoples, who must be either independent or autonomous if they are to find
adequate expression for their national genius, if they are to obtain proper
conditions in which "to live, think, love, and labour for the benefit of
all." Can we guarantee to them this freedom? That is one of the great
questions which this war will settle.[4]
[Footnote 1: See Selections from Treitschke, translated by A.L. Gowans,
pp. 17-20, 58-61.]
[Footnote 2: See Selections from Treitschke, pp. 17-20, 58-61.]
[Footnote 3: The Expansion of England, p. 349. See also p. 1, "Some
countries, such as Holland and Sweden, might pardonably regard their
history as in a manner wound up."]
[Footnote 4: See J.M. Robertson, Introduction to English Politics, pp.
251-390; Mr. H.A.L. Fisher's pamphlet on The Value of Small States, in
which, however, the distinction between states and nations is not
made clear; and the article on "Nationalism and Liberalism" in The Round
Table, December 1914.]
§5. The National Idea in Italy: The Ideal Type.—Let us now turn to
Italy, a country which has in the past been as much of a European Tom
Tiddler's ground as Belgium, though for rather different reasons. Italy
is inhabited by a race speaking a common language and observing a common
religion, she has historical memories as glorious as those of any other
country in the world, and her natural boundaries are almost as well-defined
as those of Great Britain; yet it was not until the latter half of the
nineteenth century that she managed to become a nation. The chief reason
why she remained a "geographical expression" long after England, France,
and Spain had acquired national unity was the fact that she was until
comparatively recent times an example of the less containing the greater.
Throughout the Middle Ages she was a suburb, not a country. Rome was the
capital of the world, Italy only its environs. Moreover, since all roads
lead to Rome, and the lord of Rome was the master of Europe, the roads
Romeward were worn by the tramp of the armies of all nations. Thus Italy
was constantly subject to invasion, and the state-systems with which the
Congress of Vienna resaddled her in 1814 were little more than relics of
past military occupations of her soil by foreign armies. The main problem,
therefore, in the making of modern Italy was how to get rid of the heavy
burden of the past, how to deal with Rome and all that Rome stood for.
The problem would have been insoluble had not the prestige of Rome declined
considerably since the Middle Ages, a prestige which sprang from the fact
that she was the capital of two Empires—the spiritual Empire of the
Papacy, and the secular Empire founded by Charles the Great. The former had
suffered from the Reformation and the rise of the great Protestant nations,
the latter had been growing feebler and feebler for centuries, until it
was abolished as an institution by Napoleon. Yet Italy in 1814 still lay
helpless and divided at the feet of Rome. The Pope held under his immediate
sway a large zigzag-shaped territory running across the centre from sea to
sea, and, as spiritual leader of half Europe, he could at any moment summon
to his assistance the Catholic chivalry of the world. "The Roman emperor"
no longer existed, but "the Austrian emperor" was another title for the
same man, holding much the same territory; and the fact that he had
renounced his vague suzerainty over the rest of Europe did not prevent him
exercising a very real suzerainty in Italy, not merely over the eastern
half of the Lombard Plain which definitely belonged to Austria, but also
over the other States of the peninsula which were, in theory at least,
independent. The kingdom of the two Sicilies in the South, the grand duchy
of Tuscany on the West, and the smaller duchies of Parma, Modena, and
Lucca were only stable in so far as Austria bolstered up their corrupt and
unpopular governments. Even the Papal States themselves, equally undermined
with corruption and unpopularity, ultimately rested upon the same support.
Thus Austria represented for Italy all that evil past of which she wanted
to be rid: the foreign yoke against which her newly conscious spirit of
nationality revolted, the dynastic frontiers which were abhorrent to her
desire for unity, the absolute régime under which her soul, after feeding
on the principles of the French Revolution, lay gagged and bound. The first
step to be taken towards the creation of Italy was the expulsion of the
Austrians.
This fact in itself purified the struggle for Italian freedom and raised
Italian nationalism to heights of nobility and heroism almost unparalleled
in history. The nation had not merely to be unified, but delivered, and
delivered from the oppression of that power which was the mainstay of
reaction in Europe. Nor was it simply a question of national freedom;
Austria had declared war upon individual and constitutional liberty also,
and used all her power to suppress them wherever they dared to raise their
head. From beginning to end of her fight for national existence, Italy
never forgot that she was also fighting for individual liberty, or ceased
to be conscious that the downfall of Austria in Italy would mean the
downfall of reaction in Europe. The banner which Mazzini raised in 1831 had
the words "Unity and Independence" on the one side and "Liberty, Equality,
and Humanity" on the other. Italy was indeed greatly blessed, inasmuch as
in seeking her own deliverance she could not help bursting the bands of
brass which bound the whole world in captivity.
It is not possible here to tell the glorious story of the resurrection
of Italy, or even to say anything of the three heroes at whose hands she
received her freedom—Cavour who gave her the service of his brain, Mazzini
who devoted to her the love and passion of his great heart, and Garibaldi
who fought for her with the strength of his own right arm. It must suffice
to indicate very briefly the various stages in the development of her
national idea, and the manner in which she finally realised it. Liberal
principles took root in Italy at the time of the French Revolution, and
the first glimmerings of nationalism were due to Napoleon, who bundled the
princes out of the peninsula and even for a time exiled the Pope himself.
But it was constitutional rather than national freedom which seemed most
urgent to the generation which succeeded Napoleon. The Carbonari, as the
early Italian revolutionaries were called, confined themselves almost
entirely to the demand for a constitution in the various existing States,
and though they eagerly desired the expulsion of Austria, they did so not
because she prevented Italian unity, but because she forbade political
reform. Their risings, therefore, local and disunited in character, were
bound to fail; the first fifteen years after the Congress of Vienna were
occupied by a series of attempts to substitute a constitutional for an
absolute régime in different parts of Italy, attempts which Austria
crushed with a heavy hand.
The period which followed, 1830-1848, belongs to Mazzini and his "Young
Italy" party. His task was to fire Italy for the first time with the ideal
of national unity and independence. The conception of unity was a difficult
one for Italians to grasp; all history seemed to fight against it. There
were, for example, not only the traditions connected with Rome to be
reckoned with, but there was also the difference between north and south,
and, perhaps most important of all, the local spirit of independence
associated with the great cities like Venice, Milan, Florence, Naples, etc.
Thus, over against Mazzini's ideal of a single unified State there arose
the counter-ideal of a federal system. In this, however, later events
proved Mazzini to be right. Where he failed in foresight was in regard to
the constitutional character of the State he dreamed of. He wished not
only to abolish all existing frontiers in Italy, but to do away with all
existing state-systems. The only Italy he could conceive was a republic,
and Italy was not ripe for a republic, which was, for the rest, a form
of government too much bound up with the disruptive traditions of the
City-States to be acceptable.[1] But if Italy was not to be a republic, she
must be a monarchy, and where could she find a prince to put at the head of
her united State? Clearly, she would accept no one who was not the declared
enemy of Austria and the declared friend of constitutional reform. For a
month or so in 1846 it seemed that the Pope himself might be prevailed upon
to undertake the rôle; and the elevation of Pius IX. to the Chair of St.
Peter was greeted with wild enthusiasm in Italy because he was believed to
be a Liberal. These hopes proved illusory, however, and so the eyes of all
patriots turned more and more in the direction of Piedmont.
[Footnote 1: It is noticeable that Greece also played with the idea of a

republic at first and eventually selected a monarchical form of government.

As a matter of fact, not a single nation-State, formed in Europe since the

Congress of Vienna, has adopted the republican principle.]

This principality, which was part of the kingdom of Sardinia, ruled over
by the semi-French house of Savoy, shared the northern plain of Italy
with Austria, and at first showed neither anti-Austrian nor Liberal
proclivities. Victor Emmanuel came back smiling in 1814, saying that he had
been asleep for fifteen years; the old régime was restored as though
the Revolution had never been; and a rising of the Carbonari in 1821 was
suppressed with the aid of Austrian troops. But in 1831 a king, Charles
Albert, came to the throne, who realised that it was the mission of his
house to drive the Austrians from Italy, and who was enlightened enough to
begin to institute reforms, as unostentatiously as possible, so as not to
attract the unwelcome attention of Vienna. Then came the great outburst
of 1848, which was the culmination of Mazzini's propaganda for the past
sixteen years. At first all went well. The Austrian army was almost
expelled from the peninsula; constitutions were granted in Rome, Naples,
Tuscany, and Piedmont; Venice and Rome declared themselves republics.
But no real scheme for all Italy emerged; the Mazzinians were heroic but
unpractical; and next year Austria returned once more, dealt as before
piecemeal with the revolted provinces, and finally crushed the hopes of
Italy again at the battle of Novara. Yet all was not lost. The republican
dreams of Mazzini were, it is true, at an end. But Piedmont had stepped
into Mazzini's shoes; she had championed the cause of freedom against
Austria; and, when the latter reasserted her sway, she alone of the various
States refused to abrogate the newly-acquired constitution.
Thus began the third period in the emancipation of Italy, the period of
Cavour, who became head of the Piedmontese cabinet in 1850. His aim was
first to make Piedmont the model State and champion of all Italy. He
believed fervently in liberty—"Italy," he said, "must make herself by
means of liberty, or we must give up trying to make her"—and he was at
the same time one of the ablest and most practical statesmen who have ever
guided the destinies of a nation. In ten years he made the State of the
north-west an oasis of freedom and good government which attracted the best
intellects of Italy to its service, and henceforth Piedmont became the
centre of Italian aspirations. A new propaganda movement was set on
foot, called the National Society, which rejected both federalism and
republicanism and declared in favour of a united Italy under the crown of
Victor Emmanuel of Savoy; and when the chance of French support came in
1858, Cavour felt it was time to act. This time the end crowned the work.
Austria was deprived of everything but Venice; Tuscany and Romagna declared
for incorporation by plebiscite; Garibaldi conquered Sicily and the south;
and by the end of 1860 the King of Sardinia was king of practically the
whole of Italy. All that still remained to be won was Venice, which Austria
ceded in 1866; Rome, which the French had occupied in the name of the Pope,
and were forced to evacuate in 1870; and the Italia Irredenta of to-day,
viz. the Trentino, Trieste, and Istria, which may be recovered as a result
of the present war. It is worthy of note also that the trans-Alpine
provinces, Savoy and Nice, which had been part of the dominions of the
Sardinian kingdom, were ceded to France in 1858-1859 as a return for her
aid, thus rounding off the western frontier of the new kingdom of Italy so
as to correspond fairly closely with the boundary of nationality.
The foundation of modern Italy shows us the "national idea" at its best;
it was accomplished by noble means and by noble minds; and the latter, in
their perpetual struggle against the forces of reaction, were never allowed
to forget the claims of individual as well as of national freedom. Three
tests of true nationhood, it will be remembered, were suggested at
the beginning of this chapter: a state-frontier co-extensive with the
nationality-frontier, a unitary state-system, and a form of government
recognised by the inhabitants as an expression of their general will.
Italy fulfils all these conditions; for, though the first has not yet been
perfectly realised as regards Italia Irredenta, the exception is after
all a trifling one. Thus the development of the national idea in Italy is
almost a model of what such a development should be, and we have dwelt
somewhat at length upon it for that very reason. The work of Mazzini and
Cavour provides us with a standard of comparison which should be found very
useful in dealing with the national idea in other countries.
§6. The National Idea in Germany: a Case of Arrested
Development.[1]—Nothing, for example, could be more instructive, both as
a study in nationalism and as an aid to the understanding of the present
situation in Europe, than a comparison between the making of modern Italy
and the making of modern Germany. At first sight the German Empire, with
its marvellous progress, its vast resources, and its world-wide ambitions,
would appear to be an even more successful example of national development
than the kingdom of Italy. Its demand for "a place in the sun," its
hustling diplomacy, its military spirit, its obvious intention to expand
territorially, if not in Europe itself then in Asia or Africa, are all
taken as symptoms of this success. No doubt there is a certain amount of
truth in this view. The truculence of German foreign policy is to be partly
attributed to that form of swollen self-consciousness and self-complacency
to which all nations are subject more or less, and which is most likely,
one would suppose, to be found in countries where a nationality had
recently succeeded in making itself into a nation. The natural instinct to
regard one's own nation as the peculiar people of God and to look down on
other nations as "lesser breeds without the law" is a phenomenon which must
be constantly reckoned with in any comprehensive treatment of nationalism.
Every nation has its own variety of it; in England it is Jingoism, in
France Chauvinism, in Italy Irredentism, in Russia Pan-Slavism, and so on.
These are instances of over-development of the national idea, due either
to some confusion between race and nationality, or to simple national
megalomania, which usually subsides after a healthy humiliation, such as we
suffered in England, for example, in the Boer War or as Russia suffered in
her struggle with the Japanese.
[Footnote 1: The student is advised to read the chapter on Germany before
beginning this section.]
Yet a careful examination of the German body-politic will reveal symptoms
unlike those to be found in any other nation. German nationalism is
over-developed in one direction because it is under-developed and imperfect
in other directions. Apply our three tests to the German nation, and it
will be found to fail in them all. National boundary and State frontier do
not coincide because there are still some twelve million Germans living
outside Germany, in Austria-Hungary;[1] Germany is a State, but not a
unitary State, for she still retains the obsolete "particularism" of the
eighteenth century, with its petty princes and dynastic frontiers; and
lastly, the government of Germany cannot claim to express the general will,
while more than a third of the voters in the empire are sworn to overthrow
the whole system at the earliest opportunity. The German nation, in
fact, is suffering from some form of arrested development, and arrested
development, as the criminologists tell us, is almost invariably
accompanied by morbid psychology. That Germany at the present moment, and
for some time past, has been the victim of a morbid state of mind, few
impartial observers will deny. It has, however, not been so generally
recognised that this disease—for it is nothing less—is due not to any
national depravity but to constitutional and structural defects, which are
themselves the result of an unfortunate series of historical accidents. Let
us look a little closer into this matter, considering the three defects in
German nationalism one by one, and using the story of Italy as an aid to
our investigation.
[Footnote 1: There are also Germans living in Switzerland, the Baltic

Provinces of Russia, and the United States of America; but these may be

regarded as lost to the German nation as the French Canadians are lost to

France.]

First, then, why was it that, while the unification of Italy led to the
inclusion of the whole Italian nationality within the State frontiers, with
the trifling exceptions above referred to, the unification of Germany was
only brought about, or even made possible, by the exclusion of a large
section of the nationality? Germany, like Italy, was hampered by traditions
inherited from the mediaeval Roman Empire, represented by an ancient
capital which stood in the path of unity. Why was it that, while Italy
could not and would not do without Rome, Germany was compelled to surrender
Vienna and to exclude Austria? The answer is: because the unification of
Germany was only possible through the instrumentality of Prussia, which
would not brook the rivalry of Austria, and therefore the latter had to go.
The problem of the making of Germany as it presented itself to the mind
of Bismarck was first of all a problem as to which should be supreme in
Germany, Prussia or Austria; in other words Bismarck cared more for the
aggrandisement of Prussia than for the unity of Germany.[1] To the mind
of Cavour the problem of the unification of Italy presented itself in
a totally different light. For him there was no question of the
aggrandisement of Piedmont, though he no doubt felt pride in the thought
that the House of Savoy was to possess the throne of Italy. Austria was
expelled from Italy in 1860, not that Piedmont might take her place as
ruler of the peninsula, but that Piedmont might disappear in the larger
whole of an emancipated Italy. Austria was expelled from Germany in 1866 in
order that Prussia might rule undisturbed. Thus, though the Austro-Prussian
War of 1866 was an essential step in the foundation of the modern German
State, its motives and results were not in the least comparable to those
which inspired and followed the Italian War of Liberation in 1859-60. In
the first place the Austrians were not foreigners but Germans, whom it was
necessary for reasons of State not of nationality to place outside the rest
of Germany. Germany had, in fact, to choose between national unity and
State unity; and she chose the latter, partly because Prussia really
decided the matter for her, partly because she realised that the
establishment of a strong German State was the essential prelude to the
creation of a strong united nation. Austria had to be shut out in 1866 in
order that she might be received back again at some later date on Germany's
own terms. In the second place Austria was in no sense the oppressor of
Germany as she had been of Italy. She was simply the presiding member of
the German Confederation who, as the rival of Prussia, as the inheritor of
the mediaeval imperial tradition, as the ruler of millions of non-Germanic
people, would have rendered the problem of German unification almost
insoluble. It was therefore necessary to get rid of her as gently and as
politely as possible. After the crushing victory at Königgrätz, Bismarck
treated Prussia's ancient foe with extraordinary leniency; for he had
already planned the Dual Alliance in his mind; knowing as he did that,
though in Germany Austria might be an inconvenient rival to Prussia, in
Europe she was the indispensable ally of Germany. And so, though the
ramshackle old German imperial castle was divided in two, and the northern
portion, at any rate, brought thoroughly up to date, the neighbours still
lived side by side in a "semi-detached" kind of way. It would be a mistake
then to call the war of 1866 a war of deliverance. Indeed, since the defeat
of Napoleon at Leipzig, Germany has had no such war. That is in a great
measure her national tragedy. Italian nationalism was spiritualised by the
very fact that it had to struggle for decades against a foreign oppressor,
and the foundations of her unity were laid on the heroic memories of her
efforts to expel the intruder. This spiritualisation, these heroic memories
were Germany's also in 1813-14, but the opportunity of unification was
allowed to slip by, and when the task was performed fifty years later it
was through quite other means and in a very different spirit. And yet,
though there was no one to expel, Germany could only hope to attain unity
by fighting. In 1848 she made an attempt to do so by peaceable means, and a
national Parliament actually assembled at Frankfurt to frame a constitution
for the whole country. But the attempt, noble as it was in conception,
proved a dismal failure, and it became clear that national unity in Germany
was to be won "not by speeches and majority resolutions, but by blood and
iron." The words are Bismarck's, and the task was his also. Set them beside
the words of Cavour about Italy and liberty, quoted above, or compare the
harsh unscrupulous spirit of the great German master-builder with the
spirit of Mazzini, Cavour, and Garibaldi, and you get a measure of the
difference between the developments of the national idea in Germany and in
Italy. Yet Bismarck's famous sentence expressed the truth of the matter for
Germany. Austria had been put outside the German pale, and Germany north of
the Main had accepted unity under the hegemony of Prussia, but there still
remained the four great States of South Germany to bring in. They had been
the allies of Austria in 1866, and Prussia, had she willed it, might
have incorporated them by conquest. But Bismarck saw that they must put
themselves willingly under Prussia if the German Empire was to be a stable
concern; he therefore left them alone to think it over for a while. Sooner
or later they would have to come in, since now that Austria had been
excluded there remained only the choice between dependence on France and
union with Prussia. Bismarck deliberately played upon South Germany's fear
of France, and Napoleon III's restless foreign policy admirably seconded
his efforts. But a war was necessary to bring matters to a head. The
opportunity came in 1870, and Bismarck was able to make it appear a war not
of his own choosing. The Southern States threw themselves into the arms of
Prussia; France was crushed, and Alsace-Lorraine annexed; the German Empire
was proclaimed, and modern Germany came into being. There had been no
foreigner to expel from German soil, but Bismarck found that an attack upon
France served his purpose equally well.
[Footnote 1: Perhaps it would be fairer to say that he was incapable of
distinguishing between them. See his Reflections, i. pp. 315, 316.]
Germany was made by a war of aggression, resulting in territorial expansion
at the expense of another nation; Italy by a war of liberation, driving
the alien from her soil. And the subsequent history of the two nations is
eloquent of this difference in their origins. Since 1860 Italy has in the
main occupied herself with domestic reforms, with the working out of the
"social idea" which had had to wait upon the realisation of the "national
idea." She has had, it is true, her "adventures," more especially in
Africa, and her Jingoism, which has taken the natural form of Irredentism
or the demand for the recovery of Italian provinces still left in Austrian
hands; but she has never threatened the peace of Europe, or sought power at
the expense of other nationalities. Since 1870, on the other hand, Germany
has had to sit armed to defend the booty taken from France. "We have earned
in the late war respect, but hardly love," said General von Moltke soon
after the conclusion of peace. "What we have gained by arms in six months
we shall have to defend by arms for fifty years." At the beginning of 1914
more than forty out of the fifty years named by Moltke had passed by and
the situation had undergone no material change. "The irreconcilability of
France," writes the late Imperial Chancellor of Germany, "is a factor that
we must reckon with in our political calculations. It seems to me weakness
to entertain the hope of a real and sincere reconciliation with France, so
long as we have no intention of giving up Alsace-Lorraine. And there is no
such intention in Germany."[1] The annexation of two small provinces has
thus made a permanent breach between two great nations, a breach which has
poisoned the whole of European policy during the past half century, which
has widened until it has split Europe into two huge armed camps, and
which has at last involved the entire world in one of the most terrible
calamities that mankind has ever known.
[Footnote 1: Imperial Germany, von Bülow, p. 69.]
Why did Bismarck annex Alsace-Lorraine? To strengthen, he said, the German
frontier against France. But there was another reason. Fear of France had
brought the Southern States into the Empire; fear of France should keep
them there. The permanent hostility of France was necessary to assure the
continuance of Prussia's position as the supreme military power in Germany.
And so the plundered provinces became the very corner-stone of the German
imperial system. There is surely something very strange about all this. Why
should it be necessary to retain the loyalty of nearly half Germany by what
practically amounts to terrorisation? The answer is that Germany is not a
single national State but a number of dynastic States, federated together
under the control of one predominant partner. In other words, the problem
of Alsace-Lorraine has led us to the consideration of the second flaw in
the development of the national idea in Germany.
The union of Italy meant a clean sweep of all the old dynastic frontiers
and States which had strangled the country for so long; the union of
Germany, on the contrary, riveted these obsolete chains still more firmly
than ever on the country's limbs. Bismarck claimed that this was necessary,
inasmuch as the Germans, unlike all other nations, were more alive to
dynastic than to national loyalty; that, in short, Germany was not really
ready in 1870 for true unity.[1] The chief reason, however, for the
retention of the old frontiers was that they suited the aims of Prussia.
The reformers of 1848, as Professor Erich Marcks somewhat naïvely says,
"had wanted to place Prussia at the head, but only as the servant of the
nation; Prussia was also to cease to be a State by itself, a power on its
own account. She was to create the nation's ideal—complete unity—and then
to merge herself in the nation. But Prussia would not and could not do
this. She was far too great a power herself; she could very well rule
Germany, but not serve."[2] Both Germany and Italy at first played with
the idea of a Confederation, but each was eventually forced to look to one
of its existing States to give it the unity it desired. There was only one
possible choice for each: for Germany, Prussia; for Italy, Piedmont; but
while Piedmont was content to serve, Prussia was too proud to do anything
but rule. The dynastic State frontiers were therefore retained because
Prussia refused to sacrifice her own State frontiers. The "unification of
Germany," in short, was an episode in the gradual expansion of the Prussian
dynastic State, which had begun far away back in the thirteenth century.[3]
It assumed the air of a national movement, because Prussia cleverly availed
herself of the prevailing nationalistic sentiment for her own ends. The
German Empire is therefore something unique in the annals of the world; it
is at once a nation-State, like Italy, France, and Great Britain, and also
a military Empire, like Rome under Augustus, Europe under Napoleon, Austria
under Joseph II., i.e. a State in which the territory that commands the
army holds political sway over the rest of the country. It is not mere
accident of geographical proximity, or even the kinship between Austrians
and Germans, which has led to the long and unshakable alliance of Germany
with the Hapsburg dominions. They are associated by common political
interests and by similarity of political structure. Each stands for the
supremacy of one dynastic State over a number of subordinate States or
nationalities.
[Footnote 1: The chapter entitled "Dynasties and Stocks" in the
Reflections should be carefully studied on this point. Bismarck was
obviously uncomfortable about the old frontiers.]
[Footnote 2: Lectures on the History of the Nineteenth Century, p. 104.]
[Footnote 3: See Chap. III. p. 95.]
Her common nationality leads us to forget that the German Empire should
more rightly be called the Prussian Empire.[1] Nor is there any reason at
all why the Empire of Prussia should stop its process of expansion at the
national boundaries; it has indeed already stepped beyond them, into Poland
in the east, into Denmark in the north, into France in the west. Why should
not the process be carried farther still and Germany become in Europe, nay,
in the world, what Prussia is in Germany? By preserving her identity as
a State, and by establishing her hegemony, Prussia, in the name of the
national idea of Germany, has been able to spread her own ideals throughout
the Empire, in other words to undertake that Prussianisation of Germany
which is the most striking fact in her history since 1870. Piedmont was
swallowed up in Italy, Germany has been swallowed up in Prussia; she has
become the sharer of her victories and the accomplice of her crimes. And so
under the tutelage of the spirit of Bismarck the docile German people have
adopted the Prussian faith; and the policy of aggression and conquest once
entered upon, there was no drawing back. Bismarck fed the youthful nation
upon a diet of blood and iron, and its appetite has grown by what it
fed on. The success of 1870 turned the nation's head; the annexation of
Alsace-Lorraine gave it the first taste of conquest. Germany began to
imagine that German character and German culture possessed some magical
and unique quality which would alone account for this success. Dreams of a
European Empire, of infinite expansion, of world-power, floated before the
national consciousness. The German people were no longer content, to use
Mazzini's words, "to elaborate and express their idea, to contribute their
stone also to the pyramid of history"; they now craved to impose their
idea upon the world at large, and to place their stone on the top of the
pyramid. Modern Germany is an example of nationalism "gone wrong," just as
Napoleon was an example of democratic individualism "gone wrong." The Man
of Destiny has been followed by the Nation of Destiny, the "super-man" by
the "super-nation." Both have had to face a world in arms arrayed against
them.
[Footnote 1: German writers are fond of calling it "Prussia-Germany"
(Preussen-Deutschland), a phrase of Treitschke's.]
Thus the national idea in Germany has been cramped, contorted, and
perverted by the Prussian system and the dynastic frontiers. Had the dreams
of 1848 been realised, there might have been no Franco-German War, no
Alsace-Lorraine question, no war of 1914. And what of our third test of
nationhood? Do the people of Germany feel that their government adequately
expresses their general will, that it is truly representative, by which is
not necessarily meant that it is democratic in form?[1] There is no
doubt that in 1848 the educated classes of Germany did actually desire a
democratic form of polity. In that year Germany was as liberal as Italy;
she also had risings in almost every State, not excluding Prussia itself,
which were everywhere answered with promises of a "constitution." But when
reaction came in Germany, as in Italy, Prussia did not, like Piedmont,
stand out for freedom and make itself the model State of Germany; on
the contrary she reverted to her old military absolutism at the first
opportunity. And so the dreams of German liberty, like the dreams of
complete German unity, disappeared before the stern necessity of accepting
the supremacy of a politically reactionary State; and the Prussianisation
which followed did much to neutralise altogether the liberalising
influences of the south. It is therefore possible to maintain that the
political institutions of Germany have come to represent more and more the
genius and will of the population. "The Germany of the twentieth century,"
maintains a recent writer, "is not two but one. The currents have mingled
their waters, and the Prussian torrent now has the depth and volume of the
whole main-stream of German thought."[2]
[Footnote 1: e.g. Russia has a representative government in this sense,
though she is without "representative institutions" in the democratic
sense.]
[Footnote 2: Round Table, Sept. 1914, p. 628.]
It may be so; it may be that the Germany of Goethe, Schiller, and Beethoven
has been absorbed by the Germany of Bismarck, Moltke, and Roon; but it
must not be forgotten at the same time that, since their day, yet another
Germany has come into being, the Germany of Marx, Engels, and Bebel, a
Germany which is represented by more than a third of the voters in the
Empire. The old line of cleavage had barely closed up when a new and much
more fundamental schism appeared in the State, that between imperialism and
social democracy. The existence of this tremendous revolutionary force in
Germany, determined to overthrow the militarist régime of Prussia and to
re-establish the State on a democratic basis, is an unanswerable proof
that the government of the Empire is not in any true sense representative.
Prussia has in this direction also impeded the development of the national
idea and given mechanical unity at the expense of spiritual unity. It has
created a vast political party of irreconcilables in the country, men
who have been led to feel that they have neither part nor promise in the
national life, and who therefore elect to stand outside it. "Our Social
Democratic party," writes von Bülow, "lacks a national basis. It will have
nothing to do with German patriotic memories which bear a monarchical
and military character. It is not like the French and Italian parties, a
precipitate of the process of national historical development, but since
its beginning it has been in determined opposition to our past history as a
nation. It has placed itself outside our national life."[1] And again: "In
the German Empire, Prussia is the leading State. The Social Democratic
party is the antithesis of the Prussian state."[2] Nevertheless, the
Imperial Government, not finding it possible to suppress the social
democrats, does its best to employ them for its own ends. It uses them
in fact as it uses irreconcilable France, namely, for the purpose of
terrorisation, since it has discovered that the spectre of socialism is as
effective to keep the middle classes loyal as the spectre of French
revenge is to keep the Southern States loyal. But it also hopes in time to
eradicate socialism from the State. "A vigorous national policy" Prince
von Bülow declares to be "the true remedy against the Social Democratic
Movement"; and though he makes no specific mention of war, it is obvious
that a war like that in which Germany is at present engaged is the most
vigorous form a national policy could possibly take. Was the outbreak of
war last August in part occasioned by the desire on the side of the German
Government to win over the workers of Germany? If so, it had yet another
spectre ready to its hand for the purpose—the spectre of Russia.
[Footnote 1: Imperial Germany, p. 184.]
[Footnote 2: Ibid. p. 186.]
In any case, with Germany in this condition, Europe could hardly have
avoided a great war at some time or other; and 1914 follows naturally,
almost inevitably, from 1870. The unification of 1870 was far from
complete. The German national idea still awaits development in the
direction of racial unity, political unity, and constitutional freedom. It
is Prussia that bars the way in all these directions, Prussia, which, in
itself not a nation but a military bureaucracy, a survival of the old
territorial dynastic principle which the world has largely outgrown, has
stamped its character and system upon the German people. "Prussia," says
one of its apologists, "has put an iron girdle round the whole of German
life."[1] But in the end life proves itself stronger than iron bands.
Germany was bound to make another attempt to reach complete nationhood. She
is doing so now. Prussia fights for conquest, for world-power, and makes
docile Germany imagine that she is fighting for these also; but what
Germany is really fighting for, blindly and gropingly, is freedom and
unity. She has indeed "to hack her way through." But it is not, as she
supposes, hostile Europe which hems her in and keeps her from her "place in
the sun"; it is the Prussian girdle and the Prussian chains which hamper
the free movements of her limbs and hold her close prisoner in the shadow
of the Hohenzollern castle. The overthrow of Prussia means the release of
Germany; and France, who gave Germany greatness in 1870, may with the help
of the Allies be able in the near future to give her an even greater gift,
the gift of liberty.
[Footnote 1: Lectures on the History of the Nineteenth Century, p. 106.]
§7. The Map of Europe, 1814-1914.—We have now watched the national idea
at work in the three western countries of that Central European area which
the Congress of Vienna left unsettled in 1814, and in a later chapter
we shall see the same principle acting in the two great divisions of
South-East Europe, Austria-Hungary and the Balkan Peninsula. Let us, then,
use this opportunity to pause for a moment, take a general survey of the
map, and consider in broad outline what has actually been accomplished
during the past century and what still remains to do.
From 1814 to 1848, exhausted by the effort of the Revolutionary and
Napoleonic Wars and disillusioned by reactionary statesmanship, the larger
nations slumbered: but Belgium and Greece secured their present liberties,
and outside Europe the national movement spread throughout the South
American Continent. Then came 1848, the "wonderful year" of modern history.
"There is no more remarkable example in history of the contagious quality
of ideas than the sudden spread of revolutionary excitement through
Europe in 1848. In the course of a few weeks the established order seemed
everywhere to be crumbling to pieces. The Revolution began in Palermo,
crossed the Straits of Messina, and passed in successive waves of
convulsion through Central Italy to Paris, Vienna, Milan, and Berlin. It
has often been remarked that the Latin races are of all the peoples of
Europe most prone to revolution; but this proposition did not hold good
in 1848. The Czechs in Bohemia, the Magyars in Hungary, the Germans in
Austria, rose against the paralysing encumbrance of the Hapsburg autocracy.
The Southern Slavs dreamed of an Illyrian kingdom; the Germans of a united
Germany; the Bohemians of a union of all the Slavonic peoples of Europe.
The authority of the Austrian Empire, the pivot of the European autocracy,
had never been so rudely challenged, and if the Crown succeeded in
recovering its shattered authority it was due to the dumb and unintelligent
loyalty of its Slavonic troops."[1]
[Footnote 1: H.A.L. Fisher, The Republican Tradition in Europe, p. 193.]
Many of these risings were doomed to failure, but between 1848 and 1871 the
alien governments in the Italian peninsula were abolished, making way for
a unitary government, in the form of a constitutional monarchy, which
embraces with small exceptions the whole of the Italian population of
Europe. In 1871, after three successful wars in seven years against
Denmark, Austria, and France, a Federal Government was established in
Germany, with the kingdom of Prussia as its leading State and the King of
Prussia as its monarch, with the title of German Emperor. This was a step
forward, though the new Germany was neither a unitary nor a constitutional
State. The Austrian territories have also come in for their share of the
general ferment, and Francis Joseph came to the throne in 1848 amid the
uprisings of his subject peoples; but these were successfully tided over,
though the Hungarian portion of the Austrian dominion achieved national
recognition and institutions in 1867.
After 1871 the national movement moved farther east. In 1878 Roumania and
Serbia, both national States, were declared sovereign powers independent
of Turkey; Bulgaria achieved its recognition as a principality; and
Montenegro, a small mountain community, which had never submitted to the
Turks, increased its territory and became a recognised European State.
In 1908 and 1910 Bulgaria and Montenegro became kingdoms like their
neighbours; and in 1913, after the two Balkan Wars, all the five Balkan
States—Roumania, Serbia, Bulgaria, Greece, and Montenegro—obtained
accession of territory, and the principality of Albania was constituted
out of the Albanian portion of the old Turkish dominion. Finally, in quite
another region of Europe, Norway, which had been joined in an anomalous
union with Sweden since 1814, satisfied her national aspirations unopposed
by becoming an independent Constitutional Monarchy in 1905.
All this represents a considerable clearing up of the Central European
problem. Nevertheless, much still remains to be done. Poland is as she was
in 1814, a dismembered nation. The Czechs of Bohemia, the Roumanians of
Transylvania, and the Southern Slavs, not to mention other and smaller
subject races, continue to demand their freedom from the joint tyranny of
Vienna and Budapest. Russia has not yet solved the problem of Finland, nor
England the problem of Ireland. The Turk still occupies Constantinople. And
finally, the Prussianised nationalism of Germany has created new questions
of nationality in Alsace-Lorraine and Schleswig. All these problems
together were as so much tinder ready to take fire directly the spark fell.
They were the cause of the "armed peace" of the past forty-three years;
they are the cause of the war to-day. The conflagration of 1914 is a proof
of a profound dissatisfaction among civilised nations with the existing
political structure of the Continent. Alsatians, Poles, Czechs, Finns,
Serbo-Croats, Roumanians, and the rest "still struggle for country and
liberty; for a word inscribed upon a banner, proclaiming to the world
that they also live, think, love, and labour for the benefit of all." The
framework of society does not fit the facts of nationality, and so the
framework has gone to pieces. "The map of Europe has to be re-made. That is
the key to the present movement."
MAZZINI. Essays. The Scott Library. 1s.
MAZZINI. Duties of Man, etc. Everyman Library. 1s.
Anything written by Mazzini, the prophet of the national idea, can be
recommended.
LORD ACTON. History of Freedom and other Essays. 1907. 10s. net.
Contains an acute historical analysis of nationality in the nineteenth
century. The conclusion reached is that "the theory of nationality is more
absurd and more criminal than the theory of socialism," but though the
summing up is unfavourable, the whole essay is a masterly exposition of the
national idea by one of the greatest of historical students. It forms a
very useful foil to Mazzini.
HENRY SIDGWICK. The Elements of Politics. 1897. 14s. net.
SIR JOHN SEELEY. The Expansion of England. First published in 1883. 4s.
net.
SIR JOHN SEELEY. Introduction to Political Science. 1896. 4s. net.
Both these books, the first in particular, are important in this
connection. There is no one chapter or section devoted exclusively to the
consideration of nationality, but there are constant references to the
subject. The point of view is, moreover, instructive. Seeley is, perhaps,
the nearest English approach to Treitschke.
J.M. ROBERTSON. Introduction to English Politics. 1900. 10s. 6d. net.
Critical from the Rationalistic as Acton is from the Catholic point of
view. See esp. Part V., "The Fortunes of the Lesser European States," which
after a preliminary essay on Nationality, which the author declares to be
"essentially a metaphysical dream," while "the motive spirit in it partakes
much of the nature of superstition," goes on to give a valuable account of
the development of the "small nations," Holland, Switzerland, Portugal,
etc., by way of showing their value to civilisation as a whole.
P. MILYOUKOV. Russia and its Crisis. 1905. 13s. 6d.
Chap. ii. contains some interesting matter on Nationalism, especially of
course as it has been developed in Russia.
J.S. MILL. On Representative Government. 2s.
Chap, xvi., "Of Nationality as connected with Representative Government."
ALISON PHILLIPS. Modern Europe. 1815-1899. 1903. 6s. net.
An excellent general history of Europe, 1815-1899.
SEIGNOBOS. A Political History of Contemporary Europe since 1814. 2 vols.
1901. 5s. net each.
One of the best general histories of this scope available. It is a
translation from the French, with good bibliographies.
Lectures on the History of the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge. 1902. 4s.
6d. net.
A series of studies, by recognised authorities, of various aspects of
modern European history. Chap. ii., on "The International History of
Europe during the Nineteenth Century," by the late Professor Westlake, is
suggestive on the topic of nationality; chaps. v. and vi., on Germany, by a
German professor, are interesting as giving the German view of unification
by Bismarck; and chaps. ix. and x., on "The Struggle for Italian Unity,"
and "Mazzini," by Mr. Bolton King, are especially valuable.
H.A.L. FISHER. The Republican Tradition in Europe. 1911. 6s. net.
Traces the development of the republican, as distinct from the nationalist
tradition, in modern Europe, and therefore forms a useful complement
to other writers. Chap. ix., on "Italy," and chap. x., on "The German
Revolution," are excellent accounts of "1848" in those two countries.
H.A.L. FISHER. The Value of Small States. Oxford Pamphlets. 2d.
E. LEVETT. Europe since Napoleon. 1913. Blackie. 3s. 6d.
A useful little text-book.
The Cambridge Modern History. Vols. ix., x., xi., xii. 16s. net per vol.
Indispensable for knowledge of the facts of the period.
R. NISBET BAIN. Slavonic Europe, 1447-1796. 1908. 5s. 6d. net.
Chap. xviii. gives a good account of the partitions of Poland.
BOLTON KING. A History of Italian Unity. 2 vols. 1899. 24s. net.
BOLTON KING. Mazzini. 1903. Dent, Temple Biographies. 4s. 6d. net.
BISMARCK. Reflections and Reminiscences. 2 vols. 1898. Smith Elder.
Out of print. To be bought second-hand.
BÜLOW. Imperial Germany. 1914. Cassell. 2s. net.
The last two are indispensable for a true understanding of the principles
which underlie the German Empire.
T.J. LAWRENCE. Principles of International Law. 1910. 12s. 6d. net.
A useful text-book. See also Cambridge Mod. Hist. vol. xii. chap. xxii.
"The Germans are vigorously submissive. They employ philosophical
reasonings to explain what is the least philosophic thing in the world,
respect for force and the fear which transforms that respect into
admiration."—MADAME DE STAËL (1810).
"Greatness and weakness are both inseparable from the race whose powerful
and turbid thought rolls on—the largest stream of music and poetry at
which Europe comes to drink."—ROMAIN ROLLAND (Jean Christophe).
§1. The German State.—The German Nation is one of the oldest in Europe:
the German State is almost the youngest—of the great States quite the
youngest.
Englishmen sometimes wonder why there are so many Royal princes in
Germany—why it is that when a vacant throne has to be filled, or a husband
to be found for a princess of royal standing, Germany seems to provide
such an inexhaustible choice. The reason is that Germany consisted, until
recently, not of one State but of a multitude of States, each of which had
a court and a dynasty and sovereign prerogatives of its own. In 1789, at
the outbreak of the French Revolution, there were 360 of these States of
every sort and size and variety. Some were Kingdoms, like Prussia, some
were Electorates, like Hanover (under our English George III.), some were
Grand Duchies, some were Bishoprics, some were Free Cities, and some
were simply feudal estates in which, owing to the absence of a central
authority, noble families had risen to the rank of independent powers.
These families were the descendants of those "robber-barons" whose castles
on the Rhine and all over South and West Germany the tourist finds so
picturesque. Prince William of Wied, the first Prince of Albania, is a
member of one of them, and is thus entitled to rank with the royalties of
Europe: the father-in-law of ex-King Manoel of Portugal, the Prince of
Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, a branch of the Kaiser's own family, is another
familiar recent instance. And every one remembers Prince Albert of
Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, the husband of Queen Victoria.
In 1789 the possibility of a German National State was so remote that
Germans had not even begun to dream of one. Each little Principality was
jealously tenacious of its local rights, or, as we should say, of its
vested interests, as against the common interests of Germany. Most of
them were narrow and parochial in their outlook; and the others, the
more broad-minded, were not national but cosmopolitan in spirit. To the
tradition of municipal thinking, which had lasted on uninterruptedly in the
Free Cities of Germany from the Middle Ages, Germany owes the excellence of
her municipal government to-day. To the broad and tolerant humanism of
her more enlightened courts, such as Weimar and Brunswick, we owe the
influences that shaped the work of Goethe and of Lessing, two of the
greatest figures in European thought and letters.
Into these peaceful haunts of culture and parochialism Napoleon, with the
armies and the ideas of Revolutionary France, swept like a whirlwind,
breaking up the old settled comfortable life of the cities and countryside.
One of the greatest of German writers, the Jew Heine, has described in a
wonderful passage what the coming of Napoleon meant to the inhabitants of a
little German Principality. It is worth transcribing at some length, for
it gives the whole colour and atmosphere of the old local life in Western
Germany, which has not even yet entirely passed away. The speaker is an old
soldier giving reminiscences of his boyhood:
"Our Elector was a fine gentleman, a great lover of the arts, and himself
very clever with his fingers. He founded the picture gallery at Düsseldorf,
and in the Observatory in that city they still show a very artistic set of
wooden boxes, one inside the other, made by himself in his leisure hours,
of which he had twenty-four every day.
"In those days the Princes were not overworked mortals as they are to-day.
Their crowns sat very firmly on their heads, and at night they just drew
their nightcaps over them, and slept in peace, while peacefully at their
feet slept their peoples; and when these woke up in the morning they said,
'Good morning, Father,' and the Princes replied, 'Good morning, dear
children.'
"But suddenly there came a change. One morning when we woke up in
Düsseldorf and wanted to say, 'Good morning, Father,' we found our Father
gone, and a kind of stupefaction over the whole city. Everybody felt as
though they were going to a funeral, and people crept silently to the
market-place and read a long proclamation on the door of the City Hall. It
was grey weather, and yet thin old tailor Kilian stood in his alpaca coat,
which he kept for indoor use only, and his blue woollen stockings hung down
so that his miserable little bare legs were visible above them and his thin
lips were trembling, while he murmured the words of the proclamation. A
veteran soldier at his side read somewhat louder, and at every few words a
tear trickled down into his honest white beard. I Stood by him and cried
too, and asked him why we were crying. And then he told me: 'The Elector
expresses you his gratitude'—then he went on reading, and at the words
'for your loyal and trusted obedience, and releases you from your duties,'
his tears broke out afresh…. While we were reading, the Elector's arms
were being taken down from the City Hall, the whole place became as
terrifyingly quiet as though there were going to be an eclipse of the sun,
and all the City Councillors went about hanging their heads as though no
one had any more use for them…
"When I woke up next morning, the sun was shining as usual, drums were
beating in the streets, and when I came down to breakfast and said
good-morning to my father I heard how the barber had whispered to him while
he was shaving him that the new Grand Duke Joachim was to receive the
homage of his subjects at the City Hall to-day, that he came of a very good
family and had been given the Emperor Napoleon's sister in marriage, and
had really a very good presence, and wore his fine black hair in curls, and
would shortly enter the city in state and would certainly please all the
ladies. Meanwhile, the drumming continued in the street, and I went and
stood outside the door and watched the French troops marching in, those
glorious happy Frenchmen, who marched through the world with songs and
shining sabres, the gay firm-set faces of the Grenadiers, the bear-skins,
the tricolour cockades, the gleaming bayonets, the merry skilful horsemen,
and the huge great drum-major with his silver-embroidered uniform, who
could throw his drum-stick with its gilt button up to the first floor, and
his eyes up even to the girls in the second floor windows. I was pleased
that we were to have soldiers billeted on us—my mother was not—and I
hurried to the market-place. There everything was quite different now. The
world looked as if it had had a new coat of paint. A new coat-of-arms was
hanging on the City Hall, the iron railings on the balcony were covered
with tapestry hangings, French Grenadiers were standing sentry, the old
City Councillors had put on new faces, and were wearing Sunday clothes, and
looked at one another in French and said 'Bon jour,' ladies were looking
out of all the windows, curious bystanders and smart soldiers thronged
the square, and I and the other boys climbed on to the big horse of the
Elector's statue and looked down on the gay crowd."[1]
[Footnote 1: Heine, Collected Works, i. 228 (Book Le Grand).]
Napoleon and his French soldiers, "marching through the world with songs
and shining sabres," brought the Germans more than this happy thrill of
excitement and a supply of new and more elegant princes. They brought them
that which gave strength to their own right arm—the spirit of Nationality.
"The soul of the German people," says a recent German writer, "has always
lain very deep down, and has seldom come to the surface to become the
spirit of the time and to inspire the movements of the world. Hardly ever
except in times of the deepest adversity has it come to the surface: but
then it has claimed its rights, or rather, discovered its duties."[1]
Napoleon, by humiliating her, laid bare the soul of Germany, as Germany
herself has laid bare the soul of Belgium to-day. His arrogant pretensions
roused the Germans as they had never been roused since the days of the
Reformation; while at the same time his attempts to secure the support of
the bigger German principalities by enlarging them at the expense of the
smaller, simplified the map and laid the foundations of a United Germany.
The thinkers and dreamers of Germany, stung at last into a sense of
political reality, awoke from their dreams of cosmopolitanism and devoted
their powers to the needs of the German nation.
[Footnote 1: Daab's Preface to Paul de Lagarde, German Faith, German

Fatherland, German Culture, p. vi. (Jena, 1913).]

The years between 1806 and 1813, between the disastrous battle of Jena
and the overwhelming victory of Leipzig, are the greatest years in German
history. Shaking off the torpor and the prejudices of centuries the German
nation arose and vanquished its oppressors.
But with the twilight of that glorious day the bats returned. The defeat of
Napoleon was not only the defeat of French domination but the defeat of the
French Revolution, and of the principles of Democracy and Nationality which
inspired it. The unity of spirit which the Germans had achieved on the
battlefield they were unable to transform after the victory into a unity of
government or institutions. The Congress of Vienna, which redrew the map
of Europe after the Revolutionary wars, did so, not in accordance with
the principle of nationality or the wishes of the peoples of Europe but
according to what was called "legitimacy," that is to say, the interests
of the princes. There was only one idealist at the Conference, the Russian
Emperor Alexander, and he was put off with empty phrases.
[Illustration: Germany of 1815.]
For Germany the result of the Conference was the reestablishment, in
smaller numbers and with larger units of territory, of the old undemocratic
principalities, and of a Confederation embodying their dynastic interests.
Several of the larger States, such as Bavaria, Würtemberg, Saxony, and
Hanover, which Napoleon had raised to the status of kingdoms, were
confirmed in their new dignities, and the kingdom of Prussia, the largest
of them all, acquired, out of the debris of the old Archbishopric of
Cologne and other small ecclesiastical and temporal States, the important
provinces of Westphalia and the Rhineland, which have made possible for
her the industrial growth of the last half century. Cologne, Düsseldorf,
Elberfeld, Essen, and other great industrial centres of Western Germany
will next year be celebrating the centenary of their Prussian connection.
But the chief State in the Confederation and its undisputed head was
Austria, which had for centuries enjoyed the prestige of supremacy over the
German States; and it was the Austrian statesman Metternich who was mainly
responsible for the Vienna settlement.
The German Confederation of 1815-1866 went far outside the boundaries of
modern Germany. It included lands belonging to three non-German monarchs.
The King of Holland was a member of it in virtue of the Dutch provinces of
Limburg and Luxemburg; the King of Denmark for the Duchies of Schleswig and
Holstein; and the Emperor of Austria (who, then as now, ruled over Hungary,
Austrian Poland, and the Southern Slav provinces) for Bohemia, Moravia, and
German-speaking Austria up to and beyond Vienna. The Confederation was in
fact in no sense a national State, and was never intended to be so. It was
a loosely knit assortment of principalities and free cities. Germany
was still broken up and divided in a manner almost inconceivable to the
inhabitants of an old-established unity like Great Britain or France. At
least five different kinds of money, for instance, were in use in the
different States of the Confederation, and, as stamp-collectors know, the
postal system was bewildering in its complexity. More important was
the deep gulf between different parts of the country due to religious
divisions. The Reformation, which left England with a National Church, left
Germany hopelessly divided; and the division between the Protestants in the
north and east, and the Catholics in the west and south, is still, half
a century after the establishment of the United Empire, a source of
difficulty.
Yet the Confederation has one undeniable achievement to its credit. It
paved the way for German unity by facilitating the Zollverein, or Customs
Union, which was extended between 1830 and 1844 to practically all the
German States except those under Austrian rule. But the far-reaching
importance of this development was not at that time appreciated. Western
Europe was tired after the great Napoleonic struggle and was not in a mood
for big designs. To all outward appearance Germany seemed to have relapsed,
after the thrill and glamour of the Wars of Liberation, into the stuffy
atmosphere of the old eighteenth century life. Only a very patient, a very
docile, and a very philosophic and law-abiding people would have endured
such an anti-climax; and it is these qualities, together with a certain
clumsiness and helplessness due to their complete inexperience of the
responsibilities of a larger citizenship, which go far to explain the
subsequent history of Germany.
But in the evil days after the Congress of Vienna the idea of German
unity lived on, and formed a constant theme of discussion and speculation,
like the idea of the unity of Poland and of the Southern Slavs in the
present generation. The stirring memories of the Great Revolution were like
a constant refrain at the back of men's minds all through that dreary time.
In 1830, when the French established a Liberal Monarchy and the Belgians
freed themselves from the unwelcome supremacy of Holland, there was much
excitement throughout Germany. But nothing serious occurred until 1848,
when the Liberal and Nationalist movement, which had been gathering force
throughout the educated classes of Western Europe for a generation, at
length came to a head. The whole of Germany was in a ferment, a strong
Republican movement manifested itself, and in almost every one of the many
capital cities there was a rising with a demand for a free constitution
and parliamentary government, and for the consolidation of German national
unity in accordance with the same democratic ideals. The princes had no
alternative but to give way, and, as a result, local Constitutions were
granted, and a national Parliament was summoned to meet at Frankfurt, to
draw up a national German Constitution on democratic lines.
The task before the Frankfurt Parliament was similar to that which has
confronted British statesmen several times during the last century, in
framing the Dominion of Canada, the Commonwealth of Australia, and the
Union of South Africa—the task of welding a number of separate State
governments with the free consent of their populations into a homogeneous
and democratic central authority. But in the case of an old and still
largely feudal country like Germany the task was infinitely more difficult,
for it could not be successful without a levelling-up of the political
ideals of the backward States, such as Prussia, and the elimination of many
ancient associations and dynastic interests. The Frankfurt Constitution did
actually come into being, and it was nobly planned. It guaranteed to every
German citizen the rights of civil liberty, equality before the law, and
responsible parliamentary government, both central and local. But the mind
of the German nation was not yet equal to its new responsibilities. The
Frankfurt Parliament, like the first Russian Duma, was out of touch with
realities; it wasted precious time on the discussion of abstract questions
of principle, and failed to meet the practical needs of the moment.
While it sat and talked, the enthusiasm which had created it gradually
evaporated. Meanwhile the more reactionary States, and the princes whose
prerogatives were endangered, became more and more openly hostile. All
through 1849 the Parliament was losing members by defection, and by the end
of the year its influence had sunk to vanishing point.
The movement which collapsed thus ignominiously was not a popular agitation
in the English sense of the term: like other movements of its generation it
sprang, not from the people but from the well-to-do, and its strength lay
among the professional and educated classes. The Frankfurt Parliament was
a predominantly middle-class assembly: lawyers and professors, always an
important element in German national life, were strongly represented in
it and largely responsible for its failure. Its collapse was a bitter
disappointment, and drove many of its leaders into exile abroad, more
particularly to the United States, where some of them, such as Carl
Schurz, lived to play a noteworthy part under more democratic political
institutions.
After the failure of the Frankfurt Constitution it slowly became clear to
far-sighted Germans that there was only one way in which German unity could
come about. If, unlike the separate provinces of Canada and South Africa,
the German States would not voluntarily sink their identity in a larger
whole, unity could only come through their acceptance of the supremacy of
one of the existing States.
There were only two possible candidates for the supremacy, Austria and
Prussia. Austria was still, at that time, as she had been for centuries,
in a position of undisputed headship. But her German policy was always
hampered because she had also to consider her non-German subjects.
Prussia, a younger and more homogeneous State, with a better organised
administration and a better disciplined people, was preparing to assert
herself. In 1862, at a moment when liberalism was gathering strength in
Prussia, Count Bismarck became chief Minister of the Prussian Crown and
the dominating force in Prussian policy. Bismarck was a Conservative and a
reactionary, wholly out of sympathy with the ideals of 1848. His immediate
object was to secure the supremacy of Prussia among the German States.
In the very first months of his leadership he made it clear, in a famous
sentence, by what methods he hoped to achieve his end. "The great questions
are to be settled," he told the Prussian Diet, with a scornful hit at the
Confederation, "not by speeches and majority resolutions, but by blood and
iron."
He was not long in translating words into action. In 1864 the King of
Denmark died, and difficulties at once arose as to the succession to the
Duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, which still belonged to the German
Confederation. Austria and Prussia intervened jointly in the name of the
Confederation, and, as a result, the Duchies were separated from Denmark,
Schleswig being administered by Austria and Holstein by Prussia. The object
of this rather clumsy plan, which originated with Bismarck, was to create
difficulties which would enable him to pick a quarrel with Austria. In 1866
this manoeuvre proved successful. Bismarck goaded Austria into war and
succeeded, after a six weeks' campaign, in expelling her from the German
State system, following this up by rounding off her own dominions with the
annexation of a number of the smaller pro-Austrian States, amongst them the
kingdom of Hanover. His victory also had the effect of completely checking
the growing agitation for the establishment of responsible government in
Prussia.[1]
[Footnote 1: On this point see Bismarck's Recollections, and the good
short account in Powicke's Bismarck.]
Having made Prussia supreme in Germany, Bismarck was now in a position
to solve the problem of German unity. He resolved to employ the same
well-tried method. In 1870 the somewhat high-handed manner of Napoleon III.
made it possible for him to bring about a war between the German States
and France, in which Germany, under Prussian leadership, was completely
victorious. In the flush of their success, after the capture of Paris in
January 1871, the lesser States of Germany agreed to enter into a Federal
Union under Prussian supremacy and to accept the King of Prussia as its
head, with the title of Emperor.
Thus, at length, Germany became a National State, with a national
constitution. The term Empire is misleading, for to English ears it
suggests the government of dependencies. Germany is not an Empire in that
sense: she is a Federation, like the United States and Switzerland, of
independent States which have agreed to merge some of their prerogatives,
notably the conduct of foreign affairs and of defence, in a central
authority. Since some of these independent States were, and still are,
monarchies, a higher title had to be provided for the Chief of the
Federation. An ace, as it were, was needed to trump the kings. After much
deliberation the title Emperor was agreed upon; but it is noteworthy that
the Kaiser is not "the Emperor of Germany": he bears the more non-committal
title of "German Emperor."
The German Imperial Constitution, devised by Bismarck in 1871, falls far
short of the Frankfurt experiment of 1848. It does indeed provide for
the creation of a Reichstag, or Imperial Parliament, elected by all
male citizens over twenty-five. But the Reichstag can neither initiate
legislation nor secure the appointment or dismissal of Ministers. In
the absence of ministerial responsibility to Parliament, which is the
mainspring of our English Constitutional system, the Reichstag might be
described as little more than an advisory body armed with the power of
veto. Like the English Parliament in the days of Charles I.'s ship-money,
the Reichstag could in the last resort refuse supplies, and so bring the
machinery of government to a standstill. But this situation has never yet
arisen or seemed likely to arise. The Government has ridden the Reichstag
with a strong hand, turning awkward corners by concessions to the various
groups in turn, and the Reichstag has responded to this treatment. Bismarck
"took his majorities where he could get them"; and Prince Bülow's book
contains some illuminating pages about the clever methods which that
statesman adopted to "manage" his Parliaments.
Above the Reichstag is the Bundesrat or Federal Council, on which all the
Federated States are represented, Prussia having seventeen members as
against forty-two from the other States. The Bundesrat sits in secret; its
members are selected by the different State Governments and vote according
to instructions received. All Bills originate in the Bundesrat before they
are submitted to the Reichstag, and are re-submitted to the Bundesrat, to
be passed or vetoed, after alteration in the Reichstag. The twenty-six
members of the German Federation represented in the Bundesrat comprise four
kingdoms (Prussia, Bavaria, Würtemberg, and Saxony), a number of Grand
Duchies and smaller ducal States, three Free Cities (Hamburg, Lübeck, and
Bremen), and the Imperial Territory of Alsace-Lorraine. All these (except
the last named) preserve their own local Parliaments and institutions, and
the second largest, Bavaria, even preserves in peace-time, like the British
self-governing Dominions, her own military organisation and has also her
own postal system. But Prussia in size, influence, and military strength
is by far the most important, and for practical purposes her power
preponderates over that of all the other States combined. The real control
of legislation naturally lies with the State which controls two-fifths
of the votes in the Bundesrat, where legislation is initiated and can
be vetoed; it is wielded by the Kaiser, as King of Prussia, and by his
Imperial Chancellor, President of the Bundesrat and always a Prussian
Minister. The Imperial Chancellor, who is the only Imperial Minister, is
chosen by the Kaiser and is responsible to him alone: he countersigns all
the Kaiser's orders and edicts, and has the function, it may be added, of
explaining away his indiscretions.
It is inevitable, under these circumstances, that the policy and
legislation of the central government should largely reflect Prussian views
and ideals. On the other hand, the temper of the rest of Germany must
always be kept in mind. As Prince Büllow, the late Imperial Chancellor,
says: "If the Empire is governed without reference to Prussia, ill-will
towards the Empire will grow in that country. If Prussia is governed
without reference to the Empire, then there is the danger that mistrust and
dislike of the leading State will gain ground in non-Prussian Germany….
The art of governing in our country will always have to be directed chiefly
towards maintaining the harmony between Germany and Prussia, in the spirit
as well as in the letter."[1]
[Footnote 1: Imperial Germany, pp. 191-192.]
Why should the government of Germany be such an "art"? And why should there
be any difficulty in maintaining a harmonious spirit between Prussia and
non-Prussian Germany? To answer these questions we must widen the scope of
our inquiry. So far we have considered only the growth and development
of the German State. It is now time to turn from the German State to the
German people.
§2. The Real Germany.—The difficulty of establishing German Unity
has lain in the fact that there have really always been two Germanies,
different in history, in temper, in ideals, and in their stages of
development in civilisation. There has been Prussia, or North-Eastern
Germany; and there has been the real Germany, the Germany of the South and
West. It is only since 1870, and especially within the reign of the present
Kaiser, that, through education and common experience; the two have become
fused into one; but even now, beneath the uniform surface of German life
and public opinion, there is a great inner distinction.
Let us take what we have called the real Germany first. This Germany, the
Germany of the Rhine country, of Frankfurt and Heidelberg and Cologne and
Nüremberg, is the Germany which so many Englishmen know and admire. This
Germany is an integral part of the civilisation of Western Europe, and is
closely akin to ourselves. It has grown and developed alongside with France
and the Netherlands and England, sharing in all the great spiritual and
social movements of the West. It has passed, with them, through the Middle
Ages, the Revival of Learning, the Reformation, and the long struggle
against the domination of France. Its famous cities with their Cathedrals
and Town Halls breathe the same proud, free, municipal spirit as those of
their great neighbours in the Netherlands, Ghent, Antwerp, Louvain, Bruges,
Ypres and the rest. Its scholars and teachers, poets, painters, and
musicians, from Luther to Goethe, have made their special German
contribution to the civilised life of the West—a contribution as great and
as unique as that of Renaissance Italy or Elizabethan England. Its people
are very similar in character to their neighbours of kindred stock. As
industrious as the Dutch, as persevering as the Scotch, as steady and
good-hearted as the English, good workers, good citizens, devoted in their
family relations, they have found it easy to live at peace and on a good
understanding with their neighbours, and when they have migrated abroad,
they have by common confession made the best of settlers, both in the
United States and in the British Dominions.
Yet they have developed certain characteristic qualities in their social
and political life, which distinguish them sharply from their western
neighbours. History, which has deprived them, until recently, of a wider
citizenship, has left them timid, docile, dreamy and unpractical in just
that sphere of action where Englishmen have learnt for centuries to think
and to act for themselves. Patriotism with Englishmen is an instinct. We
do not much care to wave flags or make speeches or sing songs about it: we
assume it as the permanent background of our national life and our national
consciousness. With the Germans this is not so. In Germany, partly owing
to German history, partly owing to the constitution of the German mind,
patriotism is not an instinct but an idea. Now ideas do not grow up in
men's minds by a natural process. They have to be implanted. The Germans
have needed to be taught to be patriotic. The makers of German patriotism
a century ago were teachers and philosophers. They did not simply appeal to
their patriotic instincts, as Englishmen would have done: they argued the
point and proved that Germany was worth fighting for: they founded a
school of patriotic German philosophy. There are few more curious documents
in history, or more instructive for the light they shed on future
events, than the famous Speeches to the German Nation addressed to his
fellow-countrymen by the philosopher Fichte in 1808, when his country was
under the heel of Napoleon. They are not speeches at all, but philosophical
lucubrations, discussing in abstract terms the whole subject of the nature
of patriotism and of Germany's right to exist as a nation. One argument,
for instance, on which he lays great stress, is that Germany is marked out
to be a great political power because of the peculiar excellence of the
German language, which he shows to his satisfaction to be superior to
French, Italian, and other Latin languages. Again, he points out that there
is no word in the German language for "character" (Karakter), a word
borrowed from the Greek; the reason is, he explains, that there is no need
for one, because to have character and to be German are the same thing—a
curious foretaste of the German arrogance of to-day. Yet these speeches,
which, issued in England at such a crisis, would have found no readers,
reverberated through Germany and helped to create the self-confident spirit
which freed her from the invader. Then, as now, under the inspiration of
ideas which they had accepted from professors and philosophers, Germans
fought for the German language and for German culture. But whereas in 1814
they fought to preserve them, in 1914 they are fighting to impose them.
Just as patriotism in Germany is wholly different from what it is in
England, so also is democracy, and all those elements in the national life
which feed and sustain it. British democracy does not depend upon our
popular franchise or on any legal rights or enactments. It depends upon the
free spirit and self-respect of the British people. We have been accustomed
for centuries to the unrestrained discussion of public affairs; and we
treat our governors as being in fact, as they are in name, our "ministers"
or servants. There is a force called public opinion which, slow though it
may be to assert itself, British statesmen have been taught by experience
to respect. It is as true of British as it is of American democracy that
"you can fool half the people all the time; and you can fool all the people
half the time; but you cannot fool all the people all the time." But the
German people, as a people, lacks this irreplaceable heritage of political
self-respect. It has never yet dared to tread the path of democracy without
leading strings. It has not yet learned to think for itself in politics,
or formed the habit of free discussion and practical criticism of public
affairs. This is the vital fact which must be borne in mind in all
comparisons between German and British democracy. The Germans have a
Parliament, elected by Universal Male Suffrage. But this Parliament is
powerless to control policy, because the nation behind it does not give it
sufficient support. It is because of the absence of the driving force of a
public opinion in Germany that the German people submit complacently to the
infringements on political liberty which form part of the normal régime
of German life—the domineering arrogance of officers and officials,
the restraints upon the Press and the shameless manufacture of news
and inspiration of opinion from official sources, the control of the
Universities, the schools, and the public services by the State in the
interest of "orthodox" political opinions, and the ridiculous laws which
have sent editors and cartoonists to prison in scores for criticising the
behaviour and utterances of the Emperor or the Crown Prince. In England and
in America underground attempts are sometimes made to injure the careers of
men whose opinions are considered "dangerous" by those who employ them.
In Germany such interference with freedom of political thought is not the
exception: it has become the rule. No man can make a successful career
in the public service (and education is a public service) unless he is
considered politically "orthodox" (gesinnungstüchtig); and orthodoxy does
not simply mean abstention from damaging criticism or dangerous opinions:
it means, in practice, deference to the opinions of those who "know
better," that is, to the clique of Prussian generals and bureaucrats who,
together with the Kaiser, control the policy of the country.
British readers who do not know Germany may think the foregoing indictment
of German political incapacity severe. It is not so severe as Prince
Büllow's. The portion of the late Imperial Chancellor's book which deals
with domestic policy opens with these crushing sentences: "The history of
our home policy, with the exception of a few bright spots, is a history of
political mistakes. Despite the abundance of merits and great qualities
with which the German nation is endowed, political talent has been denied
it…. We are not a political people." A page or two later he goes even
further and quotes with approval a dictum that the Germans are
"political donkeys." That a modern statesman should think this of his
fellow-countrymen is remarkable enough; that he should say it outright is
a still more remarkable proof of his unshakeable belief in their
submissiveness. Therein lies the whole tragedy of the present situation.
The German people, so kindly and, alas! so docile, is suffering, not for
its sins, but for its deficiencies; not for its own characteristic acts or
natural ambitions, but for what it has too tamely allowed others, Prussian
statesmen and soldiers, with alien ideals and an alien temper, to foist
upon it, until it has become an integral part of its natural life and
consciousness. Germany has been indoctrinated and Prussianised not only
into acquiescence, but into sympathy with the policy of its rulers.
§3. Prussia.—This brings us to the consideration of the second and more
powerful of the two Germanies—namely, Prussia. In order to understand
Prussia and the Prussian spirit we must plunge ourselves into an atmosphere
wholly different from that of the Germany that has just been described. The
very names of the two countries mark the measure of the difference. Germany
means the country of the Germans, as England means the country of the
English. But the name Prussia commemorates the subjugation and extinction
by German conquerors and crusaders from the west of the Prussians or
Bo-Russians, a tribe akin to the Letts and Lithuanians. The old Duchy of
Prussia, which now forms the provinces of East and West Prussia at the
extreme North-East of the present German Empire, consisted of heathen lands
colonised or conquered, between the thirteenth and sixteenth centuries, by
a great religious and military organisation known as the "Knights of the
Teutonic Order." While Southern and Western Germany was passing, with the
rest of Western Europe, through the transition between mediaeval and modern
Europe, what is now North-Eastern Germany was still in a wholly primitive
stage of development, and the Knights of the Teutonic Order, with crusading
fervour, were spreading Christianity and German "culture" by force of
arms, converting or repelling the Slavonic population and settling German
colonists in the territory thus reclaimed for civilisation. The great
British admirer of Prussia, Thomas Carlyle, in the first volume of his
Frederick the Great, gives a vivid account of their activities in their
forts or "burgs" of wood and stone, and helps us to realise what memories
lie behind the struggle between German and Slav to-day, and why the word
"Petersburg" has become so odious to the Russians as the name of their
capital. "The Teutsch Ritters build a Burg for headquarters, spread
themselves this way and that, and begin their great task. The Prussians
were a fierce fighting people, fanatically anti-Christian: the Teutsch
Ritters had a perilous never-resting time of it…. They built and burnt
innumerable stockades for and against: built wooden Forts which are now
stone Towns. They fought much and prevalently, galloped desperately to and
fro, ever on the alert. How many Burgs of wood and stone they built in
different parts, what revolts, surprisals, furious fights in woody, boggy
places they had, no man counted; their life, read in Dryasdust's newest
chaotic Books (which are of endless length, among other ill qualities) is
like a dim nightmare of unintelligible marching and fighting: one feels
as if the mere amount of galloping they had would have carried the Order
several times round the Globe…. But always some preaching, by zealous
monks, accompanies the chivalrous fighting. And colonists come in from
Germany; trickling in, or at times streaming. Victorious Ritterdom offers
terms to the beaten Heathen; terms not of tolerant nature, but which will
be punctually kept by Ritterdom." Here we see the strange stern, medieval,
crusading atmosphere which lies behind the unpleasant combinations, so
familiar to us to-day in France and Belgium, of Uhlans and religion, of
culture and violence, of "Germanisation" and devastation. When we hear the
German professors of to-day preaching of the spread of German culture by
the German arms, and when we feel disgust at the exaggerated religious
phraseology which pervades the Kaiser's oratory and seems to accord so ill
with his policy and ambitions, we must remember the peculiar origins of the
Prussian State and how comparatively recent those origins are. "I have once
before had occasion," said the Kaiser at Marienburg in East Prussia on June
5, 1902, "to say in this place how Marienburg, this unique Eastern bulwark,
the point of departure for the culture of the lands east of the Vistula,
will always be a symbol for our German mission. There is work for us
again to-day. Polish arrogance wishes to lay hands on Germanism, and I am
constrained to call my people to the defence of its national possessions.
Here in Marienburg I proclaim that I expect all the brothers of the Order
of St. John to be at my service when I call upon them to protect German
ways and German customs." The Kaiser's crusading appeals are not
hypocritical or consciously insincere: they are simply many centuries out
of date—a grotesque medley of medieval romanticism and royal megalomania.
What was possible for the warrior knights in North-East Germany five or six
centuries ago is a tragic absurdity and an outrageous crime to-day among
a spirited and sensitive people like the Poles—still more so in a highly
civilised national State such as Belgium or France. It is an absurdity that
only a theatrical monarch could conceive and a crime that only a military
autocracy could attempt to enforce.
In the sixteenth century the Reformation, spreading throughout the North of
Europe, undermined the basis of the Teutonic Order. The Grand Master of
the time transformed himself into a Lutheran Prince holding the hereditary
Duchy of Prussia as a vassal of the King of the neighbouring Slavonic
State of Poland. In 1611 the Duchy was amalgamated with the territory of
Brandenburg farther west, and in 1647 the enlarged Prussian territories
won their emancipation from Poland. Prussia now became a distinct State,
essentially German in character (as opposed to the Poles and Lithuanians on
its Eastern border), but still remaining for a time outside the community
of the other German States.
The union between Prussia and Brandenburg had brought Prussia under the
rule of the House of Hohenzollern, which, although originally a South
German family, had borne rule in Brandenburg since 1415. Under the
Hohenzollerns Prussia rapidly increased in territory and influence until in
1701 the ruler of the day, the grandfather of Frederick the Great, took on
himself the title of King. Under Frederick the Great, Prussia's career of
conquest and aggrandisement continued. Seizing a convenient opportunity, he
invaded and annexed the Austrian province of Silesia, and later joined with
Austria and Russia in promoting the shameful Partition of Poland. The old
conquering and "civilising" policy of the Teutonic Knights was continued,
but under new conditions and in a brutal and cynical spirit which rendered
it impossible of success. "The surest means of giving this oppressed nation
better ideas and morals," wrote Frederick the Great, in words quoted
with approval by Prince Bülow, "will always be gradually to get them to
intermarry with Germans, even if at first it is only two or three of them
in every village." This spirit in Prussian policy may have extinguished the
ancient Prussians, but it has not yet begun to Germanise the Poles, and has
gone far to de-Germanise the Alsatians. But it explains the utterances and
justifies the sincerity of those who believe that to-day, as in the early
days of her history, Prussia is fighting on behalf of "culture."
Prussia remains to-day, what she has been for the last two centuries, an
aggressive military monarchy. "Prussia attained her greatness," says Prince
Bülow, "as a country of soldiers and officials, and as such she was able
to accomplish the work of German union; to this day she is still, in all
essentials, a State of soldiers and officials." Power rests in the hands
of the monarch and of a bureaucracy of military and civil officials,
responsible to him alone, and traditionally and fanatically loyal to the
monarch who is, before all things, their War Lord.
The Prussian outlook is so foreign to Western habits of thought that it is
well that we should try to understand it at its best. Prussia proper has
not been rich, like the rest of Germany, in poets and imaginative writers;
but she is fortunate to-day in possessing in the greatest living Greek
scholar, Professor von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, a man who by birth and
breeding is able to put the highest interpretation upon the aims and spirit
of the Prussian State. To Wilamowitz Prussia is not only nearer and dearer
than Athens. She is better, and more advanced. At the close of a wonderful
address on "the glory of the Athenian Empire," in which he has employed all
the resources of his wide learning to paint a picture of Ancient Greece
at her best, Wilamowitz breaks into this impassioned peroration: "But one
element in life, the best of all, ye lacked, noble burghers of Athens.
Your sages tell us of that highest love which, freed from all bodily
entanglements, spends itself on institutions, on laws, on ideas. We
Prussians, a rough, much-enduring tribe of Northerners, may be compacted
of harder stuff; but we believe that love is on a higher level when the
fullest devotion to an institution and an idea is inseparably linked with
an entirely personal devotion to a human being; and at least we know how
warm such a love can make a loyal heart. When our children have scarce
learned to fold their hands before God, we set a picture before them, we
teach them to recognise the noble features; we tell them, 'This is our good
King.' Our young men, when they are of age to bear arms, look with joy and
pride on the trim garb of war, and say, 'I go in the King's coat.' And when
the nation assembles to a common political celebration, the occasion is no
Feast of the Constitution, no Day of the Bastille, no Panathenaic Festival.
It is then that we bow in reverence and loyalty before him who has allowed
us to see with our own eyes that for which our Fathers dreamed and
yearned, before him who ever extends the bounds of the Kingdom in Freedom,
Prosperity, and Righteousness, before his Majesty the Emperor and King."[1]
[Footnote 1: Speeches and Lectures, 3rd edition, Berlin, 1913, p. 65. The
"good King" referred to is the old Emperor William, as the address dates
from 1877.]
Here, far better expressed than in the Kaiser's speeches, we see the spirit
of the Prussian Junker at its best. It is narrow, old-fashioned, and, to
democratic ears, almost grotesque. Yet, if it survives uncorrupted by the
dangers to which progress always exposes a military caste, it will not be
easy either to crush by defeat or to transform by humiliation.
It is among the old Prussian nobility and the large landed proprietors
in the original Prussian provinces, who have come to be known as the
"Junkers," that this spirit prevails. They stand for the old stern
repressive military discipline and unchanging Conservatism in its extremest
form, regarding with well-founded suspicion and misgiving symptoms of
development in any direction whatsoever. No party in Germany acquiesced
more unwillingly in the changes necessitated by her commercial and
industrial development. Even their militarism stopped short at the
Army, and it required a substantial increase in the protective tariff
safeguarding their agricultural interests to purchase their reluctant
adhesion to the Kaiser's policy of naval expansion. Even now the German
Navy, the pride of the commercial and industrial classes throughout the
German Empire, is regarded by them with uneasy suspicion as a parvenu
service, in which the old Prussian influences count for less in promotion
than technical skill and practical efficiency.
The institutions of the Prussian State represent the spirit of its ruling
caste. If the German Empire is not democratic, Prussia lags far behind it.
The electoral system in use for the Prussian Lower House is too complicated
to explain here. Its injustice may be gauged from the fact that in 1900
the Social Democrats, who actually polled a majority of the votes, secured
seven seats out of nearly 400. The whole spirit and practice of the
Government is inimical to inborn British conceptions of civil liberty and
personal rights. There is one law and code of conduct for officers and
another for civilians, and woe betide the civilian who resists the military
pretensions. The incidents at Zabern in Alsace in 1913 are still fresh
in public memory, reinforced by evidence of a similar spirit in German
military proclamations in France and Belgium. But it is important to
realise that these incidents are not exceptional outbursts but common
Prussian practice, upheld, as the sequel to the Zabern events proved, by
the highest authority.
Prussia, and through Prussia Germany, is in effect ruled in accordance with
the wishes of the official caste: and short of a popular rising nothing but
defeat can dethrone it. "Any one who has any familiarity at all with our
officers and generals," says an authoritative German writer, in words that
we may hope will be prophetic, "knows that it would take another Sedan,
inflicted on us instead of by us, before they would acquiesce in the
control of the Army by the German Parliament."[1] No clearer statement
could be given as to where the real power lies in Germany, and how stern
will be the task of displacing it.
[Footnote 1: Professor Delbrück (who succeeded to the chair of history
in Berlin held so long by Treitschke), in a book published early in 1914
(Government and the Popular Will, p. 136).]
The foreign policy of Prussia has reflected the same domineering spirit.
Its object has been the increase of its power and territory by conquest or
cunning: and by the successful prosecution of this policy it has extended
Prussian authority and Prussian influence over a large part of Western
Germany. The best way of illustrating this will be to quote a passage from
the Recollections of Prince Bismarck, who directed Prussian policy from
1862 to 1890. In 1864 trouble arose as to the succession to the Duchies of
Schleswig and Holstein on the Danish border. Prussia had no claim whatever
to the Duchies; but she coveted Holstein because it would give her a
Western sea-board, with the results that we all know. Bismarck describes
the arguments which he used to persuade his Royal Master to assert
his claim. "I reminded him," he writes, "that each of his immediate
predecessors had won an addition to the Monarchy": he then went through the
history of the six previous reigns, and ended by encouraging King
William to be worthy of his ancestors. His advice, as we have seen, was
successfully adopted.
[Illustration: PRUSSIA SINCE THE ACCESSION OF FREDERICK THE GREAT]
The conquest of France in 1870, by means of the military power of Germany
under Prussian leadership, made Prussia supreme in Germany, and the German
army supreme in Central Europe. The Treaty of Frankfurt in May 1871, by
which the new French Republic ceded to the German Empire the two French
provinces of Alsace and Lorraine, marked the opening of a new epoch in
European history, the period of the Armed Peace, which ended in 1914. It
marked also the opening of a new epoch in Germany, some features of which
we must now examine.
§4. Germany since 1870.—German history from 1871 to 1914 falls into two
well-defined periods. During the first period, from 1871 to 1888, Germany
was ruled by her Imperial Chancellor, Prince Bismarck. But the accession of
the present Kaiser led to a change, not in the letter, but in the spirit of
the new constitution, and since 1890, when William II. "dropped the pilot"
and selected a more amenable successor, the real control of policy has lain
with the Emperor.
The relations between Prince Bismarck and the old Emperor, who was over
ninety when he died in 1888, form a touching passage in modern history.
Although his grandson has publicly claimed for him a peculiar measure of
divine inspiration, his strength lay in his implicit confidence in his
great minister. Bismarck's attitude to him, as described in his Memoirs,
is rather like that of an old family retainer who has earned by long and
faithful service the right to assert his views and to pit his judgment
against his master's. His one formidable antagonist was the Empress; and
long experience, he tells us, enabled him to judge whether difficulties in
persuading the old Kaiser to adopt a given line of policy were due to
his own judgment or conceived "in the interests of domestic peace." The
faithful servant had his own appropriate methods of winning his way in
either case.
But with the new Kaiser the old minister's astuteness availed nothing,
and the story of Bismarck's curt dismissal, after thirty-eight years
of continuous service, from the post which he had created for himself,
illustrates the danger of framing a constitution to meet a particular
temporary situation. Bismarck, put out of action by his own machinery,
retired growling to his country seat, and lived to see the reversal of his
foreign policy and the exposure of Germany, through the Franco-Russian
Alliance, to the one danger he always dreaded, an attack on both flanks.
Like Germany's present rulers, Bismarck was not a scrupulous man; but
unlike them he was shrewd and far-sighted, and understood the statesmen and
the peoples with whom he had to deal. The main object of his foreign policy
was to preserve the prestige of the German army as the chief instrument of
power in Central Europe, and to allow the new Germany, after three wars in
seven years, time to develop in peace and to consolidate her position as
one of the Great Powers.
The situation was not an easy one; for Germany's rapid rise to power,
and the methods by which she had acquired it, had not made her popular.
Bismarck's foreign policy was defensive throughout, and he pursued it along
two lines. He sought to strengthen Germany by alliances, and to weaken her
rivals by embroiling them with one another. The great fruit of his policy
was the formation, completed in 1882, of the Triple Alliance between
Germany, Austria-Hungary and Italy.
There was nothing sentimental about the Triple Alliance. The Italians hate
the Austrians, whom they drove out of Venice as recently as 1866, while
neither the German Austrians nor the other races in the Dual Monarchy have
any love lost for the Prussians. But Bismarck decided that this combination
was the safest in Germany's interest: so he set to work to play upon
Austria's fear of Russia, and to embroil Italy with France in North Africa;
and his manoeuvres were duly rewarded.
But this was not sufficient. Faced with the implacable hostility of France,
on account of the lost provinces, Bismarck saw danger of trouble from a
French Coalition with the two remaining Great Powers, Britain and Russia.
Bismarck never liked England; but he never made his successors' mistake of
despising her. He cultivated good relations, but he rejected the idea of an
alliance, because, as he said, "the English constitution is not compatible
with treaties of assured continuity." In other words, he fought shy of
British democracy, which he felt to be an incalculable factor. This threw
him back upon Russia.
The relations between the German and the Russian peoples have never been
cordial. But between the reactionary bureaucracies of the Prussian and
Russian governments there was a strong bond of mutual interest, which
Bismarck exploited to the full. Both had popular movements to hold in
check, both had stolen goods to guard in the shape of their Polish
possessions, and both had an interest in the preservation of reactionary
institutions. The influence of Prussia upon Russia, and of the efficient,
highly-organised, relentless Prussian machine upon the arbitrary,
tyrannical, but far less efficient and inhuman bureaucracy of Russia, has
been wholly sinister[1], both for Russia and for Europe. Bismarck's object,
of course, was not so much to keep down the Russian revolutionaries as to
check the aspirations of the Panslavists, whose designs for the liberation
of the Slav nationalities, as we now see them unfolding, threaten the
stability both of Prussia and of Austria-Hungary.
[Footnote 1: The same remark applies to the influence of Germany on

Turkey.]

Throughout the 'eighties Bismarck succeeded in keeping on foot a secret
understanding with Russia. How deeply he had implanted the necessity of
this policy in the mind of William I. is brought home by the fact that it
was the thought uppermost in the old man's mind as he lay on his deathbed.
"Never lose touch with the Tsar," whispered the old man to his grandson,
when he was almost too weak to speak. "There is no cause for quarrel."
The old Emperor died in 1888. In 1890 the young Emperor "dropped the
pilot." In the same year Russia refused to renew her secret treaty. In 1891
the first Franco-Russian Treaty was signed, and the diplomatic supremacy
of Europe passed from the Triple Alliance to be shared between the two
opposing groups with which we have been familiar in recent years.
The disappearance of Prince Bismarck marked the beginning of a new phase in
German policy and in German life. The younger generation, which had come
to maturity, like the Kaiser, since 1870, had never known the old divided
Germany, or realised the difficulties of her statesmen. Every one wondered
what use the young Kaiser would make of the great Army bequeathed to him.
He was believed to be a firebrand. Few believed that, imbued with Prussian
traditions, he would keep the peace for twenty-five years; fewer still
that, when he broke it, Germany would have the second Navy in the world.
But we are not now concerned with the baffling personality of the Kaiser
himself. What is important for us here is the general attitude of mind
among the German public of the Kaiser's generation, which has rendered
possible the prosecution of the cherished ideas of their ruler.
The school of thought which has been steadily gaining force, under official
encouragement, during the last twenty-five years is best summed up in
the popular watchwords, "Germany's place in the sun" and "World-Policy"
(Weltpolitik). These phrases embody, for Germans, who always tend to be
abstract in their thinking, not only a practical policy, but a philosophy
of human society and government.
This is not the place in which to analyse in detail the outlook upon life
(Weltanschauung) of the man in the street in modern Germany. It is a
confused and patchwork philosophy, drawn, consciously or unconsciously,
from many quarters—from the old cosmopolitan tradition of German culture,
dating from Goethe and Leasing; from the brave and arrogant claims
of Fichte and the prophets and poets of the Napoleonic era; from the
far-reaching influence of Hegel and his idealisation of the Prussian State;
from the reaction to "realism" in politics after 1848; from the prestige
of Bismarck and the deep impression made by the apparent success of his
methods and principles; from the gifted Prussian historians, Treitschke and
Sybel, who set their own interpretation upon Bismarck's work and imprinted
it, by speech and pen, upon the mind of the German nation; and from a
hasty interpretation of the theories of writers like Nietzsche and
Thomas Carlyle, with their exaltation of "heroes" and "supermen," their
encouragements to "live dangerously," their admiration for will-power
as against reason and feeling, and their tirades against legal shams,
"ballot-box democracy," and flabby humanitarianism.
The practical object of the policy of Weltpolitik can be simply stated.
It is to extend to the other continents, and to the world as a whole,
the power and the prestige secured for Germany in Europe by the work of
Bismarck. "When Germany had won a mighty position on a level with the older
Great Powers," says Prince Bülow, "the path of international politics
lay open to her … In the Emperor William II. the nation found a
clear-sighted, strong-willed guide who led them along the new road."
Some such expansion of German influence was inevitable from the facts of
her economic development since 1871. The population of the Empire, which
in 1871 was 41,000,000, has now risen to 65,000,000. The resources of the
country, the neglect of which during the days of disunion had forced
so many Germans to emigrate for a livelihood, have been rapidly and
scientifically developed. Already in the 'eighties "Made in Germany" had
become a familiar talisman, and, before the outbreak of the present war,
Germany ranked with the United States as the second greatest commercial
power in the world.
Simultaneously, of course, there has been a great change in the
distribution of the population. In the year 1850 65 per cent, and in 1870
47 per cent of the working population were engaged in agriculture. By 1912
the proportion had sunk to 28.6 per cent.
It was inevitable also that Germany should share with the other Great
Powers in the work of colonial government. The adjustment of the relations
between the advanced and backward races of mankind is the greatest
political task of our age; it is a responsibility shared jointly between
all the civilised States, and when in the 'eighties and 'nineties the vast
regions of Africa were partitioned amongst them, Germany, late in the
field, asserted her claims and received her share in the responsibility.
Rapid economic development and a colonial empire—what was there in these
to cause hostility between Germany and Great Britain? The United States
have passed through a similar development and have accepted a similar
extension of responsibility far outside their own continent. America is a
great, a growing, and a self-respecting Power; yet Americans see no ground
for that inevitable conflict of interests between their country and Great
Britain which forms the theme of so many German books, from Prince Bülow's
candid self-revelations down to less responsible writers like Bernhardi.
The explanation lies in the nature of German thought and ambitions. When
Germans speak of "a place in the sun," they are not thinking of the spread
of German trade, the success of German adventure or enterprise, or of
the achievements of Germans in distant lands. They are thinking of the
extension of the German State. British influence beyond the seas has been
built up during the last four centuries by the character and achievements
of British pioneers. Downing Street has seldom helped, often hindered, and
generally only ratified the accomplished facts of British settlement and
influence. That is not the Prussian theory or the Prussian method. It is
for the State to win the territory, and then to set the people to work
there, on lines laid down from above. The individual Englishman, when
he goes out to colonise, carries England with him, as a part of his
personality. Not so the German, at least on the Prussian theory. "The rare
case supervened," says Prince Bülow,[1] of an instance typical of the
building up of the British Empire, "that the establishment of State rule
followed and did not precede the tasks of colonising and civilisation."
The State itself, on this theory, has a civilising mission of expansion
towards which it directs the activities of its citizens.
[Footnote 1: Imperial Germany, 1st ed., p. 249.]
Under the influence of ideas such as these, Germany, since the accession of

William II., has built a Navy second to that of Great Britain alone.

What was the purpose of the building of the German Navy? The German
official answer is that its purpose was the protection of German trade. "We
are now vulnerable at sea," says Prince Bülow. "We have entrusted millions
to the ocean, and with these millions, the weal and woe of many of our
countrymen. If we had not in good time provided protection for them …
we should have been exposed to the danger of having one day to look on
defencelessly while we were deprived of them. We should have been placed in
the position of being unable to employ and support a considerable number of
our millions of inhabitants at home. The result would have been an
economic crisis which might easily attain the proportions of a national
catastrophe."
These words may yet prove prophetic. But the catastrophe will not be the
result of Germany's lack of a Navy; it will be the result of challenging
the naval supremacy of Great Britain.
Prince Bülow's argument assumes, as a basis, the hostility of Great
Britain. This assumption, as we know, was unjustified; and its persistence
in the German mind can only be set down to an uneasy conscience. The hard
fact of the matter is that it is impossible for Germany or for any other
Power successfully to defend her foreign trade in case of war with Great
Britain. No other Power thinks it necessary to attempt to do so, for no
other Power has reason to desire or to foresee a naval conflict with Great
Britain.
Ever since 1493, when the Pope divided the monopoly of traffic on the ocean
between Spain and Portugal, and English mariners flouted his edict,
Great Britain has stood for the policy of the Open Sea, and there is no
likelihood of our abandoning it. The German official theory of the purpose
of their Navy, with its suspicious attitude towards British sea-power, was,
in effect, a bid for supremacy, inspired by the same ideas which made
the German army, under Bismarck, supreme in Central Europe. The Kaiser's
speeches on naval matters, notably his famous declaration that "our future
is on the water," provide an official confirmation, if one were needed, of
the real nature of Germany's naval ambitions.
But what right, it may be asked, has Great Britain to this naval supremacy?
Why should we, more than any other Power, claim one of the elements for our
own? Has not Germany some reason to be jealous? Why should we not allow
her, together with ourselves, "a place on the Ocean"?
The answer to this lies in the character of the British Empire. One quarter
of the human race live under the Union Jack, scattered throughout the
oceans and controlled from a small island in the Western seas. For Great
Britain, alone among the States of the world, naval supremacy, and nothing
less, is a daily and hourly necessity. India realised this truth recently
in a flash when, after generations of silent protection by British
sea-power, German shells fell one night at Madras. Any Power that
challenges the naval supremacy of Great Britain is quarrelling, not with
the British Government or the British people, but with the facts of
history, of geography, and of the political evolution of the world. The
British Empire has not been built up, like the German, by the work of
statesmen and thinkers; it is not the result, as Germans think, of
far-seeing national policy or persistent ambition and "greed." It has
slowly taken shape, during the last four centuries, since intercourse was
opened up by sea between the different races of mankind, in accordance with
the needs of the world as a whole. Its collapse, at the hands of Germany or
any other Power, would not mean the substitution of a non-British Empire
for a British. It would inaugurate a period of chaos in all five continents
of the world.
The rulers and people of Germany, who counted on the "decadence" of Great
Britain and the disintegration of her unorganised Empire, did not realise
these simple facts. Their lack of perception was due partly to their
political inexperience; but a deeper reason for it lies in their wholly
false estimate as to what "world-policy" and "world-empire" mean. Trained
in the Prussian school, they thought of them, like soldiers, in terms of
conquest, glory, and prestige. That way lies Napoleonism. None of the great
Powers is wholly free from blame on this score. But until Germans realise,
as the other Powers are slowly realising, that the true basis of Empire is
not a love of glory but a sense of responsibility towards backward peoples,
it will be hard to readmit them into the comity of the Great Powers. Only
a sense of common purposes and ideals, and of joint responsibility for
world-problems, can make the Concert of Europe a reality.
Such is the general attitude of mind among the German public of the younger
generation. Let us now turn to the effect of this new outlook upon the
political parties and groupings.
The chief result has been the extinction in Germany, as a political force,
of the great liberal movement of the mid-nineteenth century which in
England, France, and other Western countries has grown and developed during
the last generation along lines corresponding to the needs of the new
century. The younger generation of middle-class Germans, indoctrinated
with "orthodox" and "national" opinions at school and on military service,
eschew the ideals which attracted their fathers and grandfathers in 1848;
and, although so-called "liberal," "free-thinking," and Radical parties
still exist, they have steadily been growing more militarist. Militarism in
its new guise, bound up with ideas of industrial and commercial expansion,
is far more attractive to them than in the form of the Prussian Army. The
Emperor's Navy Bills were from the first more popular in commercial and
industrial circles than with the old Prussian Conservatives. But as the
years went on the Kaiser succeeded in converting both the Junkers to his
Navy Bills and the middle classes to his Army Bills, so that by 1913, when
he demanded the "great national sacrifice" of a levy of 50 million pounds
by a tax, not on income, but on property, there was no difficulty whatever
about "managing" the Reichstag. "The Army Bill of 1913," says Prince Bülow,
"met with such a willing reception from all parties as had never been
accorded to any requisition for armaments on land and sea…. So far as man
can tell, every necessary and justifiable Army and Navy Bill will always be
able to count on a safe Parliamentary majority."[1]
[Footnote 1: Imperial Germany, p. 169.]
Prince Bülow's "safe Parliamentary majority" means, of course, a majority
sufficient to outvote the Social Democrats, with whom every German
Government has to reckon as a permanent opposition.
So far we have left the Social Democrats out of the picture. It was
necessary to do this, in discussing German policy and the relation between
the German Government and Reichstag opinion; for the German Government
itself habitually leaves them out of the picture. Hitherto in Germany, so
far as opinion on political questions has mattered at all, it is upper-and
middle-class opinion that has counted, as it counted in England up to fifty
years ago. To the German Government and to the ordinary educated German
the Social Democratic party, though it numbers in its voting ranks over 4
million German workmen and others, does not represent German opinion at
all: it represents something un-German and anti-German—a public enemy.
Between the Social Democrats and the rest of society a great gulf is fixed,
across which no intercourse is possible: as the pioneers who attempted to
introduce the Workers' Educational Association into Germany found, such
intercourse is forbidden from either direction. The Social Democrats are
the "Red Danger," "men who," in the Kaiser's words, are "the enemies of
Empire and Fatherland," and "unworthy" (except, of course, in war-time)
"to bear the name of Germans." We must go back a hundred years in English
history to realise the depth of the animosity between the Social Democratic
party and the rest of German society. "The word Radical," says an English
historian, "conveyed a very different meaning in 1816 to what it does
now…. The hands of the Radicals were supposed to be against every man,
and every man's hand was against them. Scott, when he talks of rebels in
arms, always styles them Radicals. 'Radicalism is a spirit,' wrote the
Vicar of Harrow in 1820, 'of which the first elements are a rejection of
Scripture, and a contempt of all the institutions of your country, and
of which the results, unless averted by a merciful Providence, must be
anarchy, atheism, and universal ruin.'"[1] The Vicar of Harrow in 1820 very
fairly sums up the substance of innumerable German speeches, pamphlets, and
election addresses in 1912 on the subject of the Social Democrats.
[Footnote 1: Spencer Walpole, History of England, vol. i. p. 348.]
How is this extraordinary position maintained? How is it possible that in a
modern, largely industrial community, the representatives of working-class
opinion should be regarded as public enemies?
The chief reason lies, of course, in the fact that the German Empire is not
a democracy and is not governed by ministers responsible to Parliament. The
immense numbers and rapid growth of the Social Democrats have therefore not
really been a menace to the Government. In fact, it has even been held in
some quarters that it has been to the interest of the German Government,
which is based on the Prussian military caste, to manoeuvre the Social
Democrats into an extreme position and then to hold them up as a terrible
example of what democracy means. "This," they can tell the German people,
"is the alternative to Prussian rule." A dangerous policy, it may be
argued, for the Social Democrats may some day secure a majority in the
Reichstag. The Prussian answer to this is that, without a redistribution
of seats, this is barely conceivable; and that, were it to take place,
the Reichstag would promptly be dissolved for new elections on a narrower
franchise. Bismarck himself contemplated this course, and his successors
would not shrink from it.
Another reason why it has been possible for the Government to ignore the
Social Democrats has been the absence of a practical alternative programme
on the part of the Social Democrats themselves. "If I had to make out a
school report for the Social Democratic Movement," said Prince Bülow in
the Reichstag on one occasion, "I should say, 'Criticism, agitation,
discipline, and self-sacrifice, I. a; positive achievements, lucidity of
programme, V. b.'" The taunt is not undeserved. The Socialist Movement
in Germany has suffered, like so many German movements, through a rigid
adherence to logical theories. Under the leadership of old revolutionary
thinkers like Bebel it has failed to adapt itself to the facts of modern
German life. The vague phrases of its republican programme, survivals from
a past epoch of European thought, have attracted to it a large mass of
inarticulate discontent which it has never been able to weld into a party
of practical reformers. In the municipal sphere and in the field of Trade
Unionism, under the education of responsibility, German Socialism can show
great achievements; but in national policy it has been as helpless as the
rest of the German nation.
What effect, it will be asked, is the war of 1914 likely to have on the
German working-class movement? In 1848 middle-class Germany made its stand
for democracy. May we hope for a similar and more successful movement,
in the direction of Western ideals and methods of government, from
working-class Germany as a result of 1914?
It is a tempting prophecy; but the outlook is not propitious. Germany,
Prussian and South German, noble, bourgeois, and working class, has rallied
round the Emperor in this crisis of national history, as the brutal and
cynical directors of German policy calculated that she would. For the
Social Democratic Movement the war comes with a peculiar appeal. It is a
war against Russia, a country about which the German workman knows little
and understands less, but which he considers to be the home of a reaction
far blacker than that of his own country. A war of aggression against
the Western Powers would have found the Social Democrats divided. By
representing Russia as the aggressor and the Western Powers as the
shameless allies of the "Mongol," German diplomacy, more successful within
than without, made certain of enlisting Socialist support.
Moreover, the Socialists too have to pass through a natural reaction from
their refusal to recognise the forces of Nationality—from Utopian dreams
of international action by the peoples across the barriers of separate
governments. For the first time in the history of the party, German
Socialism has been allowed to be patriotic. It is an exhilarating and
heartening experience, and it is certain to leave an indelible mark upon
the spirit of the movement. The great party organisation, hitherto confined
to the sterile work of agitation, is being used to cope with the many
problems created by the war; and this work, rather than revolutionary
agitation, is likely to occupy it for some time to come.
A veil has fallen upon Germany: German books and papers are stopped at our
ports: we cannot know through what thoughts the German nation is passing.
But as we look with the mind's eye across the North Sea, past devastated
Belgium to the populous towns of industrial Germany, we see a people
skilful, highly instructed, and mechanically intelligent, yet equally
devoid either of personal initiative or of great and inspiring leadership.
Two generations of Prussian education have left German public life
practically empty of names of more than local reputation. Great changes are
needed—a change of institutions and a change of spirit; yet whence this
will come we cannot divine. Only, as democrats, we can say with confidence
that if the true spirit of the German people is to be liberated from its
long imprisonment, its freedom must be won, not from without, but from
within. Not Europe but only the Germans can make Germany herself again.
BRYCE. Holy Roman Empire. (Deals with mediaeval Germany, but also
contains a most interesting final chapter on Germany in the Nineteenth
Century, written in 1873.) 1904. (7s. 6d.)
CARLYLE. Frederick the Great, vol. i. (Best account in English of the
earlier history of Prussia.) (2s. 6d.)
H.A.L. FISHER. Napoleonic Statesmanship: Germany. 1903. (12s. 6d.)

(Germany in the Napoleonic era.)

SEELEY. Life of Stein. 1878. 3 vols. (30s.) (The standard work in English
on reorganisation of Prussia after Napoleon.)
BISMARCK. Reflections and Reminiscences. (The guiding mind in Germany,
1862-1888.) 2 vols. 1898. (Can only be bought second-hand.)
HEADLAM. Life of Bismarck. 1899. (6s.) (Heroes of the Nations.)
HOLLAND. Germany to the Present Day. 1913. (2s. net.) A useful short
history if supplemented by other books.
POWICKE. Bismarck. 1914. (6d.) (People's Books.) (Excellent.) The two
great modern German historians are Treitschke and Sybel, for whom see
Gooch's History and Historians in the Nineteenth Century, pp. 140-53.
Treitschke's history is not available in English: Sybel's has been
translated under the title, The Founding of the German Empire by William
I. vols., New York, 1890-1891.
BÜLOW. Imperial Germany. 1914. (2s. net.) (The mind of the German

Government.)

SAUNDERS. The Last of the Huns. 1914. (1s. net.) (In spite of its
objectionable title this volume, by the late correspondent of the Times
in Berlin, is written with fairness and lucidity, and contains much
valuable information.)
HENRI LICHTENBERGER. Germany and its Evolution in Modern Times. 1913.
(10s. 6d net.) (Translated from the French: suggestive, especially on
economic questions and on the movements of German thought.)
W.H. DAWSON. The Evolution of Modern Germany. 1908. (5s. net.) (The best
general account of modern Germany in English.)
C. TOWER. Germany of To-day. 1913. Home University Library. (Is.) (Good.)
C. SAROLEA. The Anglo-German Problem. (2s.) (A useful popular account of

German political conditions and German policy.)

Board of Education Special Reports, vols. iii. and ix. (3s. 3d. and 2s.
7d.) Articles by Dr. M.E. Sadler on German Education.
Memoirs of Prince Hohenlohe. (Imperial Chancellor, 1894-1900.) 2 vols.
1906. (24s. net.)
The Britannica War Books. Germany. (2s. 6d. net.) By W. Alison Phillips
and J.W. Headlam. (A somewhat carelessly abridged reprint from the standard
article in the Encyclopaedia Britannica.)
H.S. CHAMBERLAIN. The foundations of the Nineteenth Century. English
translation. 2 vols. 1910. (25s. net.) (This book had an immense vogue in
Germany, and was particularly recommended by the Kaiser to his subjects.
It is full of interesting, if ill-founded, generalisations tending to
emphasise the importance of Race and to glorify the German race.)
THOMAS. German Literature. (6s.)
ROBERTSON. German Literature. 1914. Home University Library. (1s.)
HERFORD AND OTHERS. Germany in the Nineteenth Century. Manchester. 1912.
(2s. 6d.) Essays on different aspects of German development.
BERNHARDT. Germany and the Next War. 1912. (2s. net.) (The philosophy and
aims of Gorman militarism worked out.)
CRAMB. Germany and England. 1914. (2s. 6d. net.) (An account of
Treitschke and his school of thought: interesting for the light it throws
on German misconceptions about Great Britain.)
TREITSCHKE. Selections from his Lectures on Politics. 1914.
Translated by A.L. Gowans. (2s. net.)
The writings of the following German professors will be found interesting
if procurable: Oncken, Meinecke (both contributors to the Cambridge Modern
History), Delbrück, Sombart, Erich Marcks (see his lectures on Germany in
Lectures on the History of the Nineteenth Century, edited by Kirkpatrick,
Cambridge, 1900, 4s. 6d.), Schiemann, Lamprecht, Schmoller, and F. von
Liszt.
Note.—Such considered German writings as have come to hand since the
outbreak of the war show little tendency to cope with the real facts of the
situation, or even to seek to understand them. They seem to indicate two
developments in German opinion.
(1) A great consolidation of German national unity (except, of course, in
Poland and Alsace-Lorraine).
(2) A tendency to forgo the consideration of the immediate issues and to
hark back in thought to 1870 or even to the Wars of Liberation. It
is difficult to judge of a nation in arms from the writings of its
stay-at-homes; but no one can read recent articles by the leaders of German
thought without feeling that the Germans are still, before all things and
incurably, "the people of poets and philosophers," and that, by a tragic
irony, it is the best and most characteristic qualities of the race which
are sustaining and will continue to sustain it in the conflict in which its
dreams have involved it.
"For a century past attempts have been made to solve the Eastern Question.
On the day when it appears to have been solved Europe will inevitably be
confronted by the Austrian Question."—ALBERT SOREL (1902).
In April 1909, a week after the international crisis evoked by Austria's
annexation of Bosnia had come to an end, I paid my first visit to Cetinje,
the tiny mountain-capital of Montenegro, and was assured by the Premier,
Dr. Tomanovi, that the conflict had merely been postponed, not averted—a
fact which even then was obvious enough. "But remember," he said, "it is
a question of Aut aut (either, or)—either Serbia and Montenegro or
Austria-Hungary. One or other has got to go, and you may rest assured that
in four, or at most five, years from now there will be a European war over
this very question." At the time I merely regarded his prophecy as a proof
of Serb megalomania, but it has been literally fulfilled.
In 1908-1909 Austria-Hungary, with the aid of her German ally, enforced
her wishes in respect of Bosnia upon a reluctant Europe; but instead of
following up this success by a determined effort to solve the Southern Slav
question on an Austrian basis, she allowed the confusion to grow yearly
worse confounded, and gradually created an intolerable situation from
which a peaceful exit was well-nigh impossible. The actual event which
precipitated the struggle, the event from which the diplomatic contest of
last July, and thus the great war, first proceeded, was the assassination
of the Archduke Francis Ferdinand and his wife at Sarajevo on June 28 and
the consequent acute friction between Austria-Hungary and Serbia. But the
murder, as will be shown later, was merely made the pretext for Austria's
declaration of war. The real causes lie far deeper, and can only be
properly understood on the basis of an historical survey.
My apology for inflicting so many unfamiliar details upon the reader is
that the key to the whole situation lies in Austria-Hungary, and that upon
the fate of its provinces and races in this war depends to a very great
extent the question whether the new Europe which is to issue from this
fiery ordeal is to be better than the old Europe which is crumbling in
ruins before our eyes. For the moment a thick fog of war obscures this
point of view; but the time will assuredly come when it will emerge in its
true perspective.
In recent years it had become a cheap journalistic commonplace to refer to
the coming "inevitable" struggle between Teuton and Slav, and the present
war is no doubt widely regarded as proving the correctness of this theory,
despite the fact that the two chief groups of Teutons are ranged on
opposite sides, and that the Slavs enjoy the active support of Celts and
Latins also. That such a struggle has come, is in the last resort due to
the false conceptions of Nationality which underly the policy of the two
central Powers, Germany and Austria-Hungary. The freedom from foreign
oppression which the Germans so nobly vindicated against Napoleon has not
been extended to their own subject races, the Poles, Danes, and Lorrainers;
and recent years have seen the accentuation of a conflict the germs
of which may be detected as far back as the fatal crime of the Polish
Partition in the eighteenth century. The policy of Germanisation in Austria
has been gradually undermined by causes which it would take too long to
enumerate, but its sting has survived in the maintenance of a foreign
policy which treats 26,000,000 Slavs as a mere annexe of militant
Germanism and as "gun-fodder" for the designs of Berlin; while in Hungary
the parallel policy of Magyarisation has increased in violence from year
to year, poisoning the wells of public opinion, creating a gulf of hatred
between the Magyars and their subject races (the Slovaks, Roumanians,
Croats, Serbs, etc.), and rendering cordial relations with the neighbouring
Balkan States impossible. Nor is it a mere accident that official Germany
and official Hungary should have pursued an actively Turcophil policy; for
the same tendencies have been noticeable in Turkey, though naturally in a
somewhat cruder form than farther west. Just as the Young Turk policy
of Turkification rendered a war between Turkey and the Balkan States
inevitable, so the policy of Magyarisation pursued by two generations of
Hungarian statesmen sowed the seeds of war between Austria and the Southern
Slavs. In the former case it was possible to isolate the conflict, in the
latter it has involved the greater part of Europe in a common disaster.
The struggle centres round the Austro-Serbian dispute. Let us then attempt
a brief survey of the two countries.
§1. Austria and the Habsburgs.—Let us begin with Austria-Hungary. In
this country many misconceptions prevail regarding Austria-Hungary; nor is
this surprising, for it is unique among States, and whether we regard it
from a political, a constitutional, a racial, or a social point of view,
the issues are equally complicated and difficult to sum up. With the aid
of a good gazetteer it is easy enough to elicit the facts that the
Austria-Hungary of to-day is a state of fifty-two million inhabitants,
divided into three component parts: (a) the Empire of Austria, (b) the
Kingdom of Hungary, each with subdivisions which will be referred to later,
and (c) the annexed provinces of Bosnia-Herzegovina, jointly administered
by the two Governments. But this bald fact is meaningless except in
connection with the historical genesis of the Habsburg State.
[Illustration: AUSTRIA-HUNGARY; PHYSICAL]
Austria—Oesterreich—is the ancient Eastmark or frontier province, the
outpost of Carlovingian power against the tribes of the east, then of
the mediaeval German Empire against Slav and Magyar. Under the House of
Habsburg, which first rose to greatness on the ruins of a Greater Bohemia,
Austria grew steadily stronger as a distinct unit. Two famous mottoes sum
up the policy of that dynasty in the earlier centuries of its existence.
Austriae est Imperare Orbi Universo (Austria's it is to Rule the
Universe) ran the device of that canny Frederick III., who, amid much
adversity, laid the plans which prompted an equally striking epigram about
his son and successor Maximilian, the "Last of the Knights"—Bella gerant
alii, tu, felix Austria, nube (Let others wage war; do thou marry, O
fortunate Austria!). There were three great stages in Habsburg marriage
policy. In 1479 Maximilian married the heiress of Charles the Bold, thus
acquiring the priceless dowry of the Low Countries (what are now Belgium
and Holland). In 1506 his son Philip added the crown of Spain and the
Indies by his marriage with the heiress of Ferdinand and Isabella. In
1526, when the battle of Mohács placed Hungary at the mercy of the Turks,
Maximilian's grandson Ferdinand, in his wife's name, united Bohemia,
Hungary, and Croatia with the Austrian duchies.
Henceforth for over two centuries Austria and Habsburg became the bulwark
of Christendom against the Turks; though delayed by wars of religion and by
the excesses of religious bigotry, they yet never lost sight of the final
goal. Twice—at the beginning and at the end of this period, in 1527 and
1683—the Turks were before the very walls of Vienna, but the second of
these occasions represents their final effort. In the closing years of the
seventeenth and the first two decades of the eighteenth centuries the tide
finally rolled back against them. Foremost among the victors stands out the
great name of Prince Eugene, comrade-in-arms of our own Marlborough, whose
song, "Prinz Eugen, der edle Ritter" (Prince Eugene, the noble Knight),
has been sung in July and August 1914 on the streets of Vienna, just as
"Marlbrook s'en va-t-en guerre" might be sung by our Belgian allies. The
peace of 1718 represents Habsburg's farthest advance southwards; Belgrade
and half of present-day Serbia owned allegiance to Vienna. Then came the
check of 1739, when these conquests were restored to the Sultan. Due merely
to incompetent generals, it need not have been permanent, had not Frederick
the Great created a diversion from the north. By the time that the War of
Austrian Succession and the Seven Years' War were over, that expansion
southwards which had seemed so certain was irrevocably postponed. The
organisation of fresh "Military Frontiers," the colonisation of waste lands
in South Hungary—all was admirable so far as it went, but was already a
defensive rather than an offensive measure. Meanwhile a formidable rival
appeared in the shape of the Russian colossus, and the history of two
centuries is dominated by Austro-Russian rivalry in the Balkans. Here
we are confronted by the first of those lost opportunities in which the
history of modern Austria is unhappily so rich.
During the eighteenth century Austria became, as it were, the chief home
of bureaucratic government, first under Maria Theresa, one of the greatest
women-sovereigns, then under her son Joseph II. A series of "enlightened
experiments" in government, typical of the age of Voltaire and of
Frederick, and honestly conducted for the people, though never by the
people, ended as such experiments are apt to end, in failure. The most that
can be said is that the bureaucratic machine had become more firmly fixed
in the groove which it was henceforth to occupy.
The failure of Joseph II. was above all due to his inability to recognise
the meaning of Nationality, to his attempt to apply Germanisation as the
one infallible remedy for all internal difficulties in his dominions. The
idea of Nationality, already gaining strength, obtained a fresh impetus
from the French Revolution. While in the west it sowed the seeds of United
Italy and United Germany, which the nineteenth century was to bring to
fruition, in the Balkans it stirred waters which had seemed dead for
centuries, and led to the uprising of the Serbs and Greeks, then of the
Roumanians, and finally a generation later of the Bulgarians. In the
Habsburg dominions the same movement revealed itself in the revival of
national feeling in Hungary, Bohemia, and Croatia, but nowhere more
strongly than in Hungary, where it was accompanied by a remarkable literary
revival and the appearance of a group of Magyar poets of real genius.
The Kingdom of Hungary, which from 1526 to 1687 had been partially under
Turkish rule, led a vegetable existence during the eighteenth century. This
lull was a necessary period of recuperation after exhausting wars.
The ancient Hungarian constitution, dating in its essentials from the
thirteenth century, but fallen on evil days during the Turkish era, now
came more and more out of abeyance. Its fundamental principles were
reaffirmed by the famous laws of Leopold II. (1790-92), and after a further
relapse due to the Napoleonic wars, a long series of constitutional and
linguistic reforms were introduced by successive parliaments between 1825
and 1848.
Without entering into a discussion of the Hungarian constitution, it is
well to point out one factor which lies at the root of all political and
constitutional development in Hungary and explains the Magyar outlook
for centuries past, even up to the present day. Till 1840 Latin was the
official language of the country, and in that Latin the term for the
political nation was Populus, which we would naturally translate as
people. But populus contrasted in Hungarian law with plebs, the misera
plebs contribuens, that phrase of ominous meaning to describe the mass of
the oppressed and unenfranchised people, the populus being the nobles, a
caste which was relatively very wide, but none the less a caste, and which
enjoyed a monopoly of all political power. Till 1848 only the populus could
vote, only the plebs could pay taxes—a delightful application of the
principle, "Heads I win, tails you lose!" In 1848 the distinction was
broken down in theory, the franchise being extended beyond the privileged
class by the initiative of that class itself. But in effect the distinction
has survived to the present day in a veiled form. Political power, and,
above all, the parliamentary franchise and the county elective bodies,
continued to be a monopoly—henceforth a monopoly of the Magyar nobility,
plus those classes whom they had assimilated and attached to their
cause, against the other races, forming more than half the population of
Hungary. This point of populus and plebs may seem at first sight somewhat
pedantic and technical; but in reality it is the key which explains the
whole social structure of Hungary, even its economic and agrarian problems.
The period from the death of Joseph II. to the great revolutionary movement
of 1848 may be regarded, so far as eastern Europe is concerned, as a period
when nationality is simmering everywhere. It is a period of preparation for
the rise of national States—ushered in by the great crime of the Polish
Partition, to which so many modern evils may be traced, and closed by a
sudden explosion which shook Europe from Paris to Budapest, from Palermo to
Berlin. The first stage was of course the long Napoleonic war, during which
the seed was sown broadcast; the second, the era of reaction and political
exhaustion (1815-1848), when all that was best in Europe concentrated in
the Romantic movement in literature, art, and music.
For Austria this period was bound up with the name of Metternich, who
personified the old hide-bound methods of the bureaucracy, the diplomacy of
a past age, to which the nations were mere pawns on a chessboard. Under him
the "Police-State" assumed its most perfect form, a form not even surpassed
by Russia from 1881 to 1905.
Then came the year 1848, when the dams burst. The Hungarian constitution,
restored in its entirety, became for a time the watchword and inspirer
of the movement, while Austria for the first time received a serious
constitution. Unhappily the issue between Reaction and Progress was not
a clear one. The Magyars in Hungary unquestionably stood for historic
development and constitutional rights, but they also stood for racial
hegemony, for the forcible assimilation of all the other races, for a
unitary Magyar State instead of the old polyglot Hungary. They thus
drove all the other races to coalesce with the dynasty and the forces of
reaction. The result was a violent racial war, with all kinds of excesses.
Slovaks, Croats, Serbs, Roumanians, Saxons, all fought against the Magyars,
and finally the scale was turned by the Russian troops who poured across
the Carpathians in the name of outraged autocracy.
There followed the inevitable reaction, which again can be best summed up
in two phrases—that of Prince Felix Schwarzenberg, "Austria will astonish
the world by her ingratitude," so strikingly fulfilled in the Crimean War,
when Austria left Russia in the lurch; and that of a Hungarian patriot,
"The other races have received as reward what we Magyars receive as
punishment." In short, the statesmen of Vienna, untaught by experience,
reverted to the old bureaucratic and absolutist régime.
For ten years (1849-1859) this endured—Clericalism rampant, financial
ruin, stagnation everywhere. Then Nationality burst its bonds once more.
The war with Napoleon III. ended in Austria's loss of Lombardy and the
creation of the Italian kingdom. Faced by the bankruptcy of the whole
political and financial system, Francis Joseph launched into a period of
constitutional experiment. Following the line of least resistance,
as throughout his long reign, he inclined now to federalism, now to
centralism, and he was still experimenting when the war of 1866 broke out.
For Austria this war was decisive, for its results were her final expulsion
both from Germany and from Italy, and the creation of that fatal Dual
System which has distorted her whole subsequent development.
Under the Ausgleich or Compromise of 1867 the Dual Monarchy is composed of
two equal and separate States, the Empire of Austria and the Kingdom of
Hungary, each possessing a distinct parliament and cabinet of its own, but
both sharing between them the three Joint Ministries of Foreign Affairs,
War, and Finance. The chiefs of these three offices are equally responsible
to both Delegations, which are committees of the two Parliaments, sitting
alternately in Vienna and Budapest, but acting quite independently of each
other.
This system really secured the political power in Austria and Hungary to
two races—the Germans and the Magyars, and they, as the strongest in each
country, bought off the two next strongest, the Poles and the Croats, by
the grant of autonomy to Galicia and Croatia. The remaining eight were not
considered at all. At first this ingenious device seemed to offer fair
prospects of success. But ere long—for reasons which would lead us too
far—the German hegemony broke down in Austria, and the whole balance was
disturbed. It gradually became clear that the system was only workable when
one scale was high in the air. The history of the past forty-seven years is
the history of the gradual decay of the Dual System. Austria has progressed
in many ways; her institutions have steadily grown freer, her political
sense has developed, universal suffrage has been introduced, racial
inequalities have been reduced though not abolished, industry, art, and
general culture have advanced steadily. But she has been continually
hampered by Hungary, where racial monopoly has grown worse and worse. The
Magyar Chauvinists attempted the impossible—the assimilation by seven
million people of twelve million others. Yet in spite of every imaginable
trick—a corrupt and oppressive administration, gross manipulation of the
franchise, press persecution, the suppression of schools and ruthless
restriction of every form of culture—the non-Magyar races are stronger
to-day than in 1867. And the result of the struggle has been in Hungary a
decay of political standards, a corruption of public life, such as fills
even the greatest optimists with despair.
§2. Hungary and Magyar Misrule.—Such an assertion may seem to run
counter to the common idea of Hungary as the home of liberty and the
vanguard of popular uprisings against despotism, and it is certainly
incompatible with the arrogant claim of Magyar Statesmen that "nowhere
in the world is there so much freedom as in Hungary." At the risk of
disturbing the proportion of this chapter, I propose to give a few classic
illustrations of Magyar methods, selected almost at random from an
overwhelming mass of damning evidence.
On paper Hungary possesses a most admirable and enlightened law
guaranteeing "the Equal Rights of Nationalities" (1868); in practice, it
has remained almost from the very first a dead letter. Let us take the
field of education. Every effort, legal and illegal, has been made to
Magyarise the educational system, with the result that in all the primary
and secondary schools under State control Magyar is the exclusive language
of instruction, while the number of denominational schools has been
steadily diminished and their sphere of action, as more favourable to the
non-Magyar races, materially restricted. Fifty years ago the Slovaks, who
even then numbered over two millions, possessed three gymnasia (middle
schools) which they had founded and maintained by their own exertions.
In 1875 all three were arbitrarily closed by orders of the Hungarian
Government, and since that date the unhappy Slovaks have not been allowed
a single secondary school in which their own language is taught, while the
number of their primary schools has been reduced from 1821 in 1869 to 440
in 1911. The deliberate aim is, of course, to prevent the growth of a
Slovak middle class. It is quite a common thing for schoolboys to be
persecuted or even dismissed for showing Slovak proclivities or even
talking their mother—tongue "ostentatiously" on the street. Only last year
a brilliant young Slovak student, known to me personally, was deprived by
the Magyar authorities of a scholarship in Oriental languages, for no
other reason than that he was "untrustworthy in a national sense"![1]
Such instances are even more frequent among the Roumanians of Hungary.
A specially notorious case occurred in March 1912 at Grosswardein, when
sixteen Roumanian theological students were expelled from the Catholic
seminary for the "demonstrative use" of their language, which was regarded
as offensive by their fellow-students and professors!
[Footnote 1: This document is in my possession.]
Linguistic restrictions are carried to outrageous lengths. There is not
a single inscription in any language save Magyar in any post office or
railway station throughout Hungary. Slovak medals and stamps, produced
in America and bearing such treasonable inscriptions as "For our Slovak
language" and "I am proud to be a Slovak," have been confiscated in
Hungary. Only Magyar inscriptions are tolerated on the tombstones of the
Budapest cemeteries. The erection of monuments to Roumanian or Slovak
patriots has more than once been prohibited, and the funds collected have
been arbitrarily seized and applied to Magyar purposes. National colours,
other than the Magyar, are strictly forbidden. Two years ago, at the
funeral of a Roumanian poet at Kronstadt (Transylvania) gendarmes pressed
up to the hearse and clipped off the colours from a wreath which had been
sent by the Society of Journalists in Bucarest. About the same time a nurse
was sent to prison because a child of three was found wearing a Roumanian
tricolor bow, and its parents were reprimanded and fined. Last July on the
very eve of war, fifteen theological students, returning to Bucarest from
an excursion into Transylvania, were arrested at the frontier by Hungarian
gendarmes, hauled by main force out of the train, sent back to Hermannstadt
and kept for days in gaol; their offence consisted in waving some Roumanian
tricolors from the train windows as they steamed out of the last station in
Hungary!
No law of association exists in Hungary, and the government uses its
arbitrary powers to prohibit or suppress even such harmless organisations
as temperance societies, choral unions, or women's leagues. Perhaps the
most notorious examples are the dissolution of the Slovak Academy in
1875 and of the Roumanian National Party's organisation in 1894; but the
treatment meted out to trades unions and working-class organisations, both
Magyar and non-Magyar, for years past, has been equally scandalous. The
right of assembly is no less precarious in a country where parliamentary
candidates are arrested or expelled from their constituencies, where
deputies are prevented from addressing their constituents, where an
electoral address is often treated as a penal offence.
As for Hungary's electoral system, the less said the better.
Gerrymandering, a narrow and complicated franchise, bribery and corruption
on a gigantic scale, the wholesale use of troops and gendarmes to prevent
opposition voters from reaching the polls, the cooking of electoral rolls,
illegal disqualifications, sham counts, official terrorism, and in many
cases actual bloodshed—such are but a few of the methods which preserve a
political monopoly in the hands of a corrupt and increasingly inefficient
racial oligarchy, in a country where the absence of the ballot places the
peasant peculiarly at the mercy of the authorities. Small wonder, then, if
the non-Magyar races of Hungary, who on a basis of population would have
had 198 deputies, never were allowed to elect more than 25, and if even
this scanty number was at the infamous elections of 1910 reduced by
terrorism and corruption to eight!
In judicial matters the situation is no less galling. Petitions are
not accepted in the courts, unless drawn up in Magyar, and the whole
proceedings are invariably conducted in the same language. The non-Magyar
"stands like an ox" before the courts of his native land, and a whole
series of provisions exists for his repression, notably the monstrous
paragraphs dealing with "action hostile to the State," with the "incitement
of one nationality against another" and with the "glorification of a
criminal action"—applied with rigorous severity to all political opponents
of Magyarisation but never to its advocates. Let me cite one classic
example of the latter. In 1898 a well-known Slovak editor was sentenced
to eight months' imprisonment for two articles severely criticising the
Magyarisation of place-names in Hungary. On his return from prison he
was met at the railway station of the little county town by a crowd of
admirers: songs were sung, a short speech of welcome was delivered and a
bouquet of flowers was presented. The sequel of this perfectly orderly
incident was that no fewer than twenty-four persons, including Mr. Hurban
the leading Slovak poet, were sentenced to terms of imprisonment varying
from fourteen days to six months. The three girls who had presented the
flowers were let off with a fine of £16.
Perhaps the reader will regard me as a very dangerous conspirator, when I
tell him that in June 1910 an old lady of seventy-three, the widow of a
high-school headmaster, was fined £4 because I had called at her house for
twenty minutes on election day without its being notified to the police,
and that in June 1914 an enquiry was instituted by the local authorities
against some Slovak friends who had entertained me to luncheon! And yet I
can honestly assert that I have never been guilty of any worse crime than
Captain Grose, of whom Burns warned my countrymen a hundred years ago in
the famous line:
              A chiel's amang ye takin' notes!
The fabric of Magyar rule is far too rotten and corrupt to regard with
equanimity any extensive note-taking on the part of the outer world.
Whole books might be written to illustrate the contention that in matters
of education, administration, and justice, of association and assembly, of
the franchise and the press, the non-Magyar nationalities of Hungary have
long been the victims of a policy of repression which is without any
parallel in civilised Europe. It is this Magyar system, from which I have
lifted but a corner of the veil, that is one of the mainsprings of the
present war, and if there is to be a new and healthy Europe in the future,
this system must be swept away root, branch and stock. To such lengths has
national fanaticism driven the Magyars that in 1906 it was possible for an
ex-Premier of Hungary, speaking in open Parliament amid the applause of the
majority, to lay down the following axiom: "The legal State is the aim:
but with this question we can only concern ourselves when we have already
assured the national State…. Hungary's interests demand its erection on
the most extreme Chauvinist lines." Men who applaud such a sentiment
are worthy allies of those so-called statesmen who regard international
treaties as "a mere scrap of paper."
§3. The Decay of the Dual System.—The radical divergence of political
development in Austria and in Hungary, its paralysing effect upon the
foreign policy of the Monarchy as a whole, coupled with the growth
of national feeling among the minor nationalities and their steady
emancipation from the economic thraldom of the German and the Jew—all this
has slowly but surely undermined the Dual System and rendered its final
collapse inevitable. Indeed for some time past it has merely owed its
survival to the old age of the Emperor, who has a natural reluctance to
destroy his own creation. For some years it has been known that his heir,
Francis Ferdinand, was the advocate of far-reaching changes, which would
have taken the form of a compromise between a federalist and a centralist
system. His abrupt removal from the scene was secretly welcomed by all
those whose political and racial monopoly was bound up with the existing
régime.
German dominance in Austria, it should be added, meant a close alliance
with the German Empire; and every fresh effort of the subject races to
emancipate themselves from Germanising or Magyarising tendencies forged the
chains of the alliance closer and increased the dependence of the Magyar
oligarchy upon Berlin. As in mediaeval times, so in the twentieth century
Habsburg policy is explained by two famous Latin mottoes—Viribus unitis
("Union is strength") and Divide et impera ("Divide and rule"). Between
these two watchwords Francis Joseph and his advisers have wavered for
sixty-five years.
What then are the forces which have held Austria-Hungary together under
Francis Joseph? First unquestionably comes the dynasty; for it would be
difficult to over-estimate the power exercised by the dynastic tradition on
the many races under Habsburg sway. Next comes the Joint Army; for there is
no finer body of men in Europe than the Austrian officers' corps, poorly
paid, hard-worked, but inspired to the last man with unbounded devotion to
the Imperial house, and to a large extent immune from that spirit of caste
which is the most offensive feature of the allied German army.[1] Hardly
less important are the Catholic Church, with its vast material resources
and its powerful influence on peasant, small tradesman and court alike,
and the bureaucracy, with its traditions of red tape, small-mindedness,
slowness of movement and genial Gemütlichkeit ("easy-goingness"). It is
only after these forces that we can fairly count the parliaments and
representative government. And yet there are no fewer than twenty-three
legislative bodies in the Monarchy—the two central parliaments of Vienna
and Budapest, entirely distinct from each other; the two Delegations; the
provincial Diets, seventeen in Austria, one in Croatia; and the Diet of
Bosnia, whose every legislative act requires the ratification of the Joint
Minister of Finance and of the Austrian and Hungarian Governments.
[Footnote 1: It is in no way a "preserve" of the aristocracy, being largely
recruited from the middle and even lower-middle class.]
Against all this there is one supremely disintegrating force—the principle
of Nationality. Only a map can make clear the racial complications of
the Dual Monarchy, and even the largest scale map fails to show how
inextricably the various races are interwoven in many districts of Hungary
or Bohemia. The following table offers at least a statistical survey:
(1) Racial—           Austria.     Hungary.      Bosnia.

  Germans             9,950,266    2,037,435        ..

  Czechs             {6,435,983        ..           ..

  Slovaks            {             1,967,970        ..

  Poles               4,967,984        ..           ..

  Ruthenes            3,518,854      472,587        ..

  Magyars  (including

  900,000 Jews)          ..       10,050,575        ..

  Croats            }  783,334     1,833,162    {1,875,000

  Serbs             }              1,106,471    {

  Slovenes           1,252,940         ..           ..

  Roumanians           275,422     2,949,032        ..

  Italians             768,422        27,307        ..

  Others                 ..          374,105        ..

(2) Religious—

  Roman Catholic    22,530,000    10,888,138       451,686

  Uniate Catholic    3,417,000     2,025,508        ..

  Orthodox             660,000     2,987,163       856,158

  Calvinist          } 589,000     2,621,329        ..

  Lutheran           }             1,340,143        ..

  Mohammedan             ..            ..          626,649

  Jewish             1,314,000       932,458        ..

  Minor Sects           56,000        91,748        ..

Total population    28,324,940    20,886,487     1,898,044
§4. The Genesis of the Southern Slavs.—The foregoing survey of
tendencies in Austria-Hungary is utterly incomplete and inadequate, but it
may perhaps serve as a basis for further study. Let us now consider her
rival in the dispute which has led to the great war—Serbia.
Here, at the outset, it cannot be emphasised too strongly that those who
regard the problem merely as a dispute between the government of Vienna and
the government of Belgrade have not grasped even its elements. The Southern
Slav question goes far deeper and wider than that; it must be treated as a
whole, and of it Serbia is only a part. In any study of the Slavonic races
the first fact which emerges is that they fall naturally into two main
groups—the northern and the southern—divided by a solid wedge of three
non-Slavonic races, the German, the Magyar, and the Roumanian, stretching
from the Kiel Canal to the Black Sea. It is with the southern group that we
are concerned.
The Southern Slavs fall into four sections—the Slovenes, Croats, Serbs,
and Bulgars, who between them occupy the whole country from southern
Carinthia to central Thrace. The significance of the Bulgars will be dealt
with elsewhere, and of the Slovenes it will suffice for our present purpose
to say that they are a small and ancient race, of vigorous stock and
clerical leanings, whose true importance lies in their geographical
position and its latent possibilities for the future. The Croats and Serbs
occupy the border-line between West and East, between Rome and Byzantium,
between Catholicism and Orthodoxy. Broadly speaking, every Croat is a
Catholic, every Serb an Orthodox. Broadly speaking again, the Croat
language is Serb written with Latin characters, the Serb language Croat
written in the Cyrilline alphabet.
Despite their common language, the two kindred races have never all been
united under a single ruler. From the ninth to the end of the eleventh
century the Duchy, then Kingdom, of Croatia was governed by native princes,
upon whose extinction it was conquered by Hungary. For eight centuries
Croatia has enjoyed an autonomous position under the Holy Crown of St.
Stephen; its scope has varied according to the political constellation,
but till 1912 its constant tradition had remained unbroken. Meanwhile the
Dalmatian coast towns remained a bone of contention between Venice and
Hungary; but the marble Lions on their battered walls are still the best
proof of the triumph of Italian culture within them. Ragusa alone resisted
both Venetians and Turks, and preserved herself inviolate as the home of
commerce and the muses, until her tiny Republic was destroyed by Napoleon
in 1808. The Kingdom of Serbia developed on more distinctively Slavonic
lines. During its great days in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries
under the Nemanja dynasty it dominated the Balkan Peninsula, produced a
code of law which is unique in mediaeval records, developed a prosperous
commerce and mining industries, and seemed on the point of striking a new
note in architecture. Her greatest Tsar, Stephen Dushan, died mysteriously
of poison, when his hosts were already thundering at the gates of
Constantinople (1356). But the greatness of his empire did not survive him,
and only a generation later Serbian independence received its death-blow
on the fatal field of Kosovo—the Flodden of the Balkans, but an event
far direr in its consequences than Flodden was to Scotland. Bosnia and a
fragment of Serbia lingered on under more or less independent rulers till
the middle of the fifteenth century. Then the Turkish night replaced the
Turkish twilight. From 1463 to 1804 the national life of the Serbs lay
utterly crushed. In Serbia their nobility was literally wiped out, in
Bosnia it accepted Islam in order to save its lands. The relations of
conqueror and conquered are best characterised by the single fact that
a Christian who failed to dismount from his horse on meeting a Turk was
liable to be killed on the spot.
Throughout this period of utter gloom only two things served to keep alive
the Serb tradition—their splendid popular ballads, unequalled in Europe
for directness and imagination, save, perhaps, by the ballads of the
Anglo-Scottish Border; and the clergy of the Orthodox Church, poor ignorant
despised peasants like their flock, yet bravely keeping the national flame
burning. The one bright spot was the tiny mountain eyrie of Montenegro,
which stubbornly maintained its freedom under a long succession of
warrior-priests.
The Serb Patriarchate, which had long had its seat in Ipek, migrated to
Austria in 1690, at the special invitation of the Emperor Leopold I., and
has ever since been established (though the title of patriarch lapsed for a
time) at Karlowitz on the Danube. Large settlements of refugee Serbs from
Turkey followed their spiritual chief to Croatia, Slavonia and the southern
plains of Hungary between 1690 and 1740. The special privileges granted to
them by the emperor were, however, gradually undermined and revoked by the
Hungarian Estates. Meanwhile the "Military Frontiers" were extended on
essentially democratic lines: a land-tenure subject to military service
bred a hereditary race of soldiers and officers devoted to the Imperial
idea, and it has taken many long long years of bungling on the part of
Viennese and Magyar diplomacy to efface that devotion.
Thus the Habsburg dominions became the centre of culture for the Serbs,
whose literary revival came from Neusatz, Karlowitz and even Buda. It was
not only under Prince Eugene that they looked to the Habsburgs for aid.
Kara George, who led their first serious rising in 1804 more than once
offered himself to Vienna.
In the Balkans the Serbs were the first to revolt, and won their own
freedom, with less help than Greeks, Roumanians or Bulgarians, and under
far less favourable circumstances. Thus Serbia is essentially a self-made
man among States, built from the foundations upwards, and possessing no
aristocracy and hardly even a middle class. Her curse has been the rivalry
of two, or rather three native dynasties, the Karageorgevitch, the
Obrenovitch and the Petrovitch; and this rivalry has borne fruit in three
dastardly political crimes—the murder of the heroic Black George in 1817,
by order of his rival Milosh Obrenovitch; of Prince Michael, Serbia's
wisest ruler, by the adherents of George's son; and finally of King
Alexander and his wife in June 1903. The history of the Southern Slavs
for the last century has been a slow movement towards national unity,
overshadowed, sometimes hastened, sometimes paralysed, by the rivalry of
Austria and Russia for the hegemony of the Balkan Peninsula. Till 1875 the
influence of the two Powers alternated in Belgrade, and there was nothing
definite to suggest which influence would win, though of course Russia may
be said to have possessed an advantage in her position as the foremost
Orthodox power and as the greatest among the Slavonic brotherhood of races.
That year, however, brought a fresh rising of Bosnia and Herzegovina
against Turkish rule, and in defence of this purely Serbo-Croat province
public opinion in Serbia and Montenegro rose. Side by side the two little
principalities fought the Turks and risked their all upon the issue. The
provinces were to the last man friendly and welcomed their action. Then,
when the battle seemed won, Austria-Hungary at the Congress of Berlin
stepped in and occupied Bosnia and Herzegovina—with the active approval
of Disraeli and Salisbury. The inhabitants resisted stoutly, but were
overcome. Thus was realised the first stage upon the road of the Austrian
advance towards Salonica. Serbia received compensation at Nia, Pirot, and
Vranja; Montenegro acquired the open roadstead of Antivari and a scrap of
barren coast-line; but the hearts of both still clung to Bosnia.
Henceforth the friction between Vienna and Belgrade has been permanent,
though often latent. It was accentuated by the fact that King Milan was
little better than an Austrian agent, the most notorious example of this
being the ill-considered and ill-managed war with Bulgaria into which he
plunged Serbia at the instigation of the Ballplatz[1](1885). Afterwards, it
is true, Vienna intervened to rob the Bulgarians of the fruits of victory
and argued that Serbia was thus under her debt; but this crass application
of the principle of divide et impera could not deceive any one. Milan was
a man of great ability, but vicious and corrupt. The ceaseless scandals
of his private life, the frequent political coups d'etat in which
he indulged, tended to confirm the dislike of his subjects for the
Austrophilism with which he was identified. Alexander, his son and
successor, was even worse; indeed, it is not too much to say that he was
the most "impossible" monarch whom Europe has known since the days of the
Tsar Paul. His court was characterised by gross favouritism and arbitrary
revisions of the constitution; and his position became finally untenable
when he committed the fatal error of marrying Draga Mashin, a woman of no
position and notorious private character. Two incidents in her tragic story
remind us of similar scandals in English history—the fond delusion of Mary
Tudor and the legend of Mary of Modena's warming-pan. The last straw was
the design, widely attributed to her and the infatuated king, for securing
the succession to her brother, who had as little claim to the throne as
any other Serbian subject. On June 10, 1903, Alexander and Draga were
assassinated by a gang of Serbian officers, under circumstances of the
utmost brutality such as nothing can excuse. In the light of recent events,
however, it is important to note that both Austria and Russia knew of the
plot at least ten days before the murder and did nothing to stop it.[2]
On the day after the crime the Fremdenblatt, the organ of the
Austro-Hungarian Foreign Office, published a leading article couched in
terms of the utmost cynicism, and declaring that it mattered little to
Austria-Hungary which dynasty reigned in Serbia. The Serbian Government
might have been excused for enclosing a copy of this article in its reply
to the Austrian Note of July 23, 1914!
[Footnote 1: The Austro-Hungarian Foreign Office.]
[Footnote 2: In 1908 this was confirmed to me by a distinguished member of
the then Austrian Cabinet, since dead, who was certainly in a position to
know.]
The Obrenovitch dynasty was thus at an end. Its rival, the Karageorgevitch
dynasty, returned to power—naturally under a black cloud of European
disgust and suspicion. King Peter is not, however, as black as he has
sometimes been painted. He fought gallantly in 1870 as a French officer; as
a young man he translated Stuart Mill's Essay on Liberty into Serb, and
for a generation he lived by preference in democratic Geneva and in Paris.
Under him Serbia has for the first time enjoyed real constitutional
government. Quietly, as occasion arose, the regicides were removed to the
background, the old methods of favouritism were steadily discouraged, and
it is not too much to say that an entirely new atmosphere has been created
in Belgrade since 1903. Among the younger politicians in Serbia, as in
other Slavonic countries, the moral influence of Professor Masaryk, the
great Czech philosopher and politician, has grown more and more marked.
The depth of Serb aspirations in Bosnia has two obvious grounds—on the one
hand, pure national sentiment of the best kind; on the other, the urgent
economic need for a seaboard, Serbia being the only inland country in
Europe save Switzerland, and not enjoying the latter's favoured position
in the immediate vicinity of great world-markets. Austria-Hungary, on her
part, set herself deliberately not merely to block this access to the sea,
but also to keep Serbia in complete economic dependence. Under the new
dynasty the little kingdom showed a keener desire to shake off its