# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2004
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Mrs. F.L. Gillette, The Whitehouse Cookbook (1887)
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/13923/13923-h/13923-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

SUGGESTIONS IN REGARD TO CAKE-MAKING.
Use none but the best materials, and all the ingredients should
be properly prepared before commencing to mix any of them. Eggs
beat up much lighter and sooner by being placed in a cold place
sometime before using them; a small pinch of soda sometimes has the
same effect. Flour should always be sifted before using it. Cream
of tartar or baking powder should be thoroughly mixed with the
flour; butter be placed where it will become moderately soft, but
not melted in the least, or the cake will be sodden and
heavy. Sugar should be rolled and sifted; spices ground or pounded;
raisins or any ether fruit looked over and prepared; currants,
especially, should be nicely washed, picked, dried in a cloth and
then carefully examined, that no pieces of grit or stone may be
left amongst them. They should then be laid on a dish before the
fire to become thoroughly dry; as, if added damp to the other
ingredients, cakes will be liable to be heavy.
Eggs should be well beaten, the whites and yolks separately, the
yolks to a thick cream, the whites until they are a stiff froth.
Always stir the butter and sugar to a cream, then add the beaten
yolks, then the milk, the flavoring, then the beaten whites, and,
lastly, the flour. If fruit is to be used, measure and dredge with
a little sifted flour, stir in gradually and thoroughly.
Pour all in well-buttered cake-pans. While the cake is baking
care should be taken that no cold air enters the oven, only when
necessary to see that the cake is baking properly; the oven should
be an even, moderate heat, not too cold or too hot; much depends on
this for success. Cake is often spoiled by being looked at too
often when first put into the oven. The heat should be tested
before the cake is put in, which can be done by throwing on the
floor of the oven a tablespoonful [Pg
283]of new flour. If
the flour takes fire, or assumes a dark brown color, the
temperature is too high and the oven must be allowed to cool; if
the flour remains white after the lapse of a few seconds, the
temperature is too low. When the oven is of the proper temperature
the flour will slightly brown and look slightly scorched.
Another good way to test the heat, is to drop a few spoonfuls of
the cake batter on a small piece of buttered letter paper, and
place it in the oven during the finishing of the cake, so that the
piece will be baked before putting in the whole cake; if the little
drop of cake batter bakes evenly without burning around the edge,
it will be safe to put the whole cake in the oven. Then, again, if
the oven seems too hot, fold a thick brown paper double, and lay on
the bottom of the oven; then after the cake has risen, put a thick
brown paper over the top, or butter well a thick white paper and
lay carefully over the top.
If, after the cake is put in, it seems to bake too fast, put a
brown paper loosely over the top of the pan, care being taken that
it does not touch the cake, and do not open the door for five
minutes at least; the cake should then be quickly examined, and the
door shut carefully, or the rush of cold air will cause it to fall.
Setting a small dish of hot water in the oven, will also
prevent the cake from scorching.
To ascertain when the cake is done, run a broom straw into the
middle of it; if it comes out clean and smooth, the cake will do to
take out.
Where the recipe calls for baking powder, and you have none, you
can use cream of tartar and soda in proportion to one level
teaspoonful of soda, two heaping teaspoonfuls of cream of
tartar.
When sour milk is called for in the recipe, use only soda. Cakes
made with molasses burn much more easily than those made with
sugar. Never stir cake after the butter and sugar is creamed, but
beat it down from the bottom, up and over; this laps air into the
cake batter, and produces little air cells, which cause the dough
to puff and swell when it comes in contact with the heat while
cooking.
When making most cakes, especially sponge cake, the flour should
be added by degrees, stirred very slowly and lightly, for if
stirred hard and fast it will make it porous and tough.
Cakes should be kept in tight tin cake-cans, or earthen jars, in
a cool, dry place.
Cookies, jumbles, ginger-snaps, etc., require a quick oven; if
they become moist or soft by keeping, put again into the oven a few
minutes.
To remove a cake from a tin after it is baked, so that it will
not crack, break or fall, first butter the tin well all around the
sides and bottom; then cut a piece of letter paper to exactly fit
the tin, butter that on both sides, placing it smoothly on the
bottom and sides of the tin. When the cake is baked, let it remain
in the tin until it is cold; then set it in the oven a
minute, or just long enough to warm the tin through. Remove it from
the oven; turn it upside down on your hand, tap the edge of the tin
on the table and it will slip out with ease, leaving it whole.
If a cake-pan is too shallow for holding the quantity of cake to
be baked, for fear of its being so light as to rise above the pan,
that can be remedied by thoroughly greasing a piece of thick glazed
letter paper with soft butter. Place or fit it around the sides of
the buttered tin, allowing it to reach an inch or more above the
top. If the oven heat is moderate the butter will preserve the
paper from burning.
In the first place, the eggs should be cold, and the platter on
which they are to be beaten also cold. Allow, for the white of one
egg, one small teacupful of powdered sugar. Break the eggs and
throw a small handful of the sugar on them as soon as you begin
beating; keep adding it at intervals until it is all used up. The
eggs must not be beaten until the sugar has been added in
this way, which gives a smooth, tender frosting, and one that will
dry much sooner than the old way.
Spread with a broad knife evenly over the cake, and if it seems
too thin, beat in a little more sugar. Cover the cake with two
coats, the second after the first has become dry, or nearly so. If
the icing gets too dry or stiff before the last coat is needed, it
can be thinned sufficiently with a little water, enough to make it
work smoothly.
A little lemon juice, or half a teaspoonful of tartaric acid,
added to the frosting while being beaten, makes it white and more
frothy.
The flavors mostly used are lemon, vanilla, almond, rose,
chocolate and orange. If you wish to ornament with figures or
flowers, make up rather more icing, keep about one-third out until
that on the cake is [Pg 285]dried; then, with a clean glass
syringe, apply it in such forms as you desire and dry as before;
what you keep out to ornament with may be tinted pink with
cochineal, blue with indigo, yellow with saffron or the grated rind
of an orange strained through a cloth, green with spinach juice and
brown with chocolate, purple with cochineal and indigo. Strawberry,
or currant and cranberry juices color a delicate pink.
Set the cake in a cool oven with the door open to dry, or in a
draught in an open window.
ALMOND FROSTING.
The whites of three eggs, beaten up with three cups of fine,
white sugar. Blanch a pound of sweet almonds, pound them in a
mortar with a little sugar, until a fine paste, then add the whites
of eggs, sugar and vanilla extract. Pound a few minutes to
thoroughly mix. Cover the cake with a very thick coating of this,
set in a cool oven to dry, afterwards cover with a plain icing.
CHOCOLATE FROSTING.
The whites of four eggs, three cups of powdered sugar and nearly
a cup of grated chocolate. Beat the whites a very little, they must
not become white, stir in the chocolate, then put in the sugar
gradually, beating to mix it well.
PLAIN CHOCOLATE ICING.
Put into a shallow pan four tablespoonfuls of scraped chocolate,
and place it where it will melt gradually, but not scorch; when
melted, stir in three tablespoonfuls of milk or cream and one of
water; mix all well together, and add one scant teacupful of sugar;
boil about five minutes, and while hot, and when the cakes are
nearly cold, spread some evenly over the surface of one of the
cakes; put a second one on top, alternating the mixture and cakes;
then cover top and sides, and set in a warm oven to harden. All who
have tried recipe after recipe, vainly hoping to find one where the
chocolate sticks to the cake and not to the fingers, will
appreciate the above. In making those most palatable of cakes,
"Chocolate Eclairs," the recipe just given will be found very
satisfactory.
TUTTI FRUTTI ICING.
Mix with boiled icing one ounce each of chopped citron, candied
cherries, seedless raisins, candied pineapple and blanched
almonds.
SUGAR ICING.
To one pound of extra refined sugar add one ounce of fine white
starch; pound finely together and then sift them through gauze;
then beat the whites of three eggs to a froth. The secret of
success is to beat the eggs long enough, and always one way; add
the powdered sugar by degrees, or it will spoil the froth of the
eggs. When all the sugar is stirred in continue the whipping for
half an hour longer, adding more sugar if the ice is too thin. Take
a little of the icing and lay it aside for ornamenting afterward.
When the cake comes out of the oven, spread the sugar icing
smoothly over it with a knife and dry it at once in a cool oven.
For ornamenting the cake the icing may be tinged any color
preferred. For pink, use a few drops of cochineal; for yellow, a
pinch of saffron dissolved; for green, the juice of some chopped
spinach. Whichever is chosen, let the coloring be first mixed with
a little colorless spirit and then stirred into the white icing
until the tint is deep enough. To ornament the cake with it, make a
cone of stiff writing paper and squeeze the colored icing through
it, so as to form leaves, beading or letters, as the case may be.
It requires nicety and care to do it with success.
BOILED FROSTING.
To one pound of finest pulverized sugar add three wine-glassfuls
of clear water. Let it stand until it dissolves; then boil it until
it is perfectly clear and threads from the spoon. Beat well the
whites of four eggs. Pour the sugar into the dish with the eggs,
but do not mix them until the syrup is luke-warm; then beat all
well together for one-half hour.
Season to your taste with vanilla, rose-water, or lemon juice.
The first coating may be put on the cake as soon as it is well
mixed. Rub the cake with a little flour before you apply the icing.
While the first coat is drying continue to beat the remainder; you
will not have to wait long if the cake is set in a warm place near
the fire. This is said to be a most excellent recipe for icing.
FROSTING WITHOUT EGGS.
An excellent frosting may be made without eggs or gelatine,
which will keep longer and cut more easily, causing no breakage or
crumbling and withal is very economical.
Take one cup of granulated sugar; dampen it with one-fourth of a
cup of milk, or five tablespoonfuls; place it on the fire in a
suitable dish and stir it until it boils; then let it boil for five
minutes without stirring; remove it from the fire and set the dish
in another of cold water; add flavoring. While it is cooling, stir
or beat it constantly and it will become a thick, creamy
frosting.
GELATINE FROSTING.
Soak one teaspoonful of gelatine in one tablespoonful of cold
water half an hour, dissolve in two tablespoonfuls of hot water;
add one cup of powdered sugar and stir until smooth.
GOLDEN FROSTING.
A very delicious and handsome frosting can be made by using the
yolks of eggs instead of the whites. Proceed exactly as for
ordinary frosting. It will harden just as nicely as that does. This
is particularly good for orange cake, harmonizing with the color of
the cake in a way to please those who love rich coloring.
No. 1. CREAM FILLING.
Cream filling is made with one pint of new milk, two eggs, three
tablespoonfuls of sifted flour (or half cup of cornstarch), one cup
of sugar. Put two-thirds of the milk on the stove to boil, stir the
sugar, flour and eggs in what is left. When the milk boils, put
into it the whole and cook it until it is as thick as custard; when
cool, add vanilla extract. This custard is nice with a cup of
hickory nuts, kernels chopped fine and stirred into it. Spread
between the layers of cake. This custard can be made of the yolks
of the eggs only, saving the whites for the cake part.
No. 2. ANOTHER CREAM FILLING.
One cup powdered sugar, one-fourth cup hot water. Let them
simmer. Beat white of an egg and mix with the above; when cold, add
one-half cup chopped raisins, one-half cup chopped walnuts, one
tablespoonful of grated cocoanut.
No. 3. ICE-CREAM FILLING.
Make an icing as follows: Three cups of sugar, one of water;
boil to a thick, clear syrup, or until it begins to be brittle;
pour this, boiling hot, over the well-beaten whites of three
eggs; stir the mixture very briskly, and pour the sugar in slowly;
beat it, when all in, until cool. Flavor with lemon or vanilla
extract. This, spread between any white cake layers, answers for
"Ice-Cream Cake."
No. 4. APPLE FILLING.
Peel and slice green tart apples, put them on the fire with
sugar to suit; when tender, remove, rub them through a fine sieve
and add a small piece of butter. When cold, use to spread between
the layers; cover the cake with plenty of sugar.
No. 5. ANOTHER APPLE FILLING.
One coffeecup of sugar, one egg, three large apples grated, one
lemon grated, juice and outside of the rind; beat together and cook
till quite thick. To be cooled before putting on the cake. Spread
between layers of cake.
No. 6. CREAM FROSTING.
A cup of sweet thick cream whipped, sweetened and flavored with
vanilla; cut a loaf of cake in two, spread the frosting between and
on the top; this tastes like Charlotte Russe.
No. 7. PEACH-CREAM FILLING.
Cut peaches into thin slices, or chop them and prepare cream by
whipping and sweetening. Put a layer of peaches between the layers
of cake and pour cream over each layer and over the top. Bananas,
strawberries or other fruits may be used in the same way, mashing
strawberries and stewing thick with powdered sugar.
No. 8. CHOCOLATE CREAM FOR FILLING.
Five tablespoonfuls of grated chocolate, enough cream or milk to
wet it, one cupful of sugar, one egg, one teaspoonful vanilla
flavoring. Stir the ingredients over the fire until thoroughly
mixed, having beaten the egg well before adding it; then add the
vanilla flavoring after it is removed from the fire.
No. 9. ANOTHER CHOCOLATE FILLING.
The whites of three eggs beaten stiff, one cup of sugar and one
cup of grated chocolate, put between the layers and on top.
No. 10. BANANA FILLING.
Make an icing of the whites of two eggs and one cup and a half
of powdered sugar. Spread this on the layers, and then cover
thickly and entirely with bananas sliced thin or chopped fine. This
cake may be flavored with vanilla. The top should be simply
frosted.
No. 11. LEMON JELLY FILLING.
Grate the yellow from the rind of two lemons and squeeze out the
juice; two cupfuls of sugar, the yolks and whites of two eggs
beaten separately. Mix the sugar and yolks, then add the whites and
then the lemons. Now pour on a cupful of boiling water; stir into
this two tablespoonfuls of sifted flour, rubbed smooth in half a
cup of water; then add a tablespoonful of melted butter; cook until
it thickens. When cold, spread between the layers of cake. Oranges
can be used in place of lemons.
Another filling of lemon (without cooking) is made of the grated
rind and juice of two lemons and the whites of two eggs beaten with
one cup of sugar.
No. 12. ORANGE CAKE FILLING.
Peel two large oranges, remove the seeds, chop them fine, add
half a peeled lemon, one cup of sugar and the well-beaten white of
an egg. Spread between the layers of "Silver Cake" recipe.
No. 13. FIG FILLING.
Take a pound of figs, chop fine, and put into a stewpan on the
stove; pour over them a teacupful of water and add a half cup of
[Pg 290]sugar. Cook all together until soft and smooth. When
cold spread between layers of cake.
No. 14. FRUIT FILLING.
Four tablespoonfuls of very finely chopped citron, four
tablespoonfuls of finely chopped seeded raisins, half a cupful of
blanched almonds chopped fine, also a quarter of a pound of finely
chopped figs. Beat the whites of three eggs to a stiff froth,
adding half of a cupful of sugar; then mix thoroughly into this the
whole of the chopped ingredients. Put it between the layers of cake
when the cake is hot, so that it will cook the egg a little.
This will be found delicious.
BREAD OR RAISED CAKE.
Two cupfuls of raised dough; beat into it two-thirds of a cup of
butter and two cups of sugar creamed together, three eggs, well
beaten, one even teaspoonful of soda dissolved in two
tablespoonfuls of milk, half a nutmeg grated, one tablespoonful of
cinnamon, a teaspoonful of cloves, one cup of raisins. Mix all well
together, put in the beaten whites of eggs and raisins last; beat
all hard for several minutes; put in buttered pans and let it stand
half an hour to rise again before baking. Bake in a moderate
oven. Half a glass of brandy is an improvement, if you have it
convenient.
FRUIT CAKE. (Superior.)
Three pounds dry flour, one pound sweet butter, one pound sugar,
three pounds stoned raisins, two pounds currants, three-quarters of
a pound sweet almonds blanched, one pound citron, twelve eggs, one
tablespoonful allspice, one teaspoonful cloves, two tablespoonfuls
cinnamon, two nutmegs, one wine-glass of wine, one wine-glass of
brandy, one coffeecupful molasses with the spices in it; steep this
gently twenty or thirty minutes, not boiling hot; beat the eggs
very lightly; put the fruit in last, stirring it gradually, also a
teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a tablespoonful of water; the
fruit should be well floured; if necessary add flour after the
fruit is in; butter a sheet of paper and lay it in the pan. Lay in
some slices of citron, then a layer of the mixture, then of citron
again, etc., till the pan is nearly full. Bake [Pg 291]three
or four hours, according to the thickness of the loaves, in a
tolerably hot oven, and with steady heat. Let it cool in the oven
gradually. Ice when cold. It improves this cake very much to add
three teaspoonfuls of baking powder to the flour. A fine wedding
cake recipe.
FRUIT CAKE BY MEASURE, (Excellent.)
Two scant teacupfuls of butter, three cupfuls of dark brown
sugar, six eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, one pound of
raisins, seeded, one of currants, washed and dried, and half a
pound of citron cut in thin strips; also half a cupful of cooking
molasses and half a cupful of sour milk. Stir the butter and sugar
to a cream, add to that half a grated nutmeg, ope tablespoonful of
ground cinnamon, one teaspoonful of cloves, one teaspoonful of
mace, add the molasses and sour milk. Stir all well; then put in
the beaten yolks of eggs, a wine-glass of brandy; stir again all
thoroughly, and then add four cupfuls of sifted flour alternately
with the beaten whites of eggs. Now dissolve a level teaspoonful of
soda and stir in thoroughly. Mix the fruit together and stir into
it two heaping tablespoonfuls of flour; then stir it in the cake.
Butter two common-sized baking tins carefully, line them with
letter paper well buttered, and bake in a moderate oven two hours.
After it is baked, let it cool in the pan. Afterward put it into a
tight can, or let it remain in the pans and cover tightly. Best
recipe of all.
WHITE FRUIT CAKE.
One cup of butter, two cups of sugar, one cup of sweet milk, two
and one-half cups of flour, the whites of seven eggs, two even
teaspoonfuls of baking powder, one pound each of seeded raisins,
figs and blanched almonds, and one quarter of a pound of citron,
all chopped fine. Mix all thoroughly before adding the fruit; add a
teaspoonful of lemon extract. Put baking powder in the flour and
mix it well before adding it to the other ingredients. Sift a
little flour over the fruit before stirring it in. Bake slowly two
hours and try with a splint to see when it is done. A cup of grated
cocoanut is a nice addition to this cake.
MOLASSES FRUIT CAKE.
One teacupful of butter, one teacupful of brown sugar, worked
well together; next, two teacupfuls of cooking molasses, one cupful
of milk with a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in it, one
tablespoonful of ginger, [Pg
292]one tablespoonful
of cinnamon and one teaspoonful of cloves a little grated nutmeg.
Now add four eggs well beaten and five cups of sifted flour, or
enough to make a stiff batter. Flour a cup of raisins and one of
currants; add last. Bake in a very moderate oven one hour.
If well covered will keep six months.
SPONGE CAKE.
SEPARATE the whites and yolks of six eggs. Beat the yolks to a
cream, to which add two teacupfuls of powdered sugar, beating again
from five to ten minutes, then add two tablespoonfuls of milk or
water, a pinch of salt and flavoring. Now add part of the beaten
whites; then two cups of flour in which you have sifted two
teaspoonfuls of baking powder; mix gradually into the above
ingredients, stirring slowly and lightly, only enough to mix them
well; lastly add the remainder of the whites of the eggs. Line the
tins with buttered paper and fill two-thirds full.
WHITE SPONGE CAKE.
Whites of five eggs, one cup of flour, one cup sugar, one
teaspoonful baking powder; flavor with vanilla. Bake in a quick
oven.
ALMOND SPONGE CAKE.
The addition of almonds makes this cake very superior to the
usual sponge cake. Sift one pint of fine flour; blanch in scalding
water two ounces of sweet and two ounces of bitter almonds,
renewing the hot water when expedient; when the skins are all off
wash the almonds in cold water (mixing the sweet and bitter) and
wipe them dry; pound them to a fine, smooth paste (one at a time),
adding, as you proceed, water or white of egg to prevent their
boiling. Set them in a cool place; beat ten eggs, the whites and
yolks separately, till very smooth and thick, and then beat into
them gradually two cups powdered sugar in turn with the pounded
almonds; lastly, add the flour, stirring it round slowly and
lightly on the surface of the mixture, as in common sponge cake;
have ready buttered a deep square pan; put the mixture
carefully into it, set into the oven and bake till thoroughly done
and risen very high; when cool, cover it with plain white icing
flavored with rose-water, or with almond icing. With sweet almonds
always use a [Pg 293]small portion of bitter; without them,
sweet almonds have little or no taste, though they add to
the richness of the cake.
Use two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder in the flour.
OLD-FASHIONED SPONGE CAKE.
Two cups of sifted white sugar, two cups of flour measured
before sifting, ten eggs. Stir the yolks and sugar together until
perfectly light; add a pinch of salt; beat the whites of the eggs
to a very stiff froth and add them with the flour, after beating
together lightly; flavor with lemon. Bake in a moderate oven
about forty-five minutes. Baking powder is an improvement to this
cake, using two large teaspoonfuls.
LEMON SPONGE CAKE.
Into one level cup of flour put a level teaspoonful of baking
powder and sift it. Grate off the yellow rind of a lemon. Separate
the whites from the yolks of four eggs. Measure a scant cup of
white granulated sugar and beat it to a cream with the yolks, then
add the grated rind and a tablespoonful of the juice of the lemon.
Stir together until thick and creamy; now beat the whites to a
stiff froth; then quickly and lightly mix without beating a
third of the flour with the yolks; then a third of the whites; then
more flour and whites until all are used. The mode of mixing must
be very light, rather cutting down through the cake batter than to
beating it; beating the eggs makes them light, but beating the
batter makes the cake tough. Bake immediately until a straw run
into it can be withdrawn clean.
This recipe is especially nice for Charlotte Russe, being so
light and porous.
PLAIN SPONGE CAKE.
Beat the yolks of four eggs together with two cups of fine
powdered sugar. Stir in gradually one cup of sifted flour and the
whites of four eggs beaten to a stiff froth, then a cup of sifted
flour in which two teaspoonfuls of baking powder have been stirred,
and, lastly, a scant teacupful of boiling water, stirred in a
little at a time. Flavor, add salt and, however thin the mixture
may seem, do not add any more flour. Bake in shallow tins.
BRIDE'S CAKE.
Cream together one scant cup of butter and three cups of sugar;
add one cup of milk, then the beaten whites of twelve eggs; sift
three teaspoonfuls of baking powder into one cup of cornstarch
mixed with three cups of sifted flour and beat in gradually with
the rest; flavor to taste. Beat all thoroughly, then put in
buttered tins lined with letter paper well buttered; bake slowly in
a moderate oven. A beautiful white cake. Ice the top. Double
the recipe if more is required.
ENGLISH POUND CAKE.
One pound of butter, one and one-quarter pounds of flour, one
pound of pounded loaf sugar, one pound of currants, nine eggs, two
ounces of candied peel, one-half ounce of citron, one-half ounce of
sweet almonds; when liked, a little pounded mace. Work the butter
to a cream; add the sugar, then the well-beaten yolks of eggs, next
the flour, currants, candied peel, which should be cut into neat
slices, and the almonds, which should be blanched and chopped, and
mix all these well together; whisk the whites of eggs and let them
be thoroughly blended with the other ingredients. Beat the cake
well for twenty minutes and put it into a round tin, lined at the
bottom and sides with strips of white buttered paper. Bake it from
two hours to two and a half, and let the oven be well heated when
the cake is first put in, as, if this is not the case, the currants
will all sink to the bottom of it. A glass of wine is usually added
to the mixture, but this is scarcely necessary, as the cake will be
found quite rich enough without it.
PLAIN POUND CAKE.
This is the old-fashioned recipe that our mothers used to make,
and it can be kept for weeks in an earthen jar, closely covered,
first dipping letter paper in brandy and placing over the top of
the cake before covering the jar.
Beat to a cream one pound of butter with one pound of sugar,
after mixing well with the beaten yolks of twelve eggs, one grated
nutmeg, one glass of wine, one glass of rose-water. Then stir in
one pound of sifted flour and the well-beaten whites of the eggs.
Bake a nice light brown.
COCOANUT POUND CAKE.
One-half cupful of butter, two cupfuls of sugar, one cupful of
milk, and five eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; one teaspoonful of
soda and two of cream of tartar, stirred into four cups of sifted
flour. Beat the butter and sugar until very light; to which add the
beaten yolks, then the milk, the beaten whites of eggs, then the
flour by degrees. After beating all well together, add a small
cocoanut grated. Line the cake-pans with paper well buttered, fill
rather more than half full and bake in a moderate oven.
Spread over the top a thin frosting, sprinkled thickly with grated
cocoanut.
CITRON POUND CAKE.
Stir two cups of butter to a cream, then beat in the following
ingredients each one in succession: one pint of powdered sugar, one
quart of flour, a teaspoonful of salt; eight eggs, the yolks and
whites beaten separately, and a wine-glass of brandy; then last of
all add a quarter of a pound of citron cut into thin slices and
floured. Line two cake pans with buttered paper and turn the cake
batter in. Bake in a moderate oven about three-quarters of
an hour.
CITRON CAKE.
Three cups of white sugar and one cup of butter creamed
together; one cup of sweet milk, six eggs, whites and yolks beaten
separately, one teaspoonful of vanilla or lemon extract, two
heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder, sifted with four cups and a
half of flour. One cup and a half of citron, sliced thin and
dredged with flour. Divide into two cakes and bake in tins lined
with buttered letter paper.
LEMON CAKE.
Three teacupfuls of sugar, one cupful of butter, five eggs, a
level teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a cup of sweet milk, four
full cups of sifted flour and lastly the grated peel and juice of a
lemon, the juice to be added the very last. Bake in two shallow
tins. When cold ice with lemon icing and cut into squares.
DELICATE CAKE.
One cup of cornstarch, one of butter, two of sugar, one of sweet
milk, two of flour, the whites of seven eggs; rub butter and sugar
to a [Pg 296]cream; mix one teaspoonful cream of tartar with the
flour and cornstarch; one-half teaspoonful soda with the sweet
milk; add the milk and soda to the sugar and butter, then add
flour, then the whites of eggs; flavor to taste. Never fails to be
good.
SILVER, OR DELICATE CAKE.
Whites of six eggs, one cupful of sweet milk, two cupfuls of
sugar, four cupfuls of sifted flour, two-thirds of a cup of butter,
flavoring and two teaspoonfuls of baking powder. Stir the sugar and
butter to a cream, then add the milk and flavoring, part of the
flour, the beaten whites of eggs, then the rest of the flour. Bake
carefully in tins lined with buttered white paper.
When using the whites of eggs for nice cakes, the yolks need not
be wasted; keep them in a cool place and scramble them. Serve on
toast or with chipped beef.
GOLD CAKE.
After beating to a cream one cup and a half of butter and two
cups of white sugar, stir in the well-whipped yolks of one dozen
eggs, four cupfuls of sifted flour, one teaspoonful of baking
powder. Flavor with lemon. Line the bake-pans with buttered paper
and bake in a moderate oven for one hour.
GOLD OR LEMON CAKE.
Two cups of sugar, half a cup of butter, the yolks of six eggs
and one whole one, the grated rind and juice of a lemon or orange,
half a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in half a cup of sweet milk,
four cups of sifted flour, sifted twice; cream the butter and
sugar, then add the beaten yolks and the flour, beating hard for
several minutes. Lastly, add the lemon or orange and bake, frosting
if liked. This makes a more suitable lemon cake than if made
with the white parts of eggs added.
SNOW CAKE. (Delicious.)
One pound of arrowroot, quarter of a pound of pounded white
sugar, half a pound of butter, the whites of six eggs, flavoring to
taste of essence of almonds, or vanilla, or lemon; beat the butter
to a cream; stir in the sugar and arrowroot gradually, at the same
time beating the mixture; whisk the whites of the eggs to a stiff
froth; add them to the other ingredients and beat well for twenty
minutes; put in which-[Pg 297]ever of the above flavorings may be
preferred; pour the cake into a buttered mold or tin and bake it in
a moderate oven from one to one and a half hours.
MARBLE CAKE.
White Part.—Whites of four eggs, one cup of white
sugar, half a cup of butter, half a cup of sweet milk, two
teaspoonfuls of baking powder, one teaspoonful of vanilla or lemon
and two and a half cups of sifted flour.
Dark Part.—Yolks of four eggs, one cup of brown
sugar, half a cup of cooking molasses, half a cup of butter, half a
cup of sour milk, one teaspoonful of ground cloves, one teaspoonful
of cinnamon, one teaspoonful of mace, one nutmeg grated, one
teaspoonful of soda, the soda to be dissolved in a little milk and
added after part of the flour is stirred in, one and a half cups of
sifted flour.
Drop a spoonful of each kind in a well-buttered cake-dish, first
the light part, then the dark, alternately. Try to drop it so that
the cake shall be well-streaked through, so that it has the
appearance of marble.
SUPERIOR LOAF CAKE.
Two cups of butter, three cups of sugar, two small cups of milk,
seven cups of sifted flour; four eggs, the whites and yolks
separately beaten; one teacupful of seeded raisins, one teacupful
of well-washed and dried currants, one teacupful of sliced citron,
one tablespoonful of powdered cinnamon, one teaspoonful of mace,
one teaspoonful of soda and one teacupful of home-made yeast.
Take part of the butter and warm it with the milk; stir in part
of the flour and the yeast and let it rise; then add the other
ingredients with a wine-glass of wine or brandy. Turn all into
well-buttered cake-tins and let rise again. Bake slowly in a
moderate oven for two hours.
FRENCH CHOCOLATE CAKE.
The whites of seven eggs, two cups of sugar, two-thirds of a cup
of butter, one cup of milk and three of flour and three
teaspoonfuls of baking powder. The chocolate part of the cake is
made just the same, only use the yolks of the eggs with a cup of
grated chocolate stirred into it. Bake it in layers—the
layers being light and dark; then spread [Pg
298]a custard between
them, which is made with two eggs, one pint of milk, one-half cup
of sugar, one tablespoonful of flour or cornstarch; when cool
flavor with vanilla, two teaspoonfuls. Fine.
CHOCOLATE CAKE. No. 1.
One cup of butter and two cups of sugar stirred to a cream, with
the yolks of five eggs added after they have been well beaten. Then
stir into that one cup of milk, beat the whites of two pf the eggs
to a stiff froth and add that also; now put in three cups and a
half of sifted flour, two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder
having been stirred into it. Bake in jelly-cake tins.
Mixture for Filling.—Take the remaining three
whites of the eggs beaten very stiff, two cupfuls of sugar
boiled to almost candy or until it becomes stringy or almost
brittle; take it hot from the fire and pour it very slowly on the
beaten whites of egg, beating quite fast; add one-half cake of
grated chocolate, a teaspoonful of vanilla extract. Stir it all
until cool, then spread between each cake and over the top and
sides. This, when well made, is the premium cake of its
kind.
CHOCOLATE CAKE. No. 2.
One-half cup butter, two cups sugar, three-quarters of a cup
sweet milk, two and one-half cups flour, whites of eight eggs, one
teaspoonful of cream of tartar, one-half teaspoonful soda; bake in
shallow pans.
For the Frosting.—Take the whites of three eggs,
three tablespoonfuls of sugar and one tablespoonful of grated
chocolate (confectioners') to one egg; put the cake together with
the frosting, then frost the top of the cake with the same.
CHOCOLATE CAKE. No. 3.
Two cups sugar, one cup butter, yolks of five eggs and whites of
two and one cup milk. Thoroughly mix two teaspoonfuls baking powder
with three and one-half cups flour while dry; then mix all
together. Bake in jelly tins.
Mixture for Filling.—Whites of three eggs, one and
one-half cups of sugar, three tablespoonfuls of grated chocolate,
one teaspoonful of vanilla. Beat together and spread between the
layers and on top of the cake.
COCOANUT CAKE.
Cream together three-quarters of a cup of butter and two of
white sugar; then add one cup of sweet milk, four eggs, whites and
yolks separately beaten, the yolks added first to the butter and
sugar, then the whites; flavor with lemon or vanilla; mix three
heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder in three cups of sifted flour
and add last; bake in jelly pans.
For Filling.—Make an icing by beating the whites of
three eggs and a cup of powdered sugar to a stiff froth. When the
cake is cooled, spread a thick layer of this frosting over each
cake, and sprinkle very thickly with grated cocoanut.
COCOANUT AND ALMOND CAKE.
Two and one-half cups powdered sugar, one cup butter, four full
cups prepared flour, whites of seven eggs whisked stiff, one small
cup of milk, with a mere pinch of soda, one grated cocoanut,
one-half teaspoonful nutmeg, the juice and half the grated peel of
one lemon; cream butter and sugar; stir in lemon and nutmeg; mix
well; add the milk and whites and flour alternately. Lastly, stir
in the grated cocoanut swiftly and lightly. Bake in four jelly-cake
tins.
Filling.—One pound sweet almonds, whites of four
eggs whisked stiff, one heaping cup powdered sugar, two
teaspoonfuls rose-water. Blanch the almonds. Let them get cold and
dry; then pound in a Wedgewood mortar, adding rose-water as you go.
Save about two dozen to shred for the top. Stir the paste into the
icing after it is made; spread between the cooled cakes; make that
for the top a trifle thicker and lay it on heavily. When it has
stiffened somewhat, stick the shred almonds closely over it. Set in
the oven to harden, but do not let it scorch.
COFFEE CAKE.
One cup of brown sugar, one cup of butter, two eggs, one-half
cup of molasses, one cup of strong, cold coffee, one teaspoonful of
soda, two teaspoonfuls of cinnamon, one teaspoonful of cloves, one
cup of raisins or currants and five cups of sifted flour. Add the
fruit last, rubbed in a little of the flour. Bake about one
hour.
FEATHER CAKE.
One egg, one cup of sugar, one tablespoonful of cold butter,
half a cup of milk, one and one-half cups of flour, one teaspoonful
of cream of tartar, half a teaspoonful of soda. A nice plain
cake—to be eaten while it is fresh. A spoonful of dried apple
sauce or of peach sauce, a spoonful of jelly, the same of lemon
extract, nutmeg, cinnamon, cloves and spice—ground—or
half a cupful of raisins might be added for a change.
ELECTION CAKE.
Three cups milk, two cups sugar, one cup yeast; stir to a batter
and let stand over night; in the morning add two cups sugar, two
cups butter, three eggs, half a nutmeg, one tablespoonful cinnamon,
one pound raisins, a gill of brandy.
Brown sugar is much better than white for this kind of cake, and
it is improved by dissolving a half-teaspoonful of soda in a
tablespoonful of milk in the morning. It should stand in the
greased pans and rise some time until quite light before
baking.
CREAM CAKE.
Four eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, two teacups of
sugar, one cup of sweet cream, two heaping cupfuls of flour, one
teaspoonful of soda, mix two teaspoonfuls of cream of tartar in the
flour before sifting. Add the whites the last thing before the
flour and stir that in gently without beating.
GOLDEN CREAM CAKE.
Yolks of eight eggs beaten to the lightest possible cream, two
cupfuls of sugar, a pinch of salt, three teaspoonfuls of baking
powder sifted well with flour. Bake in three jelly-cake pans. Make
an icing of the whites of three eggs and one pound of sugar. Spread
it between the cakes and sprinkle grated cocoanut thickly over each
layer. It is delicious when properly made.
DRIED APPLE FRUIT CAKE.
Soak three cupfuls of dried apples over night in cold water
enough to swell them; chop them in the morning and put them on the
fire with three cups of molasses; stew until almost soft; add a
cupful of nice [Pg 301]raisins (seedless, if possible) and
stew a few moments; when cold, add three cupfuls of flour, one
cupful of butter, three eggs and a teaspoonful of soda; bake in a
steady oven. This will make two good-sized panfuls of splendid
cake; the apples will cook like citron and taste deliciously.
Raisins may be omitted; also spices to taste may be added. This is
not a dear but a delicious cake.
CAKE WITHOUT EGGS.
Beat together one teacupful of butter and three teacupfuls of
sugar, and when quite light stir in one pint of sifted flour. Add
to this one pound of raisins seeded and chopped, then mixed with a
cup of sifted flour one-teaspoonful of nutmeg, one teaspoonful of
powdered cinnamon and lastly one pint of thick sour cream or milk
in which a teaspoonful of soda is dissolved. Bake immediately in
buttered tins one hour in a moderate oven.
WHITE MOUNTAIN CAKE No. 1.
Two cups of sugar, two-thirds cup of butter, the whites of seven
eggs well beaten, two-thirds cup of sweet milk, two cups of flour,
one cup of cornstarch, two teaspoonfuls baking powder. Bake in
jelly-cake tins.
Frosting.—Whites of three eggs and some sugar
beaten together not quite as stiff as usual for frosting; spread
over the cake, add some grated cocoanut, then put your cakes
together; put cocoanut and frosting on top.
WHITE MOUNTAIN CAKE. No. 2.
Cream three cupfuls of sugar and one of butter, making it very
light, then add a cupful of milk. Beat the whites of eight eggs
very stiff, add half of those to the other ingredients. Mix well
into four cups of sifted flour one tablespoonful of baking powder;
stir this into the cake, add flavoring, then the remaining beaten
whites of egg. Bake in layers like jelly cake. Make an icing for
the filling, using the whites of four eggs beaten to a very stiff
froth, with two cups of fine white sugar and the juice of half a
lemon. Spread each layer of the cake thickly with this icing, place
one on another, then ice all over the top and sides. The yolks left
from this cake may be used to make a spice cake from the recipe of
"Golden Spice Cake."
QUEEN'S CAKE.
Beat well together one cupful of butter and three cupfuls of
white sugar, add the yolks of six eggs and one cupful of milk, two
teaspoonfuls of vanilla or lemon extract. Mix all thoroughly. To
four cupfuls of flour add two heaping teaspoonfuls of cream of
tartar and sift gently over the cake stirring all the time. To this
add one even teaspoonful of soda dissolved in one tablespoonful of
warm water. Mix it well. Stir in gently the whites of six eggs
beaten to a stiff foam. Bake slowly. It should be put in the oven
as soon as possible after putting in the soda and whites of
eggs.
This is the same recipe as the one for "Citron Cake," only
omitting the citron.
ANGEL CAKE.
Put into one tumbler of flour one teaspoonful of cream of
tartar, then sift it five times. Sift also one glass and a half of
white powdered sugar. Beat to a stiff froth the whites of eleven
eggs; stir the sugar into the eggs by degrees, very lightly and
carefully, adding three teaspoonfuls of vanilla extract. After this
add the flour, stirring quickly and lightly. Pour it into a clean,
bright tin cake-dish, which should not be buttered or lined.
Bake at once in a moderate oven about forty minutes, testing it
with a broom splint. When done let it remain in the cake-tin,
turning it upside down, with the sides resting on the tops of two
saucers so that a current of air will pass under and over it.
This is the best recipe found after trying several. A perfection
cake.
WASHINGTON LOAF CAKE.
Three cups of sugar, two scant cups of butter, one cup of sour
milk, five eggs and one teaspoonful of soda, three tablespoonfuls
of cinnamon, half a nutmeg grated and two cups of raisins, one of
currants and four cups of sifted flour.
Mix as usual and stir the fruit in at the last, dredged in
flour. Line the cake-pans with paper well buttered. This cake will
take longer to bake than plain; the heat of the oven must be kept
at an even temperature.
RIBBON CAKE.
This cake is made from the same recipe as marble cake, only make
double the quantity of the white part, and divide it in one-half;
[Pg 303]put into it a very little cochineal. It will be a
delicate pink. Bake in jelly-cake tins and lay first the white,
then the dark, then the pink one on top of the others; put together
with frosting between. It makes quite a fancy cake. Frost the top
when cool.
GOLDEN SPICE CAKE.
This cake can be made to advantage when you have the yolks of
eggs left, after having used the whites in making white cake. Take
the yolks of seven eggs and one whole egg, two cupfuls of brown
sugar, one cupful of molasses, one cupful of butter, one large
coffeecupful of sour milk, one teaspoonful of soda (just even full)
and five cupfuls of flour, one teaspoonful of ground cloves, two
teaspoonfuls of cinnamon, two teaspoonfuls of ginger, one nutmeg
and a small pinch of cayenne pepper; beat eggs, sugar and butter to
a light batter before putting in the molasses, then add the
molasses, flour and milk; beat it well together and bake in a
moderate oven; if fruit is used, take two cupfuls of
raisins, flour them well and put them in last.
ALMOND CAKE.
One-half cupful butter, two cupfuls sugar, four eggs, one-half
cupful almonds, blanched—by pouring water on them until skins
easily slip off—and cut in fine shreds, one-half teaspoonful
extract bitter almonds, one pint flour, one and one-half
teaspoonful baking powder, one glass brandy, one-half cupful milk.
Rub butter and sugar to a smooth white cream; add eggs, one at a
time, beating three or four minutes between each. Sift flour and
powder together, add to the butter, etc., with almonds, extract of
bitter almonds, brandy and milk; mix into a smooth, medium batter;
bake carefully in a rather hot oven twenty minutes.
ROCHESTER JELLY CAKE.
One and one-half cups sugar, two eggs, one-half cup butter,
three-fourths cup milk, two heaping cups flour with one teaspoonful
cream of tartar, one-half teaspoonful of soda, dissolved in the
milk. Put half the above mixture in a small shallow tin, and to the
remainder add one teaspoonful molasses, one-half cup raisins
(chopped) or currants, one-half teaspoonful cinnamon, cloves,
allspice, a little nutmeg and [Pg
304]one tablespoonful
flour. Bake this in same kind of tins. Put the sheets of cake
together, while warm, with jelly between.
FRUIT LAYER CAKE.
This is a delicious novelty in cake-making. Take one cup of
sugar, half a cup of butter, one cup and a half of flour, half a
cup of wine, one cup of raisins, two eggs and half a teaspoonful of
soda; put these ingredients together with care; just as if it were
a very rich cake; bake it in three layers and put frosting
between—the frosting to be made of the whites of two eggs
with enough powdered sugar to make it thick. The top of the cake
may be frosted if you choose.
WHIPPED CREAM CAKE.
One cup of sugar and two tablespoonfuls of soft butter stirred
together; add the yolks of two eggs well beaten, then add four
tablespoonfuls of milk, some flavoring, then the beaten whites of
the eggs. Mix a teaspoonful of cream of tartar and half a teaspoon
of soda in a cup of flour, sift it into the cake batter and stir
lightly. Bake in a small whipping-pan. When the cake is cool, have
ready half of a pint of sweet cream sweetened and whipped to a
stiff froth, also flavored. Spread it over the cake while fresh. To
whip the cream easily, set it on ice before whipping.
ROLLED JELLY CAKE.
Three eggs, one teacup of fine sugar, one teacup of flour; beat
the yolks until light, then add the sugar, then add two
tablespoonfuls of water, a pinch of salt; lastly stir in the flour,
in which there should be a heaping teaspoonful of baking powder.
The flour added gradually. Bake in long, shallow biscuit-tins, well
greased. Turn out on a damp towel on a bread-board, cover the top
with jelly, and roll up while warm.
TO CUT LAYER CAKE.
When cutting Layer Cakes, it is better to first make a round
hole in the cake with a knife or tin tube about an inch and a
quarter in diameter. This prevents the edge of the cake from
crumbling when cutting it.
When making custard filling for Layer Cake always set the dish
containing the custard in another dish of boiling water over the
fire; this prevents its burning, which would destroy its
flavor.
LAYER JELLY CAKE.
Almost any soft cake recipe can be used for jelly cake. The
following is excellent: One cup of sugar, half a cup of butter,
three eggs, half a cup of sweet milk, two cups of flour, two
heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder, flavoring.
For white, delicate cake the rule for "Silver Cake" is fine;
care should be taken, however, that the oven is just right for this
cake, as it browns very easily. To be baked in jelly-cake tins in
layers, with filling put between when done.
CUSTARD OR CREAM CAKE.
Cream together two cups of sugar and half a cup of butter; add
half a cup of sweet milk in which is dissolved half a teaspoonful
of soda. Beat the whites of six eggs to a stiff froth and add to
the mixture. Have one heaping teaspoonful of cream of tartar
stirred thoroughly into three cups of sifted flour and add quickly.
Bake in a moderate oven in layers like jelly cake, and, when done,
spread custard between.
For the Custard.—Take two cups of sweet milk, put
it into a clean suitable dish, set it in a dish of boiling
water on the range or stove. When the milk comes to a boil add two
tablespoonfuls of cornstarch or flour stirred into half a cup of
sugar, adding the yolks of four eggs and a little cold milk. Stir
this into the boiling milk and when cooked thick enough set aside
to cool; afterwards add the flavoring, either vanilla or lemon. It
is best to make the custard first, before making the cake part.
HICKORY NUT OR WALNUT CAKE.
Two cups of fine white sugar creamed with half a cup of butter,
three eggs, two-thirds of a cup of sweet milk, three cups of sifted
flour, one heaping teaspoonful of baking powder sifted through the
flour; a tablespoonful (level) of powdered mace, a coffeecup of
hickory nut or walnut meats chopped a little. Fill the cake-pans
with a layer of the cake, then a layer of raisins upon that, then
strew over [Pg 306]these a handful of nuts, and so on until the pan
is two-thirds full. Line the tins with well-buttered paper and bake
in a steady, but not quick, oven. This is most excellent.
CHEAP CREAM CAKE.
One cup of sugar, one egg, one cup sweet milk, two cups flour,
one tablespoonful butter, two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking
powder; flavor to taste. Divide into three parts and bake in round
shallow pans.
Cream.—Beat one egg and one-half cup sugar
together, then add one-quarter cup flour, wet with a very little
milk and stir this mixture into one-half pint of boiling milk,
until thick; flavor to taste. Spread the cream when cool between
the cakes.
SOFT GINGER CAKE.
Stir to a cream one cupful of butter and half a cupful of brown
sugar; add to this two cupfuls of cooking molasses, a cupful of
sweet milk, a tablespoonful of ginger, a teaspoonful of ground
cinnamon; beat all thoroughly together, then add three eggs, the
whites and yolks beaten separately; beat into this two cups of
sifted flour, then a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a spoonful of
water and last, two more cupfuls of sifted flour. Butter and paper
two common square bread-pans, divide the mixture and pour half into
each. Bake in a moderate oven. This cake requires long and slow
baking, from forty to sixty minutes. I find that if sour milk is
used the cakes are much lighter, but either sweet or sour is most
excellent.
HARD GINGERBREAD.
Made the same as "Soft Gingerbread," omitting the eggs and
mixing hard enough to roll out like biscuit; rolled nearly half an
inch thick and cut out like small biscuits, or it can be baked in a
sheet or on a biscuit-tin; cut slits a quarter of an inch deep
across the top of the tin from side to side. When baked and while
hot, rub over the top with molasses and let it dry on.
These two recipes are the best I have ever found among a large
variety that I have tried, the ingredients giving the best
proportion for flavor and excellence.
PLAIN GINGERBREAD.
One cup of dark cooking molasses, one cup of sour cream,
one teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a little warm water, a
teaspoonful of salt and one heaping teaspoonful of ginger; make
about as thick as cup cake. To be eaten warm.
WHITE GINGER BISCUIT.
One cup of butter, two cups of sugar, one cup of sour cream or
milk, three eggs, one teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a
tablespoonful of warm water, one tablespoonful of ginger, one
teaspoonful of ground cinnamon and five cups of sifted flour, or
enough to roll out soft. Cut out rather thick like biscuits;
brush over the tops, while hot, with the white of an egg, or
sprinkle with sugar while hot.
The grated rind and the juice of an orange add much to the
flavor of ginger cake.
GOLD AND SILVER CAKE.
This cake is baked in layers like jelly cake. Divide the silver
cake batter and color it pink with a little cochineal; this gives
you pink, white and yellow layers. Put together with frosting.
Frost the top.
This can be put together like marble cake, first a spoonful of
one kind, then another, until the dish is full.
BOSTON CREAM CAKES.
Put into a large-sized saucepan half a cup of butter and one cup
of hot water; set it on the fire; when the mixture begins to boil,
turn in a pint of sifted flour at once, beat and work it well with
a vegetable masher until it is very smooth. Remove from the fire,
and when cool enough add five eggs that have been well beaten,
first the yolks and then the whites, also half a teaspoonful of
soda and a teaspoonful of salt. Drop on buttered tins in large
spoonfuls about two inches apart. Bake in a quick oven about
fifteen minutes. When done and quite cold, open them on the side
with a knife or scissors and put in as much of the custard as
possible.
Cream for Filling.—Made of two eggs, three
tablespoonfuls of sifted flour (or half cup of cornstarch) and one
cup of sugar. Put two-thirds of a pint of milk over the fire in a
double boiler; in a third of a pint of milk, stir the sugar, flour
and beaten eggs. As soon as the milk looks like boiling, pour in
the mixture and stir briskly for [Pg
308]three minutes,
until it thickens; then remove from the fire and add a teaspoonful
of butter; when cool, flavor with vanilla or lemon and fill your
cakes.
CHOCOLATE ECLAIRS.
Make the mixture exactly like the recipe for "Boston Cream
Cakes." Spread it on buttered pans in oblong pieces about four
inches long and one and a half wide, to be laid about two inches
apart; they must be baked in a rather quick oven about twenty-five
minutes. As soon as baked ice with chocolate icing, and when this
is cold split them on one side and fill with the same cream as
"Boston Cream Cakes."
HUCKLEBERRY CAKE.
Beat a cup of butter and two cups of sugar together until light,
then add a half cup of milk, four eggs beaten separately, the yolks
to a cream and the whites to a stiff froth, one teaspoonful of
grated nutmeg, the same of cinnamon and two teaspoonfuls of baking
powder. The baking powder to be rubbed into the flour. Bub one
quart of huckleberries well with some flour and add them last, but
do not mash them. Pour into buttered pans, about an inch thick;
dust the tops with sugar and bake. It is better the day after
baking.
SWEET STRAWBERRY CAKE.
Three eggs, one cupful of sugar, two of flour, one tablespoonful
of butter, a teaspoonful, heaped, of baking powder. Beat the butter
and sugar together and add the eggs well beaten. Stir in the flour
and baking powder well sifted together. Bake in deep tin plate.
This quantity will fill four plates. With three pints of
strawberries mix a cupful of sugar and mash them a little. Spread
the fruit between the layers of cake. The top layer of strawberries
may be covered with a meringue made with the white of an egg and a
tablespoonful of powdered sugar.
Save out the largest berries and arrange them around in circles
on the top in the white frosting. Makes a very fancy dish, as well
as a most delicious cake.
MOLASSES CUP CAKES.
One cup of butter, one of sugar, six eggs, five cupfuls of
sifted flour, one tablespoonful of cinnamon, two tablespoonfuls of
ginger, [Pg 309]three teacupfuls of cooking molasses and one heaping
teaspoonful of soda. Stir the butter and sugar to a cream; beat the
eggs very light, the yolks and whites separately, and add to it;
after which put in the spices; then the molasses and flour in
rotation, stirring the mixture all the time; beat the whole
well before adding the soda and but little afterwards. Put
into well-buttered patty-pan tins and bake in a very
moderate oven. A baker's recipe.
BAKERS' GINGER SNAPS.
Boil all together the following ingredients: Two cups of brown
sugar, two cups of cooking molasses, one cup of shortening, which
should be part butter, one large tablespoonful of ginger,
one tablespoonful of ground cinnamon, one teaspoonful of cloves;
remove from the fire and let it cool. In the meantime, sift four
cups of flour and stir part of it into the above mixture. Now
dissolve a teaspoonful of soda in a tablespoonful of warm water and
beat into this mixture, stir in the remainder of the flour and make
stiff enough to roll into long rolls about an inch in diameter, and
cut off from the end into half-inch pieces. Place them on
well-buttered tins, giving plenty of room to spread. Bake in a
moderate oven. Let them cool before taking out of the tins.
GINGER COOKIES.
One cup sugar, one cup molasses, one cup butter, one egg, one
tablespoonful vinegar, one tablespoonful ginger, one teaspoonful
soda dissolved in boiling water, mix like cooky dough, rather
soft.
GINGER SNAPS.
One cup brown sugar, two cups molasses, one large cup butter,
two teaspoonfuls soda, two teaspoonfuls ginger, three pints flour
to commence with; rub shortening and sugar together into the flour;
add enough more flour to roll very smooth, very thin, and bake in a
quick oven. The dough can be kept for days by putting it in the
flour barrel under the flour, and bake a few at a time The more
flour that can be worked in and the smoother they can be rolled,
the better and more brittle they will be. Should be rolled out to
wafer-like thinness. Bake quickly without burning. They should
become perfectly cold before putting aside.
DOMINOES.
Have a plain cake baked in rather thin sheets and cut into small
oblong pieces the size and shape of a domino, a trifle larger.
Frost the top and sides. When the frosting is hard, draw the black
lines and make the dots with a small brush dipped in melted
chocolate. These are very nice for children's parties.
FANCY CAKES.
These delicious little fancy cakes may be made by making a rich
jumble-paste—rolling out in any desired shape; cut some paste
in thick, narrow strips and lay around your cakes, so as to form a
deep, cup-like edge; place on a well-buttered tin and bake. When
done, fill with iced fruit prepared as follows: Take rich, ripe
peaches (canned ones will do if fine and well drained from all
juice) cut in halves; plums, strawberries, pineapples cut in
squares or small triangles, or any other available fruit, and dip
in the white of an egg that has been very slightly beaten and then
in pulverized sugar, and lay in the centre of your cakes.
WAFERS.
Dissolve four ounces of butter in half a teacup of milk; stir
together four ounces of white sugar, eight ounces of sifted flour
and the yolk of one egg, adding gradually the butter and milk, a
tablespoonful of orange-flour water and a pinch of salt; mix it
well. Heat the wafer-irons, butter their inner surfaces, put in a
tablespoonful of the batter and close the irons immediately; put
the irons over the fire, and turn them occasionally, until the
wafer is cooked; when the wafers are all cooked roll them on a
small round stick, stand them upon a sieve and dry them; serve with
ices.
PEACH CAKES.
Take the yolks and whites of five eggs and beat them separately
(the whites to a stiff froth.) Then mix the beaten yolks with half
a pound of pulverized and sifted loaf or crushed sugar, and beat
the two together thoroughly. Fifteen minutes will be none too long
for the latter operation if you would have excellence with your
cakes.
Now add half a pound of fine flour, dredging it in a little at a
time, and then put in the whites of the eggs, beating the whole
together for [Pg 311]four or five minutes. Then with a
large spoon, drop the batter upon a baking tin, which has been
buttered and floured, being careful to have the cakes as nearly the
same size as possible and resembling in shape the half of a peach.
Have a quick oven ready and bake the cakes about ten minutes,
watching them closely so that they may only come to a light brown
color. Then take them out, spread the flat side of each with peach
jam, and stick them together in pairs, covering the outside with a
thin coat of icing, which when dry can be brushed over on one side
of the cake, with a little cochineal water.
CUP CAKES.
Two cups of sugar, one cup of butter, one cup of milk, three
cups and a half of flour and four eggs, half a teaspoonful of soda,
large spoon cream of tartar; stir butter and sugar together and add
the beaten yolks of the eggs, then the milk, then flavoring and the
whites. Put cream of tartar in flour and add last. Bake in buttered
gem-pans, or drop the batter, a teaspoonful at a time, in rows on
flat buttered tins.
To this recipe may be added a cup of English currants or chopped
raisins; and also another variety of cake may be made by adding a
half cup citron sliced and floured, a half cupful of chopped
almonds and lemon extract.
VARIEGATED CAKES.
One cup powdered sugar, one-half cup of butter creamed with the
sugar, one-half cup of milk, four eggs, the whites only, whipped
light, two and one-half cups prepared flour. Bitter almond
flavoring, spinach juice and cochineal. Cream the butter and sugar;
add the milk, flavoring, the whites and flour. Divide the batter
into three parts. Bruise and pound a few leaves of spinach in a
thin muslin bag until you can express the juice. Put a few drops of
this into one portion of the batter, color another with cochineal,
leaving the third white. Put a little of each into small, round
pans or cups, giving a light stir to each color as you add the
next. This will vein the cakes prettily. Put the white between the
pink and green, that the tints may show better. If you can get
pistachio nuts to pound up for the green, the cakes will be much
nicer. Ice on sides and top.
CORNSTARCH CAKES.
One cupful each of butter and sweet milk and half a cup of
cornstarch, two cupfuls each of sugar and flour, the whites of five
eggs beaten to a stiff froth, two teaspoonfuls of cream of tartar
and one of soda; flavor to taste. Bake in gem-tins or
patty-pans.
SPONGE DROPS.
Beat to a froth three eggs and one teacup of sugar; stir into
this one heaping coffeecup of flour, in which one teaspoonful of
cream of tartar and half a teaspoonful of saleratus are thoroughly
mixed. Flavor with lemon. Butter tin sheets with washed butter and
drop in teaspoonfuls about three inches apart. Bake instantly in a
very quick oven. Watch closely as they will burn easily. Serve with
ice cream.
SAVORY BISCUITS OR LADY FINGERS.
Put nine tablespoonfuls of fine white sugar into a bowl and put
the bowl into hot water to heat the sugar; when the sugar is
thoroughly heated, break nine eggs into the bowl and beat them
quickly until they become a little warm and rather thick; then take
the bowl from the water and continue beating until it is nearly or
quite cold; now stir in lightly nine tablespoonfuls of sifted
flour; then with a paper funnel, or something of the kind, lay this
mixture out upon papers, in biscuits three inches long and half an
inch thick, in the form of fingers; sift sugar over the biscuits
and bake them upon tins to a light brown; when they are done and
cold, remove them from the papers, by wetting them on the back; dry
them and they are ready for use. They are often used in making
Charlotte Russe.
PASTRY SANDWICHES.
Puff paste, jam of any kind, the white of an egg, sifted
sugar.
Roll the paste out thin; put half of it on a baking sheet or
tin, and spread equally over it apricot, greengage, or any preserve
that may be preferred. Lay over this preserve another thin paste,
press the edges together all round, and mark the paste in lines
with a knife on the surface, to show where to cut it when baked.
Bake from twenty minutes to half an hour; and, a short time before
being done, take the pastry out of the oven, brush it over with the
white of an egg, sift over [Pg
313]pounded sugar and
put it back in the oven to color. When cold, cut it into strips;
pile these on a dish pyramidically and serve.
This may be made of jelly-cake dough, and, after baking, allowed
to cool before spreading with the preserve; either way is good, as
well as fanciful.
NEAPOLITAINES.
One cup of powdered sugar, half a cup of butter, two
tablespoonfuls of lemon juice, three whole eggs and three yolks,
beaten separately, three cups of sifted flour. Put this all
together with half a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a
tablespoonful of milk. If it is too stiff to roll out, add just
enough more milk. Roll it a quarter of an inch thick and cut it out
with any tin cutter. Place the cakes in a pan slightly greased and
color the tops with beaten egg and milk, with some chopped almonds
over them. Bake in a rather quick oven.
BRUNSWICK JELLY CAKES.
Stir one cup of powdered white sugar and one-half cup of butter
together, till perfectly light; beat the yolks of three eggs till
very thick and smooth; sift three cups of flour and stir it into
the beaten eggs with the butter and sugar; add a teaspoonful of
mixed spice (nutmeg, mace and cinnamon) and half a glass of
rose-water or wine; stir the whole well and lay it on your
paste-board, which must first be sprinkled with flour; if you find
it so moist as to be unmanageable, throw in a little more flour;
spread the dough into a sheet about half an inch thick and cut it
out in round cakes with a biscuit-cutter; lay them in buttered pans
and bake about five or six minutes; when cold, spread over the
surface of each cake a liquor of fruit jelly or marmalade; then
beat the whites of three or four eggs till they stand alone; beat
into the froth, by degrees, a sufficiency of powdered loaf sugar to
make it as thick as icing; flavor with a few drops of strong
essence of lemon, and with a spoon heap it up on each cake, making
it high in the centre; put the cakes into a cool oven, and as soon
as the tops are colored a pale brown, take them out.
LITTLE PLUM CAKES.
One cup of sugar and half a cup of butter beaten to a smooth
cream; add three well-beaten eggs, a teaspoonful of vanilla
extract, four cups of sifted flour, one cup of raisins and one of
currants, half [Pg 314]of a teaspoonful of baking soda
dissolved in a little water, and milk enough to make a stiff
batter; drop this batter in drops on well-buttered tins and bake in
a quick oven.
JUMBLES.
Cream together two cups of sugar and one of butter, add three
well-beaten eggs and six tablespoonfuls of sweet milk, two
teaspoonfuls of baking powder, flavor to taste, flour enough to
make into a soft dough; do not roll it on the paste-board, but
break off pieces of dough the size of a walnut and make into rings
by rolling out rolls as large as your finger, and joining the ends;
lay them on tins to bake, an inch apart, as it rises and spreads;
bake in a moderate oven. These jumbles are very delicate and
will keep a long time.
WINE JUMBLES.
One cup of butter, two of sugar, three eggs, one wine-glass of
wine, one spoonful of vanilla and flour enough to roll out. Roll as
thin as the blade of a knife and cut with an oval cutter. Bake on
tin-sheets in a quick oven until a dark brown. These will keep a
year if kept in a tin box and in a dry place.
COCOANUT JUMBLES.
Grate one large cupful of cocoanut; rub one cupful of butter
with one and a half cupfuls of sugar; add three beaten eggs, whites
and yolks separately, two tablespoonfuls of milk and five cupfuls
of sifted flour; then add by degrees the grated nut, so as to make
a stiff dough, rolled thin and cut with a round cutter, having a
hole in the middle. Bake in a quick oven from five to ten
minutes.
PHILADELPHIA JUMBLES.
Two cups of sugar, one cup of butter, eight eggs beaten light;
essence of bitter almond or rose to taste; enough flour to enable
you to roll them out.
Stir the sugar and butter to a light cream, then add the
well-whipped eggs, the flavoring and flour; mix well together, roll
out in powdered sugar in a sheet a quarter of an inch thick; cut
into rings with a jagging-iron and bake in a quick oven on buttered
tins.
ALMOND JUMBLES.
Three cupfuls of soft sugar, two cupfuls of flour, half a cupful
of butter, one teacupful of loppered milk, five eggs well beaten,
two tablespoonfuls of rose-water, three-quarters of a pound of
almonds, blanched and chopped very fine, one teaspoonful of
soda dissolved in boiling water.
Cream butter and sugar; stir in the beaten yolks the milk,
flour, rose-water, almonds and, lastly, the beaten whites very
lightly and quickly; drop in rings on buttered paper and bake at
once.
FRUIT JUMBLES.
Two cups of sugar, one cup of butter, five cupfuls of flour,
five eggs, one small teacupful of milk, in which dissolve half a
teaspoonful of soda; cream the butter, add the sugar, cream again;
then add yolks of eggs, the milk, beaten whites and flour; a little
cinnamon, nutmeg, allspice and ground cloves and one-quarter of a
pound of currants, rolled in flour.
COOKIES.
One cup of butter, two cups of sugar, a small teacupful
of sweet milk, half a grated nutmeg and five cups of sifted flour,
in which there has been sifted with it two teaspoonfuls of baking
powder; mix into a soft dough and cut into round cakes; roll the
dough as thin as pie crust. Bake in a quick oven a light brown.
These can be made of sour milk and a teaspoonful of soda dissolved
in it, or sour or sweet cream can be used in place of butter.
Water cookies made the same as above, using water in place of
milk. Water cookies keep longer than milk cookies.
FAVORITE COOKIES.
One cup of butter, one and a half cups of sugar, one-half cup of
sour milk one level teaspoonful of soda, a teaspoonful of grated
nutmeg Flour enough to roll; make quite soft. Put a tablespoonful
of fine sugar on a plate and dip the tops of each as you cut them
out. Place on buttered tins and bake in a quick oven a light
brown.
FRUIT COOKIES.
One cupful and a half of sugar, one cupful of butter, one-half
cup of sweet milk, one egg, two teaspoonfuls of baking powder, a
teaspoon[Pg 316]ful of grated nutmeg, three tablespoonfuls of
English currants or chopped raisins. Mix soft and roll out, using
just enough flour to stiffen sufficiently. Cut out with a large
cutter, wet the tops with milk and sprinkle sugar over them. Bake
on buttered tins in a quick oven.
CRISP COOKIES. (Very Nice.)
One cup of butter, two cups of sugar, three eggs well beaten, a
teaspoonful of soda and two of cream of tartar, spoonful of milk,
one teaspoonful of nutmeg and one of cinnamon. Flour enough to make
a soft dough just stiff enough to roll out. Try a pint of sifted
flour to begin with, working it in gradually. Spread a little sweet
milk over each and sprinkle with sugar. Bake in a quick oven a
light brown.
LEMON COOKIES.
Four cups of sifted flour, or enough for a stiff dough, one
teacupful of butter, two cups of sugar, the juice of one lemon and
the grated peel from the outside, three eggs whipped very light.
Beat thoroughly each ingredient, adding, after all is in, a half
teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a tablespoonful of milk. Roll out
as any cookies and bake a light brown. Use no other wetting.
COCOANUT COOKIES.
One cup grated cocoanut, one and one-half cups sugar,
three-fourths cup butter, one-half cup milk, two eggs, one large
teaspoonful baking powder, one-half teaspoonful extract of vanilla
and flour enough to roll out.
DOUGHNUTS OR FRIED CAKES.
Success in making good fried cakes depends as much on the
cooking as the mixing. In the first place, there should be
boiling lard enough to free them from the bottom of the kettle, so
that they swim on the top, and the lard should never be so hot as
to smoke or so cool as not to be at the boiling point; if it is,
they soak grease and are spoiled. If it is at the right heat, the
doughnuts will in about ten minutes be of a delicate brown outside
and nicely cooked inside. Five or six minutes will cook a cruller.
Try the fat by dropping a bit of the dough in first; if it is
right, the fat will boil up when it is dropped in. They should be
turned over almost constantly, which causes them to rise and brown
[Pg 317]evenly. When they are sufficiently cooked, raise
them from the hot fat and drain them until every drop ceases
dripping.
CRULLERS OR FRIED CAKES.
One and a half cupfuls of sugar, one cupful of sour milk, two
eggs, two scant tablespoonfuls of melted butter, half a nutmeg
grated, a large teaspoonful of cinnamon, a teaspoonful of salt and
one of soda; make a little stiffer than biscuit dough, roll out a
quarter of an inch thick, and cut with a fried-cake cutter, with a
hole in the centre. Fry in hot lard.
These can be made with sweet milk and baking powder, using two
heaping teaspoonfuls of the baking powder in place of soda.
RAISED DOUGHNUTS.
Old-fashioned "raised doughnuts" are seldom seen nowadays, but
are easily made. Make a sponge as for bread, using a pint of warm
water or milk, and a large half cupful of yeast; when the sponge is
very light, add half a cupful of butter or sweet lard, a
coffeecupful of sugar, a teaspoonful of salt and one small
teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a little water, one tablespoonful
of cinnamon, a little grated nutmeg; stir in now two well-beaten
eggs, add sifted flour until it is the consistency of biscuit
dough, knead it well, cover and let rise; then roll the dough out
into a sheet half an inch thick, cut out with a very small
biscuit-cutter, or in strips half an inch wide and three inches
long, place them on greased tins, cover them well and let them rise
before frying them. Drop them in very hot lard. Raised cakes
require longer time than cakes made with baking powder. Sift
powdered sugar over them as fast as they are fried, while warm. Our
grandmothers put allspice into these cakes; that, however, is a
matter of taste.
BAKERS' RAISED DOUGHNUTS.
Warm a teacupful of lard in a pint of milk; when nearly cool add
enough flour to make a thick batter and add a small cupful of
yeast; beat it well and set it to rise; when light work in
gradually and carefully three cupfuls of sugar, the whipped whites
of six eggs, half a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a spoonful of
milk, one teaspoonful of salt, a teaspoonful of ground cinnamon and
half of a nutmeg grated; then work in gradually enough flour to
make it stiff enough to roll out; [Pg
318]let it rise again
and when very light roll it out in a sheet an inch thick; cut into
rounds; put into the centre of each round a large Sultana raisin,
seeded, and mold into perfectly round balls; flatten a little; let
them stand a few minutes before boiling them; have plenty of lard
in the pot and when it boils drop in the cakes; when they are a
light, brown take them out with a perforated skimmer; drain on soft
white paper and roll, while warm, in fine powdered sugar.
CRULLERS OR WONDERS.
Three eggs, three tablespoonfuls of melted lard or butter, three
tablespoonfuls of sugar; mix very hard with sifted flour, as hard
as can be rolled, and to be rolled very thin like pie crust; cut in
squares three inches long and two wide, then cut several slits or
lines lengthwise to within a quarter of an inch of the edges of the
ends; run your two forefingers through every other slit; lay them
down on the board edgewise and dent them. These are very dainty
when fried. Fry in hot lard a light brown.
GERMAN DOUGHNUTS.
One pint of milk; four eggs, one small tablespoonful of melted
butter, flavoring, salt to taste; first boil the milk and pour it,
while hot, over a pint of flour; beat it very smooth and when it is
cool have ready the yolks of the eggs well beaten; add them to the
milk and flour, beaten well into it, then add the well-beaten
whites; then, lastly, add the salt and as much more flour as will
make the whole into a soft dough; flour your board, turn your dough
upon it, roll it in pieces as thick as your finger and turn them in
the form of a ring; cook in plenty of boiling lard. A nice
breakfast cake with coffee.
NUT CAKES. (Fried.)
Beat two eggs well, add to them one ounce of sifted sugar, two
ounces of warmed butter, two tablespoonfuls of yeast, a teacupful
of luke-warm milk and a little salt. Whip all well together, then
stir in by degrees one pound of flour, and, if requisite, more
milk, making thin dough. Beat it until it falls from the spoon,
then set it to rise. When it has risen make butter or lard hot in a
frying pan, cut from the light dough little pieces the size of a
walnut, and, without molding or kneading, fry them pale brown. As
they are done lay them on a napkin to absorb any of the fat.
TRIFLES.
Work one egg and a tablespoonful of sugar to as much flour as
will make a stiff paste; roll it as thin as a dollar piece and cut
it into small round or square cakes; drop two or three at a time
into the boiling lard; when they rise to the surface and turn over
they are done; take them out with a skimmer and lay them on an
inverted sieve to drain. When served for dessert or supper put a
spoonful of jelly on each.
PUFF-BALL DOUGHNUTS.
These doughnuts, eaten fresh and warm, are a delicious breakfast
dish and are quickly made. Three eggs, one cupful of sugar, a pint
of sweet milk, salt, nutmeg and flour enough to permit the spoon to
stand upright in the mixture; add two heaping teaspoonfuls of
baking powder to the flour; beat all until very light. Drop by the
dessertspoonful into boiling lard. These will not absorb a bit of
fat and are not at all rich and consequently are the least
injurious of this kind of cakes.
GENERAL REMARKS.
Use the very best materials in making pastry; the shortening
should be fresh, sweet and hard; the water cold (ice-water is
best), the paste rolled on a cold board and all handled as little
as possible. When the crust is made, it makes it much more flaky
and puff much more to put it in a dish covered with a cloth and set
in a very cold place for half an hour, or even an hour; in summer,
it could be placed in the ice box.
A great improvement is made in pie crust by the addition of
about a heaping teaspoonful of baking powder to a quart of flour,
also brushing the paste as often as rolled out, and the pieces of
butter placed thereon, with the white of an egg, assists it to rise
in leaves or flakes. As this is the great beauty of
puff paste, it is as well to try this method.
If currants are to be used in pies, they should be carefully
picked over and washed in several waters, dried in a towel and
dredged with flour before they are suitable for use.
Raisins, and all dried fruits for pies and cakes, should be
seeded stoned and dredged with flour before using.
Almonds should be blanched by pouring boiling water upon them
and then slipping the skin off with the fingers. In pounding them,
always add a little rose or orange-water, with fine sugar, to
prevent their becoming oily.
Great care is requisite in heating an oven for baking pastry. If
you can hold your hand in the heated oven while you count twenty,
the oven has just the proper temperature and it should be kept at
this temperature as long as the pastry is in; this heat will bake
to a light brown and will give the pastry a fresh and flaky
appearance. If you suffer the heat to abate, the under crust will
become heavy and clammy and the upper crust will fall in.
Another good way to ascertain when the oven is heated to the
proper degree for puff paste: put a small piece of the paste in
previous to baking the whole, and then the heat can thus be judged
of.
Pie crust can be kept a week, and the last be better than the if
put in a tightly covered dish and set in the ice chest in summer
and in a cool place in winter, and thus you can make a fresh pie
every day with little trouble.
In baking custard, pumpkin or squash pies, it is well, in order
that the mixture may not be absorbed by the paste, to first partly
bake the paste before adding it, and when stewed fruit is used the
filling should be perfectly cool when put in, or it will make the
bottom crust sodden.
HOW TO MAKE A PIE.
After making the crust, take a portion of it, roll it out and
fit it to a buttered pie-plate by cutting it off evenly around the
edge; gather up the scraps left from cutting and make into another
sheet for the top crust; roll it a little thinner than the under
crust; lap one-half over the other and cut three or four slits
about a quarter of an inch from the folded edge (this prevents the
steam from escaping through the rim of the pie, and causing the
juices to run out from the edges). Now fill your pie-plate with
your prepared filling, wet the top edge of the rim, lay the upper
crust across the centre of the pie, turn back the half that is
lapped over, seal the two edges together by slightly pressing down
with your thumb, then notch evenly and regularly with a three-tined
fork, dipping occasionally in flour to prevent sticking. Bake in a
rather quick oven a light brown, and until the filling boils up
through the slits in the upper crust.
To prevent the juice soaking through into the crust, making it
soggy wet the under crust with the white of an egg, just before you
put in the pie mixture. If the top of the pie is brushed over with
the egg, it gives it a beautiful glaze.
FOR ICING PASTRY.
To ice pastry, which is the usual method adopted for fruit tarts
and sweet dishes of pastry, put the white of an egg on a plate and
with the blade of a knife beat it to a stiff froth. When the pastry
is nearly baked, brush it over with this and sift over some pounded
sugar; put it back into the oven to set the glaze and in a few
minutes [Pg 322]it will be done. Great care should be taken that the
paste does not catch or burn in the oven, which is very liable to
do after the icing is laid on.
Or make a meringue by adding a tablespoonful of white sugar to
the beaten white of one egg. Spread over the top and slightly brown
in the oven.
FINE PUFF PASTE.
Into one quart of sifted flour mix two teaspoonfuls of baking
powder and a teaspoonful of salt; then sift again. Measure
out one teacupful of butter and one of lard, hard and cold. Take
the lard and rub into the flour until a very fine smooth paste.
Then put in just enough ice-water, say half a cupful,
containing a beaten white of egg, to mix a very stiff dough. Boll
it out into a thin sheet, spread with one-fourth of the butter,
sprinkle over with a little flour, then roll up closely in a long
roll, like a scroll, double the ends towards the centre, flatten
and re-roll, then spread again with another quarter of the butter.
Repeat this operation until the butter is used up. Put it on an
earthen dish, cover it with a cloth and set it in a cold place, in
the ice box in summer; let it remain until cold; an hour or
more before making out the crust. Tarts made with this paste cannot
be cut with a knife when fresh; they go into flakes at the
touch.
You may roll this pastry in any direction, from you, toward you,
sideways, any way, it matters not, but you must have nice flour,
ice-water and very little of it, and strength to roll
it, if you would succeed.
This recipe I purchased from a colored cook on one of the Lake
Michigan steamers many years ago, and it is, without exception, the
finest puff paste I have ever seen.
PUFF PASTE FOR PIES.
One quart of pastry flour, one pint of butter, one tablespoonful
of salt, one of sugar, one and a quarter cupfuls of ice-water. Wash
the hands with soap and water and dip them first in very hot and
then in cold water. Rinse a large bowl or pan with boiling water
and then with cold. Half fill it with cold water. Wash the butter
in this, working it with the hands until it is light and waxy. This
frees it from the salt and buttermilk and lightens it, so that the
pastry is more delicate. Shape the butter into two thin cakes and
put in a pan of ice-water to harden. Mix the salt and sugar with
the flour. With the [Pg 323]hands, rub one-third of the butter
into the flour. Add the water, stirring with a knife. Stir quickly
and vigorously until the paste is a smooth ball. Sprinkle the board
lightly with flour. Turn the paste on this and pound quickly
and lightly with the rolling-pin. Do not break the paste. Roll from
you and to one side; or if easier to roll from you all the time,
turn the paste around. When it is about one-fourth of an inch
thick, wipe the remaining butter, break it in bits and spread these
on the paste. Sprinkle lightly with flour. Fold the paste,
one-third from each side, so that the edges meet. Now fold from the
ends, but do not have these meet. Double the paste, pound lightly
and roll down to about one-third of an inch in thickness. Fold as
before and roll down again. Repeat this three times if for pies and
six times if for vol-au-vents, patties, tarts, etc. Place on
the ice to harden, when it has been rolled the last time. It should
be in the ice chest at least an hour before being used. In hot
weather, if the paste sticks when being rolled down, put it on a
tin sheet and place on ice. As soon as it is chilled, it will roll
easily. The less flour you use in rolling out the paste, the
tenderer it will be. No matter how carefully every part of the work
may be done, the paste will not be good if much flour is used.
SOYER'S RECIPE FOR PUFF PASTE.
To every pound of flour allow the yolk of one egg, the juice of
one lemon, half a saltspoonful of salt, cold water, one pound of
fresh butter.
Put the flour onto the paste-board; make a hole in the centre,
into which put the yolk of the egg, the lemon juice and salt; mix
the whole with cold water (this should be iced in summer if
convenient) into a soft, flexible paste with the right hand, and
handle it as little as possible; then squeeze all the buttermilk
from the butter, wring it in a cloth and roll out the paste; place
the butter on this and fold the edges of the paste over, so as to
hide it; roll it out again to the thickness of a quarter of an
inch; fold over one-third, over which again pass the rolling-pin;
then fold over the other third, thus forming a square; place it
with the ends, top and bottom before you, shaking a little flour
both under and over, and repeat the rolls and turns twice again as
before. Flour a baking-sheet, put the paste on this and let it
remain on ice or in some cool place for half an hour; then roll
twice more, turning it as before; place it again upon the ice for a
quarter [Pg 324]of an hour, give it two more rolls, making seven in
all, and it is ready for use when required.
RULE FOR UNDER CRUST.
A good rule for pie crust for a pie requiring only an under
crust, as a custard or pumpkin pie, is: Three large
tablespoonfuls of flour sifted, rubbing into it a large
tablespoonful of cold butter, or part butter and part lard, and a
pinch of salt, mixing with cold water enough to form a
smooth, stiff paste, and rolled quite thin.
PLAIN PIE CRUST.
Two and a half cupfuls of sifted flour, one cupful of
shortening, half butter and half lard cold, a pinch of salt, a
heaping teaspoonful of baking powder sifted through the flour. Rub
thoroughly the shortening into the flour. Mix together with half a
teacupful of cold water, or enough to form a rather stiff
dough; mix as little as possible, just enough to get it into shape
to roll out; it must be handled very lightly. This rule is for two
pies.
When you have a little pie crust left do not throw it away; roll
it thin, cut in small squares and bake. Just before tea put a
spoonful of raspberry jelly on each square.
PUFF PASTE OF SUET.
Two cupfuls of flour, one-half teaspoonful of salt, one
teaspoonful of baking powder, one cup of chopped suet, freed of
skin, and chopped very fine, one cupful of water. Place the flour,
sifted with the powder in a bowl, add suet and water; mix into
smooth, rather firm dough.
This paste is excellent for fruit puddings and dumplings that
are boiled; if it is well made, it will be light and flaky and the
suet impreceptible. It is also excellent for meat pies, baked or
boiled. All the ingredients should be very cold when mixing, and
the suet dredged with flour after it is chopped, to prevent the
particles from adhering to each other.
POTATO CRUST.
Boil and mash a dozen medium-sized potatoes, add one good
teaspoonful of salt, two tablespoonfuls of cold butter and half a
cupful of milk or cream. Stiffen with flour sufficient to roll out.
Nice for the tops of meat pies.
TO MAKE PIE CRUST FLAKY.
In making a pie, after you have rolled out your top crust, cut
it about the right size, spread it over with butter, then shake
sifted flour over the butter, enough to cover it well. Cut a slit
in the middle place it over the top of your pie, and fasten the
edges as any pie. Now take the pie on your left hand and a dipper
of cold water in your right hand; tip the pie slanting a little,
pour over the water sufficiently to rinse off the flour. Enough
flour will stick to the butter to fry into the crust, to give it a
fine, blistered, flaky look, which many cooks think is much better
than rolling the butter into the crust.
TARTLETS. No. 1.
Tarts of strawberry or any other kind of preserves are generally
made of the trimmings of puff paste rolled a little thicker than
the ordinary pies; then cut out with a round cutter, first dipped
in hot water, to make the edges smooth, and placed in small
tart-pans, first pricking a few holes at the bottom with a fork
before placing them in the oven. Bake from ten to fifteen minutes.
Let the paste cool a little; then fill it with preserve. By this
manner, both the flavor and color of the jam are preserved, which
would be lost were it baked in the oven on the paste; and, besides,
so much jam is not required.
TARTLETS. No. 2.
Tartlets are nice made in this manner: Roll some good puff paste
out thin, and cut it into two and a half inch squares; brush each
square over with the white of an egg, then fold down the corners,
so that they all meet in the middle of each piece of paste;
slightly press the two pieces together, brush them over with the
egg, sift over sugar and bake in a nice quick oven for about a
quarter of an hour. When they are done, make a little hole in the
middle of the paste and fill it up with apricot jam, marmalade, or
red currant jelly. Pile them high in the centre of a dish on a
napkin and garnish with the same preserves the tartlets are filled
with.
PATTIES, OR SHELLS FOR TARTS.
Roll out a nice puff paste thin; cut out with a glass or
cookie-cutter and with a wine-glass or smaller cutter, cut out the
centre of two out of three; lay the rings thus made on the third,
and bake at once. [Pg 326]May be used for veal or oyster
patties, or filled with jelly, jam or preserves, as tarts. Or
shells may be made by lining patty-pans with paste. If the paste is
light, the shells will be fine. Filled with jelly and covered with
meringue (tablespoonful of sugar to the white of one egg) and
browned in oven, they are very nice to serve for tea.
If the cutters are dipped in hot water, the edges of the
tartlets will rise much higher and smoother when baking.
TARTS.
Larger pans are required for tarts proper, the size of small,
shallow pie-tins; then after the paste is baked and cooled and
filled with the jam or preserve, a few stars or leaves are placed
on the top, or strips of paste, criss-crossed on the top, all of
which have been previously baked on a tin by themselves.
Dried fruit, stewed until thick, makes fine tart pies, also
cranberries stewed and well sweetened.
GREEN APPLE PIE.
Peel, core and slice tart apples enough for a pie; sprinkle over
about three tablespoonfuls of sugar, a teaspoonful of cinnamon, a
small level tablespoonful of sifted flour, two tablespoonfuls of
water, a few bits of butter, stir all together with a spoon; put it
into a pie-tin lined with pie paste; cover with a top crust and
bake about forty minutes.
The result will be a delicious, juicy pie.
APPLE CUSTARD PIE. No. 1.
Three cupfuls of milk, four eggs and one cupful of sugar, two
cupfuls of thick stewed apples, strained through a colander. Beat
the whites and yolks of the eggs lightly and mix the yolks well
with the apples, flavoring with nutmeg. Then beat into this the
milk and, lastly, the whites. Let the crust partly bake before
turning in this filling. To be baked with only the one crust, like
all custard pies.
APPLE CUSTARD PIE. No. 2.
Select fair sweet apples, pare and grate them, and to every
teacupful of the apple add two eggs well beaten, two tablespoonfuls
of fine sugar, one of melted butter, the grated rind and half the
juice of one lemon, half a wine-glass of brandy and one teacupful
of milk; [Pg 327]mix all well and pour into a deep plate lined
with paste; put a strip of the paste around the edge of the dish
and bake thirty minutes.
APPLE CUSTARD PIE. No. 3.
Lay a crust in your plates; slice apples thin and half fill your
plates; pour over them a custard made of four eggs and one quart of
milk, sweetened and seasoned to your taste.
APPLE CUSTARD PIE. No. 4.
Peel sour apples and stew until soft, and not much water left in
them; then rub through a colander; beat three eggs for each pie to
be baked and put in at the rate of one cupful of butter and one of
sugar for three pies; season with nutmeg.
IRISH APPLE PIE.
Pare and take out the cores of the apples, cutting each apple
into four or eight pieces, according to their size. Lay them neatly
in a baking dish, seasoning them with brown sugar and any spice,
such as pounded cloves and cinnamon, or grated lemon peel. A little
quince marmalade gives a fine flavor to the pie. Add a little water
and cover with puff paste. Bake for an hour.
MOCK APPLE PIE.
Crush finely with a rolling pin, one large Boston cracker; put
it into a bowl and pour upon it one teacupful of cold water; add
one teacupful of fine white sugar, the juice and pulp of one lemon,
half a lemon rind grated and a little nutmeg; line the pie-plate
with half puff paste, pour in the mixture, cover with the paste and
bake half an hour.
These are proportions for one pie.
APPLE AND PEACH MERINGUE PIE.
Stew the apples or peaches and sweeten to taste. Mash smooth and
season with nutmeg. Fill the crusts and bake until just done. Put
on no top crust. Take the whites of three eggs for each pie and
whip to a stiff froth, and sweeten with three tablespoonfuls of
powdered sugar. Flavor with rose-water or vanilla; beat until it
will stand alone; then spread it on the pie one-half to one inch
thick; set it back into the oven until the meringue is well "set."
Eat cold.
COCOANUT PIE. No. 1.
One-half cup desiccated cocoanut soaked in one cupful of milk,
two eggs, one small cupful of sugar, butter the size of an egg.
This is for one small-sized pie. Nice with a meringue on top.
COCOANUT PIE. No. 2.
Cut off the brown part of the cocoanut, grate the white part,
mix it with milk and set it on the fire and let it boil slowly
eight or ten minutes. To a pound of the grated cocoanut, allow a
quart of milk, eight eggs, four tablespoonfuls of sifted white
sugar, a glass of wine, a small cracker, pounded fine, two
spoonfuls of melted butter and half a nutmeg. The eggs and sugar
should be beaten together to a froth, then the wine stirred in. Put
them into the milk and cocoanut, which should be first allowed to
get quite cool; add the cracker and nutmeg, turn the whole into
deep pie plates, with a lining and rim of puff paste. Bake them as
soon as turned into the plates.
CHOCOLATE CUSTARD PIE. No. 1.
One-quarter cake of Baker's chocolate, grated; one pint of
boiling water, six eggs, one quart of milk, one-half cupful of
white sugar, two teaspoonfuls of vanilla. Dissolve the chocolate in
a very little milk, stir into the boiling water and boil three
minutes. When nearly cold beat up with this the yolks of all the
eggs and the whites of three. Stir this mixture into the milk,
season and pour into shells of good paste. When the custard is
"set"—but not more than half done—spread over it the
whites whipped to a froth, with two tablespoonfuls of sugar. You
may bake these custards without paste, in a pudding dish or cups
set in boiling water.
CHOCOLATE PIE. No. 2.
Put some grated chocolate into a basin and place on the back of
the stove and let it melt (do not add any water to it); beat one
egg and some sugar in it; when melted, spread this on the top of a
custard pie. Lovers of chocolate will like this.
LEMON PIE. No. 1. (Superior.)
Take a deep dish, grate into it the outside of the rind of two
lemons; add to that a cup and a half of white sugar, two heaping
tablespoonfuls of unsifted flour, or one of cornstarch; stir it
well [Pg 329]together, then add the yolks of three well-beaten
eggs, beat this thoroughly, then add the juice of the lemons, two
cups of water and a piece of butter the size of a walnut. Set this
on the fire in another dish containing boiling water and cook it
until it thickens, and will dip up on the spoon like cold honey.
Remove from the fire, and when cooled, pour it into a deep pie-tin,
lined with pastry; bake, and when done, have ready the whites,
beaten stiff, with three small tablespoonfuls of sugar. Spread this
over the top and return to the oven, to set and brown slightly.
This makes a deep, large sized pie, and very superior.
LEMON PIE. No. 2.
One coffee cupful of sugar, three eggs, one cupful of water, one
tablespoonful of melted butter, one heaping tablespoonful of flour,
the juice and a little of the rind of one lemon. Reserve the whites
of the eggs, and after the pie is baked, spread them over the top
beaten lightly-with a spoonful of sugar, and return to the oven
until it is a light brown.
This may be cooked before it is put into the crust or not, but
it is rather better to cook it first in a double boiler or dish. It
makes a medium-sized pie. Bake from thirty-five to forty
minutes.
LEMON PIE. No. 3.
Moisten a heaping tablespoonful of cornstarch with a little cold
water, then add a cupful of boiling water; stir over the fire till
it boils and cook the cornstarch, say two or three minutes; add
teaspoonful of butter and a cupful of sugar; take off the fire and,
when slightly cooled, add an egg well beaten and the juice and
grated rind of a fresh lemon. Bake with a crust. This makes one
small pie.
LEMON PIE. No. 4.
Two large, fresh lemons, grate off the rind, if not bitter
reserve it for the filling of the pie, pare off every bit of the
white skin of the lemon (as it toughens while cooking); then cut
the lemon into very thin slices with a sharp knife and take out the
seeds; two cupfuls of sugar, three tablespoonfuls of water and two
of sifted flour. Put into the pie a layer of lemon, then one of
sugar, then one of the grated rind and, lastly, of flour, and so on
till the ingredients are used; sprinkle the water over all, and
cover with upper crust. Be [Pg
330]sure to have the
under crust lap over the upper, and pinch it well, as the syrup
will cook all out if care is not taken when finishing the edge of
crust. This quantity makes one medium-sized pie.
ORANGE PIE.
Grate the rind of one and use the juice of two large oranges.
Stir together a large cupful of sugar and a heaping tablespoonful
of flour; add to this the well-beaten yolks of three eggs, two
tablespoonfuls of melted butter. Reserve the whites for frosting.
Turn this into a pie-pan lined with pie paste and bake in a quick
oven. When done so as to resemble a finely baked custard, spread on
the top of it the beaten whites, which must be sweetened with two
tablespoonfuls of sugar; spread evenly and return to the oven and
brown slightly.
The addition of the juice of half a lemon improves it, if
convenient to have it.
BAKERS' CUSTARD PIE.
Beat up the yolks of three eggs to a cream. Stir thoroughly a
tablespoonful of sifted flour into three tablespoonfuls of sugar;
this separates the particles of flour so that there will be no
lumps; then add it to the beaten yolks, put in a pinch of salt, a
teaspoonful of vanilla and a little grated nutmeg; next the
well-beaten whites of the eggs; and, lastly, a pint of scalded milk
(not boiled) which has been cooled; mix this in by degrees and turn
all into a deep pie-pan lined with puff paste, and bake from
twenty-five to thirty minutes.
I received this recipe from a celebrated cook in one of our best
New York bakeries. I inquired of him "why it was that their custard
pies had that look of solidity and smoothness that our home-made
pies have not." He replied, "The secret is the addition of this
bit of flour—not that it thickens the custard any to
speak of, but prevents the custard from breaking or wheying and
gives that smooth appearance when cut."
CREAM PIE.
Pour a pint of cream upon one and a half cupfuls of sugar; let
it stand until the whites of three eggs have been beaten to a stiff
froth; add this to the cream and beat up thoroughly; grate a little
nutmeg over the mixture and bake without an upper crust. If a
tablespoonful of sifted flour is added to it, as the above Custard
Pie recipe, it would improve it.
WHIPPED CREAM PIE.
Line a pie plate with a rich crust and bake quickly in a hot
oven. When done, spread with a thin layer of jelly or jam, then
whip one cupful of thick sweet cream until it is as light as
possible; sweeten with powdered sugar and flavor with vanilla;
spread over the jelly or jam; set the cream where it will get very
cold before whipping.
CUSTARD PIE.
Beat together until very light the yolks of four eggs and four
tablespoonfuls of sugar, flavor with nutmeg or vanilla; then add
the four beaten whites, a pinch of salt and, lastly, a quart of
sweet milk; mix well and pour into tins lined with paste. Bake
until firm.
BOSTON CREAM PIE.
Cream Part.—Put on a pint of milk to boil. Break
two eggs into a dish and add one cup of sugar and half a cup of
flour previously mixed after beating well, stir it into the milk
just as the milk commences to boil; add an ounce of butter and keep
on stirring one way until it thickens; flavor with vanilla or
lemon.
Crust Part.—Three eggs beaten separately, one cup
of granulated sugar, one and a half cups of sifted flour, one large
teaspoonful of baking powder and two tablespoonfuls of milk or
water. Divide the batter in half and bake on two medium-sized
pie-tins. Bake in a rather quick oven to a straw color. When done
and cool, split each one in half with a sharp broad-bladed knife,
and spread half the cream between each. Serve cold.
The cake part should be flavored the same as the custard.
MOCK CREAM PIE.
Take three eggs, one pint of milk, a cupful of sugar, two
tablespoonfuls of cornstarch or three of flour; beat the sugar,
cornstarch and yolks of the eggs together; after the milk has come
to a boil, stir in the mixture and add a pinch of salt and about a
teaspoonful of butter. Make crust the same as any pie; bake, then
fill with the custard, grate over a little nutmeg and bake again.
Take the whites of the eggs and beat to a stiff froth with two
tablespoonfuls of sugar, spread over the top and brown in a quick
oven.
FRUIT CUSTARD PIE.
Any fruit custard, such as pineapple, banana, can be readily
made after the recipe of APPLE CUSTARD PIE.
CHERRY PIE.
Line your pie plate with good crust, fill half full with ripe
cherries; sprinkle over them about a cupful of sugar, a teaspoonful
of sifted flour, dot a few bits of butter over that. Now fill the
crust full to the top. Cover with the upper crust and bake.
This is one of the best of pies, if made correctly, and the
cherries in any case should be stoned.
CURRANT PIE.
Make in just the same way as the "Cherry Pie," unless they are
somewhat green, then they should be stewed a little.
RIPE CURRANT PIE.
One cupful of mashed ripe currants, one of sugar, two
tablespoonfuls of water, one of flour, beaten with the yolks of two
eggs. Bake; frost the top with the beaten whites of the eggs and
two tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and brown in oven.
GREEN TOMATO PIE.
Take medium-sized tomatoes, pare and cut out the stem end.
Having your pie-pan lined with paste made as biscuit dough, slice
the tomatoes very thin, filling the pan somewhat heaping,
then grate over it a nutmeg; put in half a cup of butter and a
medium cup of sugar, if the pan is rather deep. Sprinkle a small
handful of flour over all, pouring in half a cup of vinegar before
adding the top crust. Bake half an hour in a moderately hot oven,
serving hot. Is good; try it.
APRICOT MERINGUE PIE.
A canned apricot meringue pie is made by cutting the apricots
fine and mixing them with half a cup of sugar and the beaten yolk
of an egg; fill the crust and bake. Take from the oven, let it
stand for two or three minutes, cover with a meringue made of the
beaten white of an egg and one tablespoonful of sugar. Set back in
a slow oven until [Pg 333]it turns a golden brown. The above pie
can be made into a tart without the addition of the meringue by
adding criss-cross strips of pastry when the pie is first put into
the oven.
All of the above are good if made from the dried and stewed
apricots instead of the canned and are much cheaper.
Stewed dried apricots are a delicious addition to mince meat.
They may be used in connection with minced apples, or to the
exclusion of the latter.
HUCKLEBERRY PIE.
Put a quart of picked huckleberries into a basin of water; take
off, whatever floats; take up the berries by the handful, pick out
all the stems and unripe berries and put them into a dish; line a
buttered pie, dish with a pie paste, put in the berries half an
inch deep, and to a quart of berries, put half of a teacupful of
brown sugar; dredge a teaspoonful of flour over, strew a
saltspoonful of salt and a little nutmeg grated over; cover the
pie, cut a slit in the centre, or make several small incisions on
either side of it; press the two crusts together around the edge,
trim it off neatly with a sharp knife and bake in a quick oven for
three-quarters of an hour.
BLACKBERRY PIE.
Pick the berries clean, rinse them in cold water and finish as
directed for huckleberries.
MOLASSES PIE.
Two teacupfuls of molasses; one of sugar, three eggs, one
tablespoonful of melted butter, one lemon, nutmeg; beat and bake in
pastry.
LEMON RAISIN PIE.
One cup of chopped raisins, seeded, and the juice and grated
rind of one lemon, one cupful of cold water, one tablespoonful of
flour, one cupful of sugar, two tablespoonfuls of butter. Stir
lightly together and bake with upper and under crust.
RHUBARB PIE.
Cut the large stalks off where the leaves commence, strip off
the outside skin, then cut the stalks in pieces half an inch long;
line a pie dish with paste rolled rather thicker than a dollar
piece, put a [Pg 334]layer of the rhubarb nearly an inch
deep; to a quart bowl of cut rhubarb put a large teacupful of
sugar; strew it over with a saltspoonful of salt and a little
nutmeg grated; shake over a little flour; cover with a rich pie
crust, cut a slit in the centre, trim off the edge with a sharp
knife and bake in a quick oven until the pie loosens from the dish.
Rhubarb pies made in this way are altogether superior to those made
of the fruit stewed.
RHUBARB PIE. (Cooked.)
Skin the stalks, cut them into small pieces, wash and put them
in a stewpan with no more water than what adheres to them; when
cooked, mash them fine and put in a small piece of butter; when
cool, sweeten to taste; if liked, add a little lemon-peel, cinnamon
or nutmeg; line your plate with thin crust, put in the filling,
cover with crust and bake in a quick oven; sift sugar over
it when served.
PINEAPPLE PIE.
A grated pineapple, its weight in sugar, half its weight in
butter, one cupful of cream, five eggs; beat the batter to a creamy
froth, add the sugar and yolks of the eggs, continue beating till
very light; add the cream, the pineapple grated and the whites of
the eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Bake with an under crust. Eat
cold.
GRAPE PIE.
Pop the pulps out of the skins into one dish and put the skins
into another. Then simmer the pulp a little over the fire to soften
it; remove it and rub it through a colander to separate it from the
seeds. Then put the skins and pulp together and they are ready for
pies or for canning or putting in jugs for other use. Fine for
pies.
DAMSON OR PLUM PIE.
Stew the damsons whole in water only sufficient to prevent their
burning; when tender and while hot, sweeten them with sugar and let
them stand until they become cold; then pour them into pie dishes
lined with paste, dredge flour upon them, cover them with the same
paste, wet and pinch together the edges of the paste, cut a slit in
the centre of the cover through which the vapor may escape and bake
twenty minutes.
PEACH PIE.
Peel, stone and slice the peaches. Line a pie plate with crust
and lay in your fruit, sprinkling sugar liberally over them in
proportion to their sweetness. Allow three peach kernels chopped
fine to each pie; pour in a very little water and bake with an
upper crust, or with cross-bars of paste across the top.
DRIED FRUIT PIES.
Wash the fruit thoroughly, soak over night in water enough to
cover. In the morning stew slowly until nearly done in the same
water. Sweeten to taste. The crust, both upper and under, should be
rolled thin; a thick crust to a fruit pie is undesirable.
RIPE BERRY PIES.
All made the same as "Cherry Pie." Line your pie-tin with crust,
fill half full of berries, shake over a tablespoonful of sifted
flour (if very juicy) and as much sugar as is necessary to sweeten
sufficiently. Now fill up the crust to the top, making quite full.
Cover with crust and bake about forty minutes.
Huckleberry and blackberry pies are improved by putting into
them a little ginger and cinnamon.
JELLY AND PRESERVED FRUIT PIES.
Preserved fruit requires no baking; hence, always bake the shell
and put in the sweetmeats afterwards; you can cover with whipped
cream, or bake a top crust shell; the former is preferable for
delicacy.
CRANBERRY PIE.
Take fine, sound, ripe cranberries and with a sharp knife split
each one until you have a heaping coffeecupful; put them in a
vegetable dish or basin; put over them one cupful of white sugar,
half a cup of water, a tablespoon full of sifted flour; stir
it all together and put into your crust. Cover with an upper crust
and bake slowly in a moderate oven. You will find this the true way
of making a cranberry pie.
CRANBERRY TART PIE.
After having washed and picked over the berries, stew them well
in a little water, just enough to cover them; when they burst open
[Pg 336]and become soft, sweeten them with plenty of sugar,
mash them smooth (some prefer them not mashed); line your
pie-plates with thin puff paste, fill them and lay strips of paste
across the top. Bake in a moderate oven. Or you may rub them
through a colander to free them from the skins.
GOOSEBERRY PIE.
Can be made the same as "Cranberry Tart Pie," or an upper crust
can be put on before baking. Serve with boiled custard or a pitcher
of good sweet cream.
STEWED PUMPKIN OR SQUASH FOR PIES.
Deep-colored pumpkins are generally the best. Cut a pumpkin or
squash in half, take out the seeds, then cut it up in thick slices,
pare the outside and cut again in small pieces. Put it into a large
pot or saucepan with a very little water; let it cook slowly until
tender. Now set the pot on the back of the stove, where it will not
burn, and cook slowly, stirring often until the moisture is dried
out and the pumpkin looks dark and red. It requires cooking a long
time, at least half a day, to have it dry and rich. When cool press
through a colander.
BAKED PUMPKIN OR SQUASH FOR PIES.
Cut up in several pieces, do not pare it; place them on baking
tins and set them in the oven; bake slowly until soft, then take
them out, scrape all the pumpkin from the shell, rub it through a
colander. It will be fine and light and free from lumps.
PUMPKIN PIE. No. 1.
For three pies: One quart of milk, three cupfuls of boiled and
strained pumpkin, one and one-half cupfuls of sugar, one-half
cupful of molasses, the yolks and whites of four eggs beaten
separately, a little salt, one tablespoonful each of ginger and
cinnamon. Beat all together and bake with an under crust.
Boston marrow or Hubbard squash may be substituted for pumpkin
and are much preferred by many, as possessing a less strong
flavor.
PUMPKIN PIE. No. 2.
One quart of stewed pumpkin pressed through a sieve, nine eggs,
whites and yolks beaten separately, two scant quarts of milk, one
tea[Pg 337]spoonful of mace, one teaspoonful of cinnamon and
the same of nutmeg, one and one-half cupfuls of white sugar, or
very light brown. Beat all well together and bake in crust without
cover.
A tablespoonful of brandy is a great improvement to pumpkin, or
squash pies.
PUMPKIN PIE WITHOUT EGGS.
One quart of properly stewed pumpkin pressed through a colander;
to this add enough good, rich milk, sufficient to moisten it enough
to fill two good-sized earthen pie-plates, a teaspoonful of salt,
half a cupful of molasses or brown sugar, a tablespoonful of
ginger, one teaspoonful of cinnamon or nutmeg. Bake in a moderately
slow oven three-quarters of an hour.
SQUASH PIE.
One pint of boiled dry squash, one cupful of brown sugar, three
eggs, two tablespoonfuls of molasses, one tablespoonful of melted
butter one tablespoonful of ginger, one teaspoonful of cinnamon, a
pinch of salt and one pint of milk. This makes two pies, or one
large deep one.
SWEET POTATO PIE.
One pound of steamed sweet potatoes finely mashed,-two cups
sugar, one cup cream, one-half cup butter, three well-beaten eggs,
flavor with lemon or nutmeg and bake in pastry shell. Fine.
COOKED MEAT FOR MINCE PIES.
In order to succeed in having good mince pie, it is quite
essential to cook the meat properly, so as to retain its juices and
strength of flavor.
Select four pounds of lean beef, the neck piece is as good as
any; wash it and put it into a kettle with just water enough to
cover it; take off the scum as it reaches the boiling point, add
hot water from time to time, until it is tender, then season with
salt and pepper; take off the cover and let it boil until almost
dry, or until the juice has boiled back into the meat. When it
looks as though it was beginning to fry in its own juice, it is
time to take up and set aside to get cold, which should be done the
day before needed. Next day, when making the mince meat, the bones,
gristle and stringy bits should be well picked out before
chopping.
MINCE PIES. No. 1.
The "Astor House," some years ago, was famous for its
"mince pies." The chief pastry cook at that time, by request,
published the recipe. I find that those who partake of it never
fail to speak in laudable terms of the superior excellence of this
recipe when strictly followed.
Four pounds of lean boiled beef chopped fine, twice as much of
chopped green tart apples, one pound of chopped suet, three pounds
of raisins, seeded, two pounds of currants picked over, washed and
dried, half a pound of citron, cut up fine, one pound of brown
sugar, one quart of cooking molasses, two quarts of sweet cider,
one pint of boiled cider, one tablespoonful of salt, one
tablespoonful of pepper, one tablespoonful of mace, one
tablespoonful of allspice and four tablespoonfuls of cinnamon, two
grated nutmegs, one tablespoonful of cloves; mix thoroughly and
warm it on the range until heated through. Remove from the fire and
when nearly cool, stir in a pint of good brandy and one pint of
Madeira wine. Put into a crock, cover it tightly and set it in a
cold place where it will not freeze, but keep perfectly cold. Will
keep good all winter.
MINCE PIES. No. 2.
Two pounds of lean fresh beef, boiled and, when cold, chopped
fine. One pound of beef suet, cleared of strings and minced to
powder. Five pounds of apples, pared and chopped, two pounds of
raisins, seeded and chopped, one pound of Sultana raisins, washed
and picked over, two pounds of currants washed and carefully
picked over, three-quarters of a pound of citron cut up fine, two
tablespoonfuls cinnamon, one of powdered nutmeg, two of mace, one
of cloves, one of allspice, one of fine salt, two and a quarter
pounds of brown sugar, one quart brown sherry, one pint best
brandy.
Mince-meat made by this recipe will keep all winter. Cover
closely in a jar and set in a cool place.
For preserving mince meat, look for CANNED MINCE MEAT.
MOCK MINCE MEAT WITHOUT MEAT.
One cupful of cold water, half a cupful of molasses, half a
cupful of brown sugar, half a cupful of cider vinegar, two-thirds
of a cupful [Pg 339]of melted butter, one cupful of raisins seeded
and chopped, one egg beaten light, half a cupful of rolled cracker
crumbs, a teaspoonful of cinnamon, a teaspoonful each of cloves,
allspice, nutmeg, salt and black pepper.
Put the saucepan on the fire with the water and raisins; let
them cook a few minutes, then add the sugar and molasses, then the
vinegar, then the other ingredients; lastly, add a wine-glassful of
brandy. Very fine.
FRUIT TURNOVERS. (Suitable for Picnics.)
Make a nice puff paste; roll it out the usual thickness, as for
pies; then cut it out into circular pieces about the size of a
small tea saucer; pile the fruit on half of the paste, sprinkle
over some sugar, wet the edges and turn the paste over. Press the
edges together, ornament them and brush the turnovers over with the
white of an egg; sprinkle over sifted sugar and bake on tins, in a
brisk oven, for about twenty minutes. Instead of putting the fruit
in raw, it may be boiled down with a little sugar first and then
enclosed in the crust; or jam of any kind may be substituted for
fresh fruit.
PLUM CUSTARD TARTLETS.
One pint of greengage plums, after being rubbed through a sieve,
one large cup of sugar, the yolks of two eggs well beaten. Whisk
all together until light and foamy, then bake in small patty-pans
shells of puff paste a light brown. Then fill with the plum paste,
beat the two whites until stiff, add two tablespoonfuls of powdered
sugar, spread over the plum paste and set the shells into a
moderate oven for a few moments.
These are much more easily handled than pieces of pie or even
pies whole, and can be packed nicely for carrying.
LEMON TARTLETS. No. 1.
Put a quart of milk into a saucepan over the fire. When it comes
to the boiling point put into it the following mixture: Into a bowl
put a heaping tablespoonful of flour, half a cupful of sugar and a
pinch of salt. Stir this all together thoroughly; then add the
beaten yolks of six eggs; stir this one way into the boiling milk
until cooked to a thick cream; remove from the fire and stir into
it the grated rind and juice of one large lemon. Have ready baked
and hot some puff paste tart [Pg
340]shells. Fill them
with the custard and cover each with a meringue made of the whites
of the eggs, sweetened with four tablespoonfuls of sugar. Put into
the oven and bake a light straw color.
LEMON TARTLETS. No. 2.
Mix well together the juice and grated rind of two lemons, two
cupfuls of sugar, two eggs and the crumbs of sponge cake; beat it
all together until smooth; put into twelve patty-pans lined with
puff paste and bake until the crust is done.
ORANGE TARTLETS.
Take the juice of two large oranges and the grated peel of one,
three-fourths of a cup of sugar, a tablespoonful of butter; stir in
a good teaspoonful of cornstarch into the juice of half a lemon and
add to the mixture. Beat all well together and bake in tart shells
without cover.
MERINGUE CUSTARD TARTLETS.
Select deep individual pie-tins; fluted tartlet pans are
suitable for custard tarts, but they should be about six inches in
diameter and from two to three inches deep. Butter the pan and line
it with ordinary puff paste, then fill it with a custard made as
follows: Stir gradually into the beaten yolks of six eggs two
tablespoonfuls of flour, a saltspoonful of salt and half a pint of
cream. Stir until free from lumps and add two tablespoonfuls of
sugar; put the saucepan on the range and stir until the custard
coats the spoon. Do not let it boil or it will curdle. Pour it in a
bowl, add a few drops of vanilla flavoring and stir until the
custard becomes cold; fill the lined mold with this and bake in a
moderate oven. In the meantime, put the whites of the eggs in a
bright copper vessel and beat thoroughly, using a baker's wire
egg-beater for this purpose. While beating, sprinkle in lightly
half a pound of sugar and a dash of salt. When the paste is quite
firm, spread a thin layer of it over the tart and decorate the top
with the remainder by squeezing it through a paper funnel. Strew a
little powdered sugar over the top, return to the oven, and when a
delicate yellow tinge remove from the oven and when cold serve.
BERRY TARTS.
Line small pie-tins with pie crust and bake. Just before ready
to use fill the tarts with strawberries, blackberries, raspberries,
or whatever berries are in season. Sprinkle over each tart a little
sugar; after adding berries add also to each tart a tablespoonful
of sweet cream. They form a delicious addition to the breakfast
table.
CREAM STRAWBERRY TARTS.
After picking over the berries carefully, arrange them in layers
in a deep pie-tin lined with puff paste, sprinkling sugar thickly
between each layer: fill the pie-tin pretty full, pouring in a
quantity of the juice: cover with a thick crust, with a slit in the
top and bake. When the pie is baked, pour into the slit in the top
of the pie the following cream mixture: Take a small cupful of the
cream from the top of the morning's milk, heat it until it comes to
a boil, then stir into it the whites of two eggs beaten light, also
a tablespoonful of white sugar and a teaspoonful of cornstarch wet
in cold milk. Boil all together a few moments until quite smooth;
set it aside and when cool pour it into the pie through the slit in
the crust. Serve it cold with powdered sugar sifted over it.
Raspberry, blackberry and whortleberry may be made the same.
GREEN GOOSEBERRY TART.
Top and tail the gooseberries. Put into a porcelain kettle with
enough water to prevent burning and stew slowly until they break.
Take them off, sweeten well and set aside to cool. When cold
pour into pastry shells and bake with a top crust of puff paste.
Brush all over with beaten egg while hot, set back in the oven to
glaze for three minutes. Eat cold.
COCOANUT TARTS.
Take three cocoanuts, the meats grated, the yolks of five eggs,
half a cupful of white sugar, season, a wine-glass of milk; put the
butter in cold and bake in a nice puff paste.
CHOCOLATE TARTS.
Four eggs, whites and yolks, one-half cake of Baker's chocolate,
grated, one tablespoonful of cornstarch, dissolved in water, three
[Pg 342]tablespoonfuls of milk, four of white sugar, two
teaspoonfuls of vanilla, one saltspoonful of salt, one-half
teaspoonful of cinnamon, one teaspoonful of butter, melted; rub the
chocolate smooth in the milk and heat to boiling over the fire,
then stir in the cornstarch. Stir five minutes until well
thickened, remove from the fire and pour into a bowl. Beat all the
yolks and the whites of two eggs well with the sugar, and when the
chocolate mixture is almost cold, put all together with the
flavoring and stir until light. Bake in open shells of pastry. When
done, cover with a meringue made of the whites of two eggs and two
tablespoonfuls of sugar flavored with a teaspoonful of lemon juice.
Eat cold.
These are nice for tea, baked in patty-pans.
MAIDS OF HONOR.
Take one cupful of sour milk, one of sweet milk, a tablespoonful
of melted butter, the yolks of four eggs, juice and rind of one
lemon and a small cupful of white pounded sugar. Put both kinds of
milk together in a vessel, which is set in another and let it
become sufficiently heated to set the curd, then strain off the
milk, rub the curd through a strainer, add butter to the curd, the
sugar, well-beaten eggs and lemon. Line the little pans with the
richest of puff paste and fill with the mixture; bake until firm in
the centre, from ten to fifteen minutes.
GERMAN FRUIT PIE.
Sift together a heaping teaspoonful of baking powder and a pint
of flour; add a piece of butter as large as a walnut, a pinch of
salt, one beaten egg and sweet milk enough to make a soft dough.
Roll it out half an inch thick; butter a square biscuit tin and
cover the bottom and sides with the dough; fill the pan with
quartered juicy apples, sprinkle with a little cinnamon and
molasses. Bake in rather quick oven until the crust and apples are
cooked a light brown. Sprinkle a little sugar over the top five
minutes before removing from the oven.
Ripe peaches are fine used in the same manner.
APPLE TARTS.
Pare, quarter, core and boil in half a cupful of water, until
quite soft, ten large, tart apples; beat until very smooth and add
the yolks of six eggs, or three whole ones, the juice and grated
outside rind of [Pg 343]two lemons, half a cap of butter; one
and a half of sugar (or more, if not sufficiently sweet); beat all
thoroughly, line patty-pans with a puff paste and fill; bake five
minutes in a hot oven.
Meringue.—If desired very nice, cover them when
removed from the oven with the meringue made of the whites of three
eggs remaining, mixed with three tablespoonfuls of sugar; return to
the oven and delicately brown.
CREAM TARTS.
Make a rich, brittle crust, with which cover your patty-pans,
smoothing off the edges nicely and bake well. While these "shells"
are cooling, take one teacupful (more or less according to the
number of tarts you want) of perfectly sweet and fresh cream,
skimmed free of milk; put this into a large bowl or other deep
dish, and with your egg-beater whip it to a thick, stiff froth; add
a heaping tablespoonful of fine white sugar, with a teaspoonful (a
small one) of lemon or vanilla. Fill the cold shells with this and
set in a cool place till tea is ready.
OPEN JAM TARTS.
Time to bake until paste loosens from the dish. Line shallow tin
dish with puff paste, put in the jam, roll out some of the paste,
wet it lightly with the yolk of an egg beaten with a little milk,
and a tablespoonful of powdered sugar. Cut it in narrow strips,
then lay them across the tart, lay another strip around the edge,
trim off outside, and bake in a quick oven.
CHESS CAKES.
Peel and grate one cocoanut; boil one pound of sugar fifteen
minutes in two-thirds of a pint of water; stir in the grated
cocoanut and boil fifteen minutes longer. While warm, stir in a
quarter of a pound of butter; add the yolks of seven eggs well
beaten. Bake in patty-pans with rich paste. If prepared cocoanut is
used, take one and a half coffeecupfuls. Fine.
The usual rule for custards is, eight eggs to a quart of milk;
but a very good custard can be made of six, or even less,
especially with the addition of a level tablespoonful of sifted
flour, thoroughly blended in the sugar first, before adding the
other ingredients. They may be baked, boiled or steamed, either in
cups or one large dish. It improves custard to first boil the milk
and then cool it before being used; also a little salt adds to the
flavor. A very small lump of butter may also be added, if one wants
something especially rich.
To make custards look and taste better, duck's eggs should be
used when obtainable; they add very much to the flavor and
richness, and so many are not required as of ordinary eggs, four
duck's eggs to the pint of milk making a delicious custard. When
desired extremely rich and good, cream should be substituted for
the milk, and double the quantity of eggs used to those mentioned,
omitting the whites.
When making boiled custard, set the dish containing the custard
into another and larger dish, partly filled with boiling water,
placed over the fire. Let the cream or milk come almost to a boil
before adding the eggs or thickening, then stir it briskly one way
every moment until smooth and well cooked; it must not boil
or it will curdle.
To bake a custard, the fire should be moderate and the dish well
buttered.
Everything in baked custard depends upon the regularly heated
slow oven. If made with nicety it is the most delicate of all
sweets; if cooked till it wheys it is hardly eatable.
Frozen eggs can be made quite as good as fresh ones if used as
soon as thawed soft. Drop them into boiling water, letting them
remain until the water is cold. They will be soft all through and
beat up equal to those that have not been touched with the
frost.
Eggs should always be thoroughly well beaten separately, the
yolks first, then the sugar added, beat again, then add the beaten
whites with the flavoring, then the cooled scalded milk. The
lighter the eggs are beaten, the thicker and richer the
custard.
Eggs should always be broken into a cup, the whites and yolks
separated, and they should always be strained. Breaking the eggs
thus, the bad ones may be easily rejected without spoiling the
others and so cause no waste.
A meringue, or frosting for the top, requires about a
tablespoonful of fine sugar to the beaten white of one egg; to be
placed on the top after the custard or pudding is baked, smoothed
over with a broad-bladed knife dipped in cold water, and replaced
in the oven to brown slightly.
SOFT CARAMEL CUSTARD.
One quart of milk, half a cupful of sugar, six eggs, half a
teaspoonful of salt. Put the milk on to boil, reserving a cupful.
Beat the eggs and add the cold milk to them. Stir the sugar in a
small frying pan until it becomes liquid and just begins to smoke.
Stir it into the boiling milk; then add the beaten eggs and cold
milk and stir constantly until the mixture begins to thicken. Set
away to cool. Serve in glasses.
BAKED CUSTARD.
Beat five fresh eggs, the whites and yolks separately, the yolks
with half a cup of sugar, the whites to a stiff froth; then stir
them gradually into a quart of sweet rich milk previously boiled
and cooled; flavor with extract of lemon or vanilla and half a
teaspoonful of salt. Rub butter over the bottom and sides of a
baking-dish or tin basin; pour in the custard, grate a little
nutmeg over and bake in a quick oven. It is better to set the dish
in a shallow pan of hot water reaching nearly to the top, the water
to be kept boiling until the custard is baked; three-quarters of an
hour is generally enough. Run a teaspoon handle into the middle of
it; if it comes out clean it is baked sufficiently.
CUP CUSTARD.
Six eggs half a cupful of sugar, one quart of new milk. Beat the
eggs and the sugar and milk, and any extract or flavoring you like.
Fill your custard cups, sift a little nutmeg or cinnamon over the
tops, set them in a moderate oven in a shallow pan half filled with
[Pg 346]hot water. In about twenty minutes try them with the
handle of a teaspoon to see if they are firm. Judgment and great
care are needed to attain skill in baking custard, for if left in
the oven a minute too long, or if the fire is too hot, the milk
will certainly whey.
Serve cold with fresh fruit sugared and placed on top of each.
Strawberries, peaches or raspberries, as preferred.
BOILED CUSTARD.
Beat seven eggs very light, omitting the whites of two; mix them
gradually with a quart of milk and half a cupful of sugar; boil in
a dish set in another of boiling water; add flavoring. As soon as
it comes to the boiling point remove it, or it will be liable to
curdle and become lumpy. Whip the whites of the two eggs that
remain, adding two heaping tablespoonfuls of sugar. When the
custard is cold heap this on top; if in cups, put on a strawberry
or a bit of red jelly on each. Set in a cold place till wanted.
BOILED CUSTARD, OR MOCK CREAM.
Take two even tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, one quart of milk,
three eggs, half a teaspoonful of salt and a small piece of butter;
heat the milk to nearly boiling and add the starch, previously
dissolved in a little cold milk; then add the eggs well beaten with
four tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar; let it boil up once or
twice, stirring it briskly, and it is done. Flavor with lemon, or
vanilla, or raspberry, or to suit your taste.
A good substitute for ice cream, served very cold.
FRENCH CUSTARD.
One quart of milk, eight eggs, sugar and cinnamon to taste;
separate the eggs, beat the yolks until thick, to which add the
milk, a little vanilla, and sweeten to taste; put it into a pan or
farina kettle, place it over a slow fire and stir it all the time
until it becomes custard; then pour it into a pudding-dish to get
cold; whisk the whites until stiff and dry; have ready a pan of
boiling water on the top of which place the whites; cover and place
them where the water will keep sufficiently hot to cause a steam to
pass through and cook them; place in a dish (suitable for the
table) a layer of custard and white alter[Pg
347]nately; on each
layer of custard grate a little nutmeg with a teaspoonful of wine;
reserve a layer of white for the cover, over which grate nutmeg;
then send to table and eat cold.
GERMAN CUSTARD.
Add to a pint of good, rich, boiled custard an ounce of sweet
almonds, blanched, roasted and pounded to a paste, and half an
ounce of pine-nuts or peanuts, blanched, roasted and pounded; also
a small quantity of candied citron cut into the thinnest possible
slips; cook the custard as usual and set it on the ice for some
hours before using.
APPLE CUSTARD.
Pare, core and quarter a dozen large juicy pippins. Stew among
them the yellow peel of a large lemon grated very fine, and stew
them till tender in a very small portion of water. When done, mash
them smooth with the back of a spoon (you must have a pint and a
half of the stewed apple); mix a half cupful of sugar with them and
set them away till cold. Beat six eggs very light and stir them
gradually into a quart of rich milk alternately with the stewed
apple. Put the mixture into cups, or into a deep dish and bake it
about twenty minutes. Send it to table cold, with nutmeg grated
over the top.
ALMOND CUSTARD. No. 1.
Scald and blanch half a pound of shelled sweet almonds and three
ounces of bitter almonds, throwing them, as you do them, into a
large bowl of cold water. Then pound them one at a time into a
paste, adding a few drops of wine or rose-water to them. Beat eight
eggs very light with two-thirds of a cup of sugar, then mix
together with a quart of rich milk, or part milk and part cream;
put the mixture into a saucepan and set it over the fire. Stir it
one way until it begins to thicken, but not till it curdles; remove
from the fire and when it is cooled put in a glass dish. Having
reserved part of the whites of the eggs, beat them to a stiff
froth, season with three tablespoonfuls of sugar and a teaspoonful
of lemon extract, spread over the top of the custard. Serve
cold.
ALMOND CUSTARD. No. 2.
Blanch a quarter of a pound of sweet almonds, pound them, as in
No. 1 on preceding page, with six ounces of fine white sugar and
mix them well with the yolks of four eggs; then dissolve one ounce
of patent gelatine in one quart of boiling milk, strain it through
a sieve and pour into it the other mixture; stir the whole over the
fire until it thickens and is smooth; then pour it into your mold
and keep it upon ice, or in a cool place, until wanted; when ready
to serve dip the mold into warm water, rub it with a cloth and turn
out the cream carefully upon your dish.
SNOWBALL CUSTARD.
Soak half a package of Cox's gelatine in a teacupful of cold
water one hour, to which add a pint of boiling water, stir it until
the gelatine is thoroughly dissolved. Then beat the whites of four
eggs to a stiff froth, put two teacupfuls of sugar in the gelatine
water first, then the beaten white of egg and one teaspoonful of
vanilla extract, or the grated rind and the juice of a lemon. Whip
it some time until it is all quite stiff and cold. Dip some teacups
or wine-glasses in cold water and fill them; set in a cold
place.
In the meantime, make a boiled custard of the yolks of three of
the eggs, with half a cupful of sugar and a pint of milk; flavor
with vanilla extract. Now after the meringue in the cups has stood
four or five hours, turn them out of the molds, place them in a
glass dish and pour this custard around the base.
BAKED COCOANUT CUSTARD.
Grate as much cocoanut as will weigh a pound. Mix half a pound
of powdered white sugar with the milk of the cocoanut, or with a
pint of cream, adding two tablespoonfuls of rose-water. Then stir
in gradually a pint of rich milk. Beat to a stiff froth the whites
of eight eggs and stir them into the milk and sugar, a little at a
time, alternately with the grated cocoanut; add a teaspoonful of
powdered nutmeg and cinnamon. Then put the mixture into cups and
bake them twenty minutes in a moderate oven, set in a pan half
filled with boiling water. When cold, grate loaf sugar over
them.
WHIPPED CREAM. No. 1.
To the whites of three eggs, beaten to a stiff froth, add a pint
of thick sweet cream (previously set where it is very cold) and
four tablespoonfuls of sweet wine, with three of fine white sugar
and a teaspoonful of the extract of lemon or vanilla. Mix all the
ingredients together on a board platter or pan and whip it to a
standing froth; as the froth rises, take it off lightly with a
spoon and lay it on an inverted sieve with a dish under it to catch
what will drain through; and what drains through can be beaten over
again.
Serve in a glass dish with jelly or jam and sliced sponge cake.
This should be whipped in a cool place and set in the ice box.
WHIPPED CREAM. No. 2.
Three coffeecupfuls of good thick sweet cream, half a cup of
powdered sugar, three teaspoonfuls of vanilla; whip it to a stiff
froth. Dissolve three-fourths of an ounce of best gelatine in a
teacup of hot water and when cool pour it in the cream and stir it
gently from the bottom upward, cutting the cream into it, until it
thickens. The dish which contains the cream should be set in
another dish containing ice-water, or cracked ice. When finished
pour in molds and set on ice or in any very cold place.
SPANISH CREAM.
Take one quart of milk and soak half a box of gelatine in it for
an hour; place it on the fire and stir often. Beat the yolks of
three eggs very light with a cupful of sugar, stir into the
scalding milk and heat until it begins to thicken (it should not
boil, or it will curdle); remove from the fire and strain through
thin muslin or tarlatan, and when nearly cold flavor with vanilla
or lemon; then wet a dish or mold in cold water and set aside to
stiffen.
BAVARIAN CREAM.
One quart of sweet cream, the yolks of four eggs beaten together
with a cupful of sugar. Dissolve half an ounce of gelatine or
isinglass in half a teacupful of warm water; when it is dissolved
stir in a pint of boiling hot cream; add the beaten yolks and
sugar; cook all together until it begins to thicken, then remove
from the fire and add the other pint of cold cream whipped to a
stiff froth, adding a little at a time [Pg
350]and beating hard.
Season with vanilla or lemon. Whip the whites of the eggs for the
top. Dip the mold in cold water before filling; set it in a cold
place. To this could be added almonds, pounded, grated chocolate,
peaches, pineapples, strawberries, raspberries, or any seasonable
fruit.
STRAWBERRY BAVARIAN CREAM.
Pick off the hulls of a box of strawberries, bruise them in a
basin with a cup of powered sugar; rub this through a sieve and mix
with it a pint of whipped cream and one ounce and a half of
clarified isinglass or gelatine; pour the cream into a mold
previously oiled. Let it in rough ice and when it has become firm
turn out on a dish.
Raspberries or currants may be substituted for strawberries.
GOLDEN CREAM.
Boil a quart of milk; when boiling stir into it the well-beaten
yolks of six eggs; add six tablespoonfuls of sugar and one
tablespoonful of sifted flour, which have been well beaten
together; when boiled, turn it into a dish, and pour over it the
whites beaten to a stiff froth, mixing with them six
tablespoonfuls, of powdered sugar. Set all in the oven and brown
slightly. Flavor the top with vanilla and the bottom with lemon.
Serve cold.
CHOCOLATE CREAM. No. 1.
Three ounces of grated chocolate, one-quarter pound of sugar,
one and one-half pints of cream, one and one-half ounces of
clarified isinglass, or gelatine, the yolks of six eggs.
Beat the yolks of the eggs well; put them into a basin with the
grated chocolate, the sugar and one pint of the cream; stir these
ingredients well together, pour them into a basin and set this
basin in a saucepan of boiling water; stir it one way until the
mixture thickens, but do not allow it to boil, or it will
curdle. Strain the cream through a sieve into a basin, stir in the
isinglass and the other one-half pint of cream, which should-be
well whipped; mix all well together, and pour it into a mold which
has been previously oiled with the purest salad oil, and, if at
hand, set it in ice until wanted for table.
CHOCOLATE CREAM OR CUSTARD. No. 2.
Take one quart of milk, and when nearly boiling stir in two
ounces of grated chocolate; let it warm on the fire for a few
moments, and then remove and cool; beat the yolks of eight eggs and
two whites with eight tablespoonfuls of sugar, then pour the milk
over them; flavor and bake as any custard, either in cups or a
large dish. Make a meringue of the remaining whites.
LEMON CREAM. No. 1.
One pint of cream, the yolks of two eggs, one quarter of a pound
of white sugar, one large lemon, one ounce isinglass or
gelatine.
Put the cream into a lined saucepan with the sugar, lemon
peel and isinglass, and simmer these over a gentle fire for about
ten minutes, stirring them all the time. Strain the cream into a
basin, add the yolks of eggs, which should be well beaten, and put
the basin into a saucepan of boiling water; stir the mixture one
way until it thickens, but do not allow it to boil; take it
off the fire and keep stirring it until nearly cold. Strain the
lemon juice into a basin, gradually pour on it the cream, and
stir it well until the juice is well mixed with it. Have
ready a well-oiled mold, pour the cream into it, and let it remain
until perfectly set. When required for table, loosen the edges with
a small blunt knife, put a dish on the top of the mold, turn it
over quickly, and the cream should easily slip away.
LEMON CREAM. No. 2.
Pare into one quart of boiling water the peels of four large
lemons, the yellow outside only; let it stand for four hours; then
take them out and add to the water the juice of the four lemons and
one cupful of fine white sugar. Beat the yolks of ten eggs and mix
all together; strain it through a piece of lawn or lace into a
porcelain lined stewpan; set it over a slow fire; stir it one way
until it is as thick as good cream, but do not let it boil;
then take it from the fire, and, when cool, serve in custard
cups.
LEMON CREAM. No. 3.
Peel three lemons and squeeze out the juice into one quart of
milk. Add the peel; cut in pieces and cover the mixture for a few
[Pg 352]hours; then add six eggs, well beaten, and one pint
of water, well sweetened. Strain and simmer over a gentle fire till
it thickens; do not let it boil. Serve very cold.
ORANGE CREAM.
Whip a pint of cream so long that there will be but one-half the
quantity left when skimmed off. Soak in half a cupful of cold water
a half package of gelatine and then grate over it the rind of two
oranges. Strain the juice of six oranges and add to it a cupful of
sugar; now put the half pint of unwhipped cream into a double
boiler, pour into it the well-beaten yolks of six eggs, stirring
until it begins to thicken, then add the gelatine. Remove from the
fire, let it stand for two minutes and add the orange juice and
sugar; beat all together until about the consistency of soft
custard and add the whipped cream. Mix well and turn into molds to
harden. To be served with sweetened cream. Fine.
SOLID CREAM.
Four tablespoonfuls of pounded sugar, one quart of cream, two
tablespoonfuls of brandy, the juice of one large lemon.
Strain the lemon juice over the sugar and add the brandy, then
stir in the cream, put the mixture into a pitcher and continue
pouring from one pitcher to another, until it is quite thick; or it
may be whisked until the desired consistency is obtained. It should
be served in jelly glasses.
BANANA CREAM.
After peeling the bananas, mash them with an iron or wooden
spoon; allow equal quantities of bananas and sweet cream; to one
quart of the mixture, allow one-quarter of a pound of sugar. Beat
them all together until the cream is light.
TAPIOCA CREAM CUSTARD.
Soak three heaping tablespoonfuls of tapioca in a teacupful of
water over night. Place over the fire a quart of milk; let it come
to a boil, then stir in the tapioca, a good pinch of salt, stir
until it thickens; then add a cupful of sugar and the beaten yolks
of three eggs. Stir it quickly and pour it into a dish and stir
gently into the mixture the whites beaten stiff, the flavoring and
set it on ice, or in an ice chest.
PEACH CREAM. No. 1.
Mash very smooth two cupfuls of canned peaches, run them through
a sieve and cook for three minutes in a syrup made by boiling
together one cupful of sugar and stirring all the time. Place the
pan containing the syrup and peaches into another of boiling water
and add one-half packet of gelatine prepared the same as in
previous recipes, and stir for five minutes to thoroughly dissolve
the gelatine, then take it from the fire, place in a pan of
ice-water, beat until nearly cool and then add the well-frothed
whites of six eggs. Beat this whole mixture until it commences to
harden. Then pour into a mold, set away to cool and serve with
cream and sugar. It should be placed on the ice to cool for two or
three hours before serving.
PEACH CREAM. No. 2.
A quart of fine peaches, pare and stone the fruit and cut in
quarters. Beat the whites of three eggs with a half cupful of
powdered sugar until it is stiff enough to cut with a knife. Take
the yolks and mix with half a cupful of granulated sugar and a pint
of milk. Put the peaches into the mixture, place in a pudding-dish
and bake until almost firm; then put in the whites, mixing all
thoroughly again, and bake a light brown. Eat ice cold.
ITALIAN CREAM.
Put two pints of cream into two bowls; with one bowl mix six
ounces of powdered loaf sugar, the juice of two large lemons and
two glassfuls of white wine; then add the other pint of cream and
stir the whole very hard; boil two ounces of isinglass or gelatine
with four small teacupfuls of water till reduced to one-half; then
stir the mixture luke-warm into the other ingredients; put them in
a glass dish to congeal.
SNOW CREAM.
Heat a quart of thick, sweet cream; when ready to boil, stir
into it quickly three tablespoonfuls of cornstarch flour, blended
with some cold cream; sweeten to taste and allow it to boil gently,
stirring for two or three minutes; add quickly the whites of six
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; do not allow it to boil up more than
once after adding the eggs; flavor with lemon, vanilla, bitter
almond or grated lemon peel; lay the[Pg
354] snow thus formed
quickly in rocky heaps on silver or glass dishes, or in shapes.
Iced, it will turn out well.
If the recipe is closely followed, any family may enjoy it at a
trifling expense, and it is really worthy the table of an epicure.
It can be made the day before it is to be eaten; kept cold.
MOCK ICE.
Take about three tablespoonfuls of some good preserve; rub it
through a sieve with as much cream as will fill a quart mold;
dissolve three-quarters of an ounce of isinglass or gelatine in
half a pint of water; when almost cold, mix it well with the cream;
put it into a mold, set in a cool place and turn out next day.
PEACH MERINGUE.
Pare and quarter (removing stones) a quart of sound, ripe
peaches; place them all in a dish that it will not injure to set in
the oven and yet be suitable to place on the table. Sprinkle the
peaches with sugar, and cover them well with the beaten whites of
three eggs. Stand the dish in the oven until the eggs have become a
delicate brown, then remove, and when cool enough, set the dish on
ice, or in a very cool place. Take the yolks of the eggs, add to
them a pint of milk, sweeten and flavor, and boil same in a custard
kettle, being careful to keep the eggs from curdling. When cool
pour into a glass pitcher and serve with the meringue when ready to
use.
APPLE FLOAT.
One dozen apples, pared and cored, one pound and a half of
sugar. Put the apples on with water enough to cover them and let
them stew until they look as if they would break; then take them
out and put the sugar in the same water; let the syrup come to a
boil, put in the apples and let them stew until done through and
clear; then take them out, slice into the syrup one large lemon and
add an ounce of gelatine dissolved in a pint of cold water. Let the
whole mix well and come to a boil; then pour upon the apples. The
syrup will congeal. It is to be eaten cold with cream.
Or you may change the dish by making a soft custard with the
yolks of four eggs, three tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar and a
[Pg 355]scant quart of milk. When cold, spread it over the
apples. Whip the whites of the egg, flavor with lemon and place on
the custard. Color in the oven.
SYLLABUB.
One quart of rich milk or cream, a cupful of wine, half a cupful
of sugar; put the sugar and wine into a bowl and the milk lukewarm
in a separate vessel. When the sugar is dissolved in the wine, pour
the milk in, holding it high; pour it back and forth until it is
frothy. Grate nutmeg over it.
CREAM FOR FRUIT.
This recipe is an excellent substitute for pure cream, to be
eaten on fresh berries and fruit.
One cupful of sweet milk; heat it until boiling. Beat together
the whites of two eggs, a tablespoonful of white sugar and a piece
of butter the size of a nutmeg. Now add half a cupful of cold milk
and a teaspoonful of cornstarch; stir well together until very
light and smooth, then add it to the boiling milk; cook it until it
thickens; it must not boil. Set it aside to cool. It should be of
the consistency of real fresh cream. Serve in a creamer.
STRAWBERRY SPONGE.
One quart of strawberries, half a package of gelatine, one
cupful and a half of water, one cupful of sugar, the juice of a
lemon, the whites of four eggs. Soak the gelatine for two hours in
half a cupful of the water. Mash the strawberries and add half the
sugar to them. Boil the remainder of the sugar and the water gently
twenty minutes. Rub the strawberries through a sieve. Add the
gelatine to the boiling syrup and take from the fire immediately;
then add the strawberries. Place in a pan of ice-water and beat
five minutes. Add the whites of eggs and beat until the mixture
begins to thicken. Pour in the molds and set away to harden. Serve
with sugar and cream. Raspberry and blackberry sponges are made in
the same way.
LEMON SPONGE.
Lemon sponge is made from the juice of four lemons, four eggs, a
cupful of sugar, half a package of gelatine and one pint of water.
Strain lemon juice on the sugar; beat the yolks of the eggs and mix
[Pg 356]with the remainder of the water, having used a half
cupful of the pint in which to soak the gelatine. Add the sugar and
lemon to this and cook until it begins to thicken, then add the
gelatine. Strain this into a basin, which place in a pan of water
to cool. Beat with a whisk until it has cooled but not hardened;
now add the whites of the eggs until it begins to thicken, turn in
a mold and set to harden.
Remember the sponge hardens very rapidly when it commences to
cool, so have your molds all ready. Serve with powdered sugar and
cream.
APPLE SNOW.
Stew some fine-flavored sour apples tender, sweeten to taste,
strain them through a fine wire sieve and break into one pint of
strained apples the white of an egg; whisk the apple and egg very
briskly till quite stiff and it will be as white as snow; eaten
with a nice boiled custard it makes a very desirable dessert. More
eggs may be used if liked.
QUINCE SNOW.
Quarter five fair-looking quinces and boil them till they are
tender in water, then peel them and push them through a coarse
sieve. Sweeten to the taste and add the whites of three or four
eggs. Then with an egg-whisk beat all to a stiff froth and pile
with a spoon upon a glass dish and set away in the ice box, unless
it is to be served immediately.
ORANGE TRIFLE.
Take the thin parings from the outside of a dozen oranges and
put to steep in a wide-mouthed bottle; cover it with good cognac
and let it stand twenty-four hours; skin and seed the oranges and
reduce to a pulp; press this through a sieve, sugar to taste,
arrange in a dish and heap with whipped cream flavored with the
orange brandy, ice two hours before serving.
LEMON TRIFLE.
The juice of two lemons and grated peel of one, one pint of
cream, well sweetened and whipped stiff, one cupful of sherry, a
little nutmeg. Let sugar, lemon juice and peel lie together two
hours before you add wine and nutmeg. Strain through double
tarlatan and whip gradually into the frothed cream. Serve very soon
heaped in small glasses. Nice with cake.
FRUIT TRIFLE.
Whites of four eggs beaten to a stiff froth, two tablespoonfuls
each of sugar, currant jelly and raspberry jam. Eaten with sponge
cakes, it is a delicious dessert.
GRAPE TRIFLE.
Pulp through a sieve two pounds of ripe grapes, enough to keep
back the stones, add sugar to taste. Put into a trifle dish and
cover > with whipped cream, nicely flavored. Serve very
cold.
APPLE TRIFLE.
Peel, core and quarter some good tart apples of nice flavor, and
stew them with a strip of orange and a strip of quince peel,
sufficient water to cover the bottom of the stewpan, and sugar in
the proportion of half a pound to one pound of fruit; when cooked,
press the pulp through a sieve, and, when cold, dish and cover with
one pint of whipped cream flavored with lemon peel.
Quinces prepared in the same manner are equally as good.
PEACH TRIFLE.
Select perfect, fresh peaches, peel and core and cut in
quarters; they should be well sugared, arranged in a trifle
dish with a few of their own blanched kernels among them, then
heaped with whipped cream as above; the cream should not be
flavored; this trifle should be set on the ice for at least an hour
before serving; home-made sponge cakes should be served with
it.
GOOSEBERRY TRIFLE.
One quart of gooseberries, sugar to taste, one pint of custard,
a plateful of whipped cream.
Put the gooseberries into a jar, with sufficient moist sugar to
sweeten them, and boil them until reduced to a pulp. Put this pulp
at the bottom of a trifle dish; pour over it a pint of custard,
and, when cold, cover with whipped cream. The cream should be
whipped the day before it is wanted for table, as it will then be
so much firmer and more solid. This dish may be garnished as fancy
dictates.
LEMON HONEY.
One coffeecupful of white sugar, the grated rind and juice of
one large lemon, the yolks of three eggs and the white of one, a
tablespoonful of butter. Put into a basin the sugar and butter, set
it in a dish of boiling water over the fire; while this is melting,
beat up the eggs, and add to them the grated rind from the outside
of the lemon; then add this to the sugar and butter, cooking and
stirring it until it is thick and clear like honey.
This will keep for some days, put into a tight preserve jar, and
is nice for flavoring pies, etc.
FLOATING ISLANDS.
Beat the yolks of five eggs and the whites of two very light,
sweeten with five tablespoonfuls of sugar and flavor to taste; stir
them into a quart of scalded milk and cook it until it thickens.
When cool pour it into a glass dish. Now whip the whites of the
three remaining eggs to a stiff froth, adding three
tablespoonfuls of sugar and a little flavoring. Pour this froth
over a shallow dish of boiling water; the steam passing through it
cooks it; when sufficiently cooked, take a tablespoon and drop
spoonfuls of this over the top of the custard, far enough apart so
that the "little white islands" will not touch each other. By
dropping a teaspoonful of bright jelly on the top or centre of each
island, is produced a pleasing effect; also by filling wine-glasses
and arranging them around a standard adds much to the appearance of
the table.
FLOATING ISLAND.
One quart of milk, five eggs and five tablespoonfuls of sugar.
Scald the milk, then add the beaten yolks and one of the whites
together with the sugar. First stir into them a little of the
scalded milk to prevent curdling, then all of the milk. Cook it the
proper thickness; remove from the fire, and, when cool, flavor;
then pour it into a glass dish and let it become very cold. Before
it is served beat up the remaining four whites of the eggs to a
stiff froth and beat into them three tablespoonfuls of sugar
and two tablespoonfuls of currant jelly. Dip this over the top of
the custard.
TAPIOCA BLANC MANGE.
Half a pound of tapioca soaked an hour in one pint of milk and
boiled till tender; add a pinch of salt, sweeten to taste and put
into a [Pg 359]mold; when cold turn it out and serve with
strawberry or raspberry jam around it and a little cream. Flavor
with lemon or vanilla.
BLANC MANGE. No. 1.
In one teacupful of water boil until dissolved one ounce of
clarified isinglass, or of patent gelatine (which is better); stir
it continually, while boiling. Then squeeze the juice of a lemon
upon a cupful of fine, white sugar; stir the sugar into a quart of
rich cream and half a pint of Madeira or sherry wine; when it is
well mixed, add the dissolved isinglass or gelatine, stir all well
together, pour it into molds previously wet with cold water; set
the molds upon ice, let them stand until their contents are hard
and cold, then serve with sugar and cream or custard sauce.
BLANC MANGE. No. 2.
Dissolve two ounces of patent gelatine in cold water; when it is
dissolved stir it into two quarts of rich milk, with a teacupful of
fine white sugar; season it to your taste with lemon, or vanilla,
or peach water; place it over the fire and boil it, stirring it
continually; let it boil five minutes; then strain it through a
cloth, pour it into molds previously wet with cold water and salt;
let it stand on ice, or in any cool place until it becomes hard and
cold; turn it out carefully upon dishes and serve; or, half fill
your mold; when this has set, cover with cherries, peaches in
halves, strawberries or sliced bananas, and add the remainder.
CHOCOLATE BLANC MANGE.
Half a box of gelatine soaked in a cupful of water for an hour,
half a cupful of grated chocolate, rubbed smooth in a little milk.
Boil two cupfuls of milk, then add the gelatine and chocolate and
one cupful of sugar; boil all together eight or ten minutes. Remove
from the fire, and when nearly cold beat into this the whipped
whites of three eggs, flavored with vanilla. Should be served cold
with custard made of the yolks, or sugar and cream. Set the molds
in a cold place.
CORNSTARCH BLANC MANGE.
Take one quart of sweet milk and put one pint upon the stove to
heat; in the other pint mix four heaping tablespoonfuls of
cornstarch and half a cupful of sugar; when the milk is hot, pour
in the cold milk with the cornstarch and sugar thoroughly mixed in
it and stir alto[Pg 360]gether until there are no lumps and it
is thick; flavor with lemon; take from the stove and add the whites
of three eggs beaten to a stiff froth.
A Custard for the above.—One pint of milk boiled
with a little salt in it; beat the yolks of three eggs with half a
cupful of sugar and add to the boiling milk; stir well, but do not
let it boil until the eggs are put in; flavor to taste.
FRUIT BLANC MANGE.
Stew nice, fresh fruit (cherries, raspberries and strawberries
being the best), or canned ones will do; strain off the juice and
sweeten to taste; place it over the fire in a double kettle until
it boils; while boiling, stir in cornstarch wet with a little cold
water, allowing two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch to each pint of
juice; continue stirring until sufficiently cooked; then pour into
molds wet in cold water and set away to cool. Served with cream and
sugar.
ORANGE CHARLOTTE.
For two molds of medium size, soak half a box of gelatine in
half a cupful of water for two hours. Add one and a half cupfuls of
boiling water and strain. Then add two cupfuls of sugar, one of
orange juice and pulp and the juice of one lemon. Stir until the
mixture begins to cool, or about five minutes; then add the whites
of six eggs, beaten to a stiff froth. Beat the whole until so stiff
that it will only just pour into molds lined with sections of
orange. Set away to cool.
STRAWBERRY CHARLOTTE.
Make a boiled custard of one quart of milk, the yolks of six
eggs and three-quarters of a cupful of sugar; flavor to taste. Line
a glass fruit-dish with slices of sponge cake dipped in sweet
cream; lay upon this ripe strawberries sweetened to taste; then a
layer of cake and strawberries as before. When the custard is cold
pour over the whole. Now beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff
froth, add a tablespoonful of sugar to each egg and put over the
top. Decorate the top with the largest berries saved out at the
commencement.
Raspberry charlotte may be made the same way.
CHARLOTTE RUSSE. (Fine.)
Whip one quart of rich cream to a stiff froth and drain well on
a nice sieve. To one scant pint of milk add six eggs beaten very
light; make very sweet; flavor high with vanilla. Cook over hot
water till it is a thick custard. Soak one full ounce of Cox's
gelatine in a very little water and warm over hot water. When the
custard is very cold beat in lightly the gelatine and the whipped
cream. Line the bottom of your mold with buttered paper, the side
with sponge cake or lady-fingers fastened together with the white
of an egg. Fill with the cream, put in a cold place, or, in summer,
on ice. To turn out, dip the mold for a moment in hot water. In
draining the whipped cream, all that drips through can be
re-whipped.
CHARLOTTE RUSSE.
Cut stale sponge cake into slices about half an inch thick and
line three molds with them, leaving a space of half an inch between
each slice; set the molds where they will not be disturbed until
the filling is ready. Take a deep tin pan and fill about one-third
full of either snow or pounded ice and into this set another pan
that will hold at least four quarts. Into a deep bowl or pail (a
whip churn is better) put one and a half pints of cream (if the
cream is very thick take one pint of cream and a half pint of
milk); whip it to a froth and when the bowl is full, skim the froth
into the pan which is standing on the ice and repeat this until the
cream is all froth; then with a spoon draw the froth to one side
and you will find that some of the cream has gone back to milk;
turn this into the bowl again and whip as before; when the cream is
all whipped, stir into it two-thirds of a cup of powdered sugar,
one teaspoonful of vanilla and half of a box of gelatine, which has
been soaked in cold water enough to cover it for one hour and then
put in boiling water enough to dissolve it (about half a cup); stir
from the bottom of the pan until it begins to grow stiff; fill the
molds and set them on ice in the pan for one hour, or until they
are sent to the table. When ready to dish them, loosen lightly at
the sides and turn out on a flat dish. Have the cream ice cold when
you begin to whip it; and it is a good plan to put a lump of ice
into the cream while whipping it.
ANOTHER CHARLOTTE RUSSE.
Two tablespoonfuls of gelatine soaked in a little cold milk two
hours, two coffeecupfuls of rich cream, one teacupful of milk. Whip
the cream stiff in a large bowl or dish; set on ice. Boil the milk
and pour gradually over the gelatine until dissolved, then strain;
when nearly cold, add the whipped cream, a spoonful at a time.
Sweeten with powdered sugar, flavor with extract of vanilla. Line a
dish with lady-fingers or sponge cake; pour in cream and set in a
cool place to harden. This is about the same recipe as M. Parloa's,
but is not as explicit in detail.
PLAIN CHARLOTTE RUSSE. No. 1.
Make a rule of white sponge cake; bake in narrow shallow pans.
Then make a custard of the yolks after this recipe. Wet a saucepan
with cold water to prevent the milk that will be scalded in it from
burning. Pour out the water and put in a quart of milk, boil and
partly cool. Beat up the yolks of six eggs and add three ounces of
sugar and a saltspoonful of salt; mix thoroughly and add the
lukewarm milk. Stir and pour the custard into a porcelain or double
saucepan and stir while on the range until of the consistency of
cream; do not allow it to boil, as that would curdle it; strain,
and when almost cold add two teaspoonfuls of vanilla. Now, having
arranged your cake (cut into inch slices) around the sides and on
the bottom of a glass dish, pour over the custard. If you wish a
meringue on the top, beat up the whites of four eggs with four
tablespoonfuls of sugar; flavor with lemon or vanilla, spread over
the top and brown slightly in the oven.
PLAIN CHARLOTTE RUSSE. No. 2.
Put some thin slices of sponge cake in the bottom of a glass
sauce dish; pour in wine enough to soak it; beat up the whites of
three eggs until very light; add to it three tablespoonfuls of
finely powdered sugar, a glass of sweet wine and one pint of thick
sweet cream; beat it well and pour over the cake. Set it in a cold
place until served.
NAPLE BISCUITS, OR CHARLOTTE RUSSE.
Make a double rule of sponge cake; bake it in round deep
patty-pans; when cold cut out the inside about one-quarter of an
inch from the edge and bottom, leaving the shell. Replace the
inside with a cus[Pg 363]tard made of the yolks of four eggs
beaten with a pint of boiling milk, sweetened and flavored; lay on
the top of this some jelly or jam; beat the whites of three eggs
with three heaping tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar until it will
stand in a heap; flavor it a little; place this on the jelly. Set
them aside in a cold place until time to serve.
ECONOMICAL CHARLOTTE RUSSE.
Make a quart of nicely flavored mock custard, put it into a
large glass fruit dish, which is partly filled with stale cake (of
any kind) cut up into small pieces about an inch square, stir it a
little, then beat the whites of two or more eggs stiff, sweetened
with white sugar; spread over the top, set in a refrigerator to
become cold.
Or, to be still more economical: To make the cream, take a pint
and a half of milk, set it on the stove to boil; mix together in a
bowl the following named articles: large half cup of sugar, one
moderately heaped teaspoonful of cornstarch, two tablespoonfuls of
grated chocolate one egg, a small half cup of milk and a pinch of
salt. Pour into the boiling milk, remove to top of the stove and
let simmer a minute or two. When the cream is cold pour over the
cake just before setting it on the table. Serve in saucers. If you
do not have plenty of eggs you can use all cornstarch, about two
heaping teaspoonfuls; but be careful and not get the cream too
thick, and have it free from lumps.
The cream should be flavored either with vanilla or lemon
extract. Nutmeg might answer.
TIPSY CHARLOTTE.
Take a stale sponge cake, cut the bottom and sides of it, so as
to make it stand even in a glass fruit dish; make a few deep gashes
through it with a sharp knife, pour over it a pint of good wine,
let it stand and soak into the cake. In the meantime, blanch, peel
and slice lengthwise half a pound of sweet almonds; stick them all
over the top of the cake. Have ready a pint of good boiled custard,
well flavored, and pour over the whole. To be dished with a spoon.
This is equally as good as any charlotte.
ORANGE CHARLOTTE.
One-third of a box of gelatine, one-third of a cupful of cold
water, one-third of a cupful of boiling water and one cup of sugar,
the juice of one lemon and one cupful of orange juice and pulp, a
little grated [Pg 364]orange peel and the whites of four
eggs. Soak the gelatine in the cold water one hour. Pour the
boiling water over the lemon and orange juice, cover it and let
stand half an hour; then add the sugar, let it come to a boil on
the fire, stir in the gelatine and when it is thoroughly dissolved,
take from the fire. When cool enough, beat into it the four beaten
whites of eggs, turn into the mold and set in a cold place to
stiffen, first placing pieces of sponge cake all around the
mold.
BURNT ALMOND CHARLOTTE.
One cupful of sweet almonds, blanched and chopped fine, half a
box of gelatine soaked two hours in half a cupful of cold water;
when the gelatine is sufficiently soaked, put three tablespoonfuls
of sugar into a saucepan over the fire and stir until it becomes
liquid and looks dark; then add the chopped almonds to it and stir
two minutes more; turn it out on a platter and set aside to get
cool. After they become cool enough break them up in a mortar, put
them in a cup and a half of milk, and cook again for ten minutes.
Now beat together the yolks of two eggs with a cupful of sugar, and
add to the cooking mixture; add also the gelatine; stir until
smooth and well dissolved; take from the fire and set in a basin of
ice-water and beat it until it begins to thicken; then add to that
two quarts of whipped cream, and turn the whole carefully into
molds, set away on the ice to become firm. Sponge cake can be
placed around the mold or not, as desired.
CHARLOTTE RUSSE, WITH PINEAPPLE.
Peel and cut a pineapple in slices, put the slices into a
stewpan with half a pound of fine white sugar, half an ounce of
isinglass, or of patent gelatine (which is better), and half a
teacupful of water; stew it until it is quite tender, then rub it
through a sieve, place it upon ice, and stir it well; when it is
upon the point of setting, add a pint of cream well whipped, mix it
well and pour it into a mold lined with sponge cake, or prepared in
any other way you prefer.
COUNTRY PLUM CHARLOTTE.
Stone a quart of ripe plums; first stew and then sweeten them.
Cut slices of bread and butter and lay them in the bottom and
around the sides of a large bowl or deep dish. Pour in the plums
boiling hot, [Pg 365]cover the bowl and set it away to cool
gradually. When quite cool, send it to the table and eat it with
cream.
VELVET CREAM, WITH STRAWBERRIES.
Dissolve half an ounce of gelatine in a gill of water; add to it
half a pint of light sherry, grated lemon peel and the juice of one
lemon and five ounces of sugar. Stir over the fire until the sugar
is thoroughly dissolved. Then strain and cool. Before it sets beat
into it a pint of cream; pour into molds and keep on ice until
wanted. Half fill the small molds with fine strawberries, pour the
mixture on top, and place on ice until wanted.
CORNSTARCH MERINGUE.
Heat a quart of milk until it boils, add four heaping
teaspoonfuls of cornstarch which has previously been dissolved in a
little cold milk. Stir constantly while boiling for fifteen
minutes. Remove from the fire, and gradually add while hot the
yolks of five eggs, beaten together with three-fourths of a cupful
of sugar, and flavored with lemon, vanilla or bitter almond. Bake
this mixture for fifteen minutes in a well-buttered pudding-dish or
until it begins to "set."
Make a meringue of the whites of five eggs, whipped stiff with a
half cupful of jelly, and spread evenly over the custard, without
removing the same farther than the edge of the oven.
Use currant jelly if vanilla is used in the custard, crab apple
for bitter almond and strawberry for lemon. Cover and bake for five
minutes, after which take off the lid and brown the meringue a very
little. Sift powdered sugar thickly over the top. To be eaten
cold.
WASHINGTON PIE.
This recipe is the same as "Boston Cream Pie" (adding half an
ounce of butter), which may be found under the head of PASTRY, PIES
AND TARTS. In summer time, it is a good plan to bake the pie the
day before wanted; then when cool, wrap around it a paper and place
it in the ice box so to have it get very cold; then serve it
with a dish of fresh strawberries or raspberries. A delicious
dessert.
CREAM PIE.
Make two cakes as for Washington pie, then take one cup of sweet
cream and three tablespoonfuls of white sugar. Beat with egg-beater
or fork till it is stiff enough to put on without running off and
flavor with vanilla. If you beat it after it is stiff it will come
to butter. Put between the cakes and on top.
DESSERT PUFFS.
Puffs for dessert are delicate and nice; take one pint of milk
and cream each, the whites of four eggs beaten to a stiff froth,
one heaping cupful of sifted flour, one scant cupful of powdered
sugar, add a little grated lemon peel and a little salt; beat these
all together till very light, bake in gem-pans, sift pulverized
sugar over them and eat with sauce flavored with lemon.
PEACH CAKE FOR DESSERT.
Bake three sheets of sponge cake, as for jelly cake; cut nice
ripe peaches in thin slices, or chop them; prepare cream by
whipping, sweetening and adding flavor of vanilla, if desired; put
layers of peaches between the sheets of cake; pour cream over each
layer and over the top. To be eaten soon after it is prepared.
FRUIT SHORT-CAKES.
For the recipes of strawberry, peach and other fruit
short-cakes, look under the head of BISCUITS, ROLLS AND MUFFINS.
They all make a very delicious dessert when served with a pitcher
of fresh sweet cream, when obtainable.
SALTED OR ROASTED ALMONDS.
Blanch half a pound of almonds. Put with them a tablespoonful of
melted butter and one of salt. Stir them till well mixed, then
spread them over a baking-pan and bake fifteen minutes, or till
crisp, stirring often. They must be bright yellow-brown when done.
They are a fashionable appetizer and should be placed in ornamental
dishes at the beginning of dinner, and are used by some in place of
olives, which, however, should also be on the table, or some fine
pickles may take their place.
ROAST CHESTNUTS.
Peel the raw chestnuts and scald them to remove the inner skin;
put them in a frying pan with a little butter and toss them about a
few moments; add a sprinkle of salt and a suspicion of cayenne.
Serve them after the cheese.
Peanuts may be blanched and roasted the same.
AFTER-DINNER CROUTONS.
These crispy croutons answer as a substitute for
hard-water crackers and are also relished by most people.
Cut sandwich bread into slices one-quarter of an inch thick; cut
each slice into four small triangles; dry them in the oven slowly
until they assume a delicate brownish tint, then serve either hot
or cold. A nice way to serve them is to spread a paste of part
butter and part rich creamy cheese, to which may be added a very
little minced parsley.
ORANGE FLOAT.
To make orange float, take one quart of water, the juice and
pulp of two lemons, one coffeecupful of sugar. When boiling hot,
add four tablespoonfuls of cornstarch. Let it boil fifteen minutes,
stirring all the time. When cold, pour it over four or five oranges
that have been sliced into a glass dish and over the top spread the
beaten whites of three eggs, sweetened and flavored with vanilla. A
nice dessert.
LEMON TOAST.
This dessert can be made very conveniently without much
preparation.
Take the yolks of six eggs, beat them well and add three cupfuls
of sweet milk; take baker's bread, not too stale, and cut into
slices; dip them into the milk and eggs and lay the slices into a
spider, with sufficient melted butter, hot, to fry a delicate
brown. Take the whites of the six eggs and beat them to a froth,
adding a large cupful of white sugar; add the juice of two lemons,
heating well and adding two cupfuls of boiling water. Serve over
the toast as a sauce and you will find it a very delicious
dish.
SWEET OMELET. No. 1.
One tablespoonful of butter, two of sugar, one cupful of milk,
four eggs. Let the milk come to a boil. Beat the flour and butter
together; add to them gradually the boiling milk and cook eight
minutes; stirring often; beat the sugar and the yolks of the eggs
together; add to the cooked mixture and set away to cool. When
cool, beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth and add to the
mixture. Bake in a buttered pudding-dish for twenty minutes in a
moderate oven. Serve immediately with creamy sauce.
SWEET OMELET. No. 2.
Four eggs, two tablespoonfuls of sugar, a pinch of salt, half a
teaspoonful of vanilla extract, one cupful of whipped cream. Beat
the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth and gradually beat the
flavoring and sugar into them. When well beaten add the yolks and,
lastly, the whipped cream. Have a dish holding about one quart
slightly buttered. Pour the mixture into this and bake just twelve
minutes. Serve the moment it is taken from the oven.
SALAD OF MIXED FRUITS.
Put in the centre of a dish a pineapple properly pared, cored
and sliced, yet retaining as near as practicable its original
shape. Peel, quarter and remove the seeds from four sweet oranges;
arrange them in a border around the pineapple. Select four fine
bananas, peel and cut into slices lengthwise; arrange these
zigzag-fence fashion around the border of the dish. In the V-shaped
spaces around the dish put tiny mounds of grapes of mixed colors.
When complete, the dish should look very appetizing. To half a pint
of clear sugar syrup add half an ounce of good brandy, pour over
the fruit and serve.
ORANGE COCOANUT SALAD.
Peel and slice a dozen oranges, grate a cocoanut and slice a
pineapple. Put alternate layers of each until the dish is full.
Then pour over them sweetened wine. Served with small cakes.
When oranges are served whole, they should be peeled and
prettily arranged in a fruit dish. A small knife is best for this
purpose. Break the skin from the stem into six or eight even parts,
peel each section down half way, and tuck the point in next to the
orange.
CRYSTALLIZED FRUIT.
Pick out the finest of any kind of fruit, leave on their stalks,
beat the whites of three eggs to a stiff froth, lay the fruit in
the beaten egg with the stalks upward, drain them and beat the part
that drips off again; select them out, one by one and dip them into
a cup of finely powdered sugar; cover a pan with a sheet of fine
paper, place the fruit inside of it, and put it in an oven that is
cooling; when the icing on the fruit becomes firm, pile them on a
dish and set them in a cool place. For this purpose, oranges or
lemons should be carefully pared, and all the white inner skin
removed that is possible, to prevent bitterness; then cut either in
thin horizontal slices if lemons, or in quarters if oranges. For
cherries, strawberries, currants, etc., choose the largest and
finest, leaving stems out. Peaches should be pared and cut in
halves and sweet juicy pears may be treated in the same way, or
look nicely when pared, leaving on the stems and iced. Pineapples
should be cut in thin slices and these again divided into
quarters.
PEACHES AND CREAM.
Pare and slice the peaches just before sending to table. Cover
the glass dish containing them to exclude the air as much as
possible, as they soon change color. Do not sugar them in the
dish—they then become preserves, not fresh fruit. Pass the
powdered sugar and cream with them.
SNOW PYRAMID.
Beat to a stiff foam the whites of half a dozen eggs, add a
small teacupful of currant jelly and whip all together again. Fill
half full of cream as many saucers as you have guests, dropping in
the centre of each saucer a tablespoonful of the beaten eggs and
jelly in the shape of a pyramid.
JELLY FRITTERS.
Make a batter of three eggs, a pint of milk and a pint bowl of
wheat flour or more, beat it light; put a tablespoonful of lard or
beef fat in a frying or omelet pan, add a saltspoonful of salt,
making it boiling hot, put in the batter by the large spoonful, not
too close; when one side is a delicate brown, turn the other; when
done, take them on to a dish with a d'oyley over it; put a
dessertspoonful of firm jelly or jam on each and serve. A very nice
dessert.
STEWED APPLES. No. 1.
Take a dozen green tart apples, core and slice them, put into a
saucepan with just enough water to cover them, cover the saucepan
closely, and stew the apples until they are tender and clear; then
take them out, put them into a deep dish and cover them; add to the
juice in the saucepan a cupful of loaf sugar for every twelve
apples, and boil it half an hour, adding to the syrup a pinch of
mace and a dozen whole cloves just ten minutes before taking from
the fire; pour scalding hot over the apples and set them in a cold
place; eat ice cold with cream or boiled custard.
STEWED APPLES. No. 2.
Apples cooked in the following way look very pretty on a
tea-table and are appreciated by the palate. Select firm round
greenings, pare neatly and cut in halves; place in a shallow
stewpan with sufficient boiling water to cover them and a cup of
sugar to every six apples. Each half should cook on the bottom of
the pan and be removed from the others so as not to injure its
shape. Stew slowly until the pieces are very tender; remove to a
glass dish carefully, boil the syrup a half hour longer, pour it
over the apples and eat cold. A few pieces of lemon boiled in the
syrup add to the flavor.
BAKED PEARS.
Pare and core the pears without dividing; place them in a pan
and fill up the orifice with brown sugar; add a little water and
let them bake until perfectly tender. Nice with sweet cream or
boiled custard.
STEWED PEARS.
Stewed pears with a thick syrup make a fine dessert dish
accompanied with cake.
Peel and cut them in halves, leaving the stems on and scoop out
the cores. Put them into a saucepan, placing them close together,
with the stems uppermost. Pour over sufficient water, a cup of
sugar, a few whole cloves and some sticks of cinnamon, a
tablespoonful of lemon juice. Cover the stewpan closely, to stew
gently till the fruit is done, which will depend on the quality of
the fruit. Then take out the fruit carefully and arrange it on a
dish for serving. Boil down the syrup [Pg
371]until quite thick;
strain it and allow it to cool enough to set it; then pour it over
the fruit.
The juice could be colored by a few drops of liquid cochineal,
or a few slices of beets, while boiling. A teaspoonful of brandy
adds much to the flavor. Serve with cream or boiled custard.
BAKED QUINCES.
Take ripe quinces, pare and quarter them, cut out the seeds;
then stew them in clear water until a straw will pierce them; put
into a baking dish with half a cupful of loaf sugar to every eight
quinces; pour over them the liquor in which they were boiled, cover
closely and bake in the oven one hour; then take out the quinces
and put them into a covered dish; return the syrup to the saucepan
and boil twenty minutes; then pour over the quinces and set them
away to cool.
GOOSEBERRY FOOL.
Stew a quart of ripe gooseberries in just enough water to cover
them; when soft, rub them through a colander to remove the skins
and seeds; while hot stir into them a tablespoonful of melted
butter and a cupful of sugar. Beat the yolks of three eggs and add
that; whip all together until light. Fill a large glass fruit dish
and spread on the top the beaten whites mixed with three
tablespoonfuls of sugar. Apples or any tart fruit is nice made in
this manner.
MERINGUES OR KISSES.
A coffeecupful of fine white sugar, the whites of six eggs;
whisk the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth and with a wooden
spoon stir in quickly the pounded sugar; and have some
boards put in the oven thick enough to prevent the bottom of the
meringues from acquiring too much color. Cut some strips of paper
about two inches wide; place this paper on the board and drop a
tablespoonful at a time of the mixture on the paper, taking care to
let all the meringues be the same size. In dropping it from the
spoon, give the mixture the form of an egg and keep the meringues
about two inches apart from each other on the paper. Strew over
them some sifted sugar and bake in a moderate oven for half an
hour. As soon as they begin to color, remove them from the oven;
take each slip of paper by the two ends and turn it gently on the
table and with a small spoon take out the soft part of [Pg 372]each
meringue. Spread some clean paper on the board, turn the meringues
upside down and put them into the oven to harden and brown on the
other side. When required for table, fill them with whipped cream,
flavored with liquor or vanilla and sweeten with pounded sugar.
Join two of the meringues together and pile them high in the dish.
To vary their appearance, finely chopped almonds or currants may be
strewn over them before the sugar is sprinkled over; and they may
be garnished with any bright-colored preserve. Great expedition is
necessary in making this sweet dish, as, if the meringues are not
put into the oven as soon as the sugar and eggs are mixed, the
former melts and the mixture would run on the paper instead of
keeping its egg-shape. The sweeter the meringues are made the
crisper will they be; but if there is not sufficient sugar mixed
with them, they will most likely be tough. They are sometimes
colored with cochineal; and if kept well-covered in a dry place,
will remain good for a month or six weeks.
JELLY KISSES.
Kisses, to be served for dessert at a large dinner, with other
suitable confectionery, may be varied in this way: Having made the
kisses, heap them in the shape of half an egg, placed upon stiff
letter paper lining the bottom of a thick baking pan; put them in a
moderate oven until the outside is a little hardened; then take one
off carefully, take out the soft inside with the handle of a spoon,
and put it back with the mixture, to make more; then lay the shell
down. Take another and prepare it likewise; fill the shells with
currant jelly or jam; join two together, cementing them with some
of the mixture; so continue until you have enough. Make kisses,
cocoanut drops, and such like, the day before they are wanted.
This recipe will make a fair-sized cake basket full. It adds
much to their beauty when served up to tint half of them pale pink,
then unite white and pink. Serve on a high glass dish.
COCOANUT MACAROONS.
Make a "kiss" mixture, add to it the white meat, grated, and
finish as directed for KISSES.
ALMOND MACAROONS.
Half a pound of sweet almonds, a coffeecupful of white sugar,
the whites of two eggs; blanch the almonds and pound them to a
paste; [Pg 373]add to them the sugar and the beaten whites of eggs;
work the whole together with the back of a spoon, then roll the
mixture in your hands in balls about the size of a nutmeg, dust
sugar over the top, lay them on a sheet of paper at least an inch
apart. Bake in a cool oven a light brown.
CHOCOLATE MACAROONS.
Put three ounces of plain chocolate in a pan and melt on a slow
fire; then work it to a thick paste with one pound of powdered
sugar and the whites of three eggs; roll the mixture down to the
thickness of about one-quarter of an inch; cut it in small, round
pieces with a paste-cutter, either plain or scalloped; butter a pan
slightly, and dust it with flour and sugar in equal quantities;
place in it the pieces of paste or mixture, and bake in a hot but
not too quick oven.
LEMON JELLY. No. 1.
Wash and prepare four calf's feet, place them in four quarts of
water, and let them simmer gently five hours. At the expiration of
this time take them out and pour the liquid into a vessel to cool;
there should be nearly a quart. When cold, remove every particle of
fat, replace the jelly into the preserving-kettle, and add one
pound of loaf sugar, the rind and juice of two lemons; when the
sugar has dissolved, beat two eggs with their shells in one gill of
water, which pour into the kettle and boil five minutes, or until
perfectly clear; then add one gill of Madeira wine and strain
through a flannel bag into any form you like.
LEMON JELLY. No. 2.
To a package of gelatine add a pint of cold water, the juice of
four lemons and the rind of one; let it stand one hour, then add
one pint of boiling water, a pinch of cinnamon, three cups of
sugar; let it all come to a boil; strain through a napkin into
molds, set away to get cold. Nice poured over sliced bananas and
oranges.
WINE JELLY.
One package of gelatine, one cupful of cold water soaked
together two hours; add to this three cupfuls of sugar, the juice
of three lemons and the grated rind of one. Now pour over this a
quart of boiling water and stir until dissolved, then add a pint of
sherry wine. Strain [Pg 374]through a napkin, turn into molds
dipped in cold water and place in the ice box for several
hours.
One good way to mold this jelly is to pour some of it into the
mold, harden it a little, put in a layer of strawberries or
raspberries, or any fresh fruit in season, pour in jelly to set
them; after they have set, another layer of jelly, then another of
berries, and so fill each mold, alternating with jelly and
berries.
CIDER JELLY.
This can be made the same, by substituting clear, sweet cider in
place of the wine.
ORANGE JELLY.
Orange jelly is a great delicacy and not expensive. To make a
large dish, get six oranges, two lemons, a two-ounce package of
gelatine. Put the gelatine to soak in a pint of water, squeeze the
orange juice into a bowl, also the lemon juice, and grate one of
the lemon skins in with it. Put about two cupfuls of sugar with the
gelatine, then stir in the orange juice, and pour over all three
pints of boiling water, stirring constantly. When the gelatine is
entirely dissolved, strain through a napkin into molds or bowls wet
with cold water, and set aside to harden. In three or four hours it
will be ready for use and will last several days.
VARIEGATED JELLY.
After dividing a box of Cox's gelatine into halves, put each
half into a bowl with half a cupful of cold water. Put
three-quarters of an ounce or six sheets of pink gelatine into a
third bowl containing three-fourths of a cupful of cold water.
Cover the bowls to keep out the dust and set them away for two
hours. At the end of that time, add a pint of boiling water, a
cupful of sugar, half a pint of wine, and the juice of lemon to the
pink gelatine, and, after stirring till the gelatine is dissolved,
strain the liquid through a napkin. Treat one of the other portions
of the gelatine in the same way. Beat together the yolks of four
eggs and half a cupful of sugar, and, after adding this mixture to
the third portion of gelatine, stir the new mixture into a pint and
a third of boiling milk, contained in a double boiler. Stir on the
fire for three minutes, then strain through a fine sieve, and
flavor with a teaspoonful of vanilla extract. Place in a deep pan
two molds, each holding about three pints, and surround them with
ice and water. Pour [Pg 375]into these molds, in equal parts, the
wine jelly which was made with the clear gelatine, and set it away
to harden. When it has become set, pour in the pink gelatine, which
should have been set away in a place not cold enough to make it
harden. After it has been transferred and has become hard, pour
into the molds the mixture of eggs, sugar and gelatine, which
should be in a liquid state. Set the molds in an ice chest for
three or four hours. At serving time, dip them into tepid water to
loosen the contents, and gently turn the jelly out upon flat
dishes.
The clear jelly may be made first and poured into molds, then
the pink jelly and finally the egg jelly.
STRAWBERRY JELLY.
Strawberries, pounded sugar; to every pint of juice allow half a
package of Cox's gelatine.
Pick the strawberries, put them into a pan, squeeze them well
with a wooden spoon, add sufficient pounded sugar to sweeten them
nicely, and let them remain for one hour that the juice may be
extracted; then add half a pint of water to every pint of juice.
Strain the strawberry juice and water through a napkin; measure it
and to every pint allow half a package of Cox's gelatine dissolved
in a teacupful of water. Mix this with the juice, put the jelly
into a mold and set the mold on ice. A little lemon juice added to
the strawberry juice improves the flavor of the jelly, if the fruit
is very ripe; but it must be well strained before it is put with
the other ingredients, or it will make the jelly muddy. Delicious
and beautiful.
RECIPE FOR CHEESE CUSTARD.
For three persons, two ounces of grated parmesan cheese; the
whites of three eggs beaten to a stiff froth, a little pepper, salt
and cayenne, a little milk or cream to mix; bake for a quarter of
an hour.
ICE-CREAM.
One pint of milk, the yolks of two eggs, six ounces of sugar and
one tablespoonful of cornstarch. Scald but do not boil. Then put
the whites of the two eggs into a pint of cream; whip it. Mix the
milk and cream, flavor and freeze. One teaspoonful of vanilla or
lemon is generally sufficient.
The quantity, of course, can be increased to any amount desired,
so long as the relative proportions of the different ingredients
are observed.
PURE ICE-CREAM.
Genuine ice-cream is made of the pure sweet cream in this
proportion: Two quarts of cream, one pound of sugar; beat up,
flavor and freeze.
For family use, select one of the new patent freezers, as being
more rapid and less laborious for small quantities than the old
style turned entirely by hand. All conditions being perfect, those
with crank and revolving dashers effect freezing in eight to
fifteen minutes.
FRUIT ICE-CREAM.
Ingredients.—To every pint of fruit juice allow one
pint of cream; sugar to taste.
Let the fruit be well ripened; pick it off the stalks and put it
into a large earthen pan. Stir it about with a wooden spoon,
breaking it until it is well mashed; then, with the back of the
spoon, rub it through a hair-sieve. Sweeten it nicely with pounded
sugar; whip the cream for a few minutes, add it to the fruit, and
whisk the whole again for another five minutes. Put the mixture
into the freezer and freeze. Raspberry, strawberry, currant, and
all fruit ice-creams are made in the same manner. A little powdered
sugar sprinkled over the fruit before it is mashed assists to
extract the juice. In winter, when fresh [Pg
377]fruit is not
obtainable, a little jam may be substituted for it; it should be
melted and worked through a sieve before being added to the whipped
cream; and if the color should not be good, a little prepared
cochineal may be put in to improve its appearance. In making berry
flavoring for ice-cream, the milk should never be heated; the juice
of the berries added to cold cream, or fresh rich milk,
mixed with cold cream, the juice put in just before
freezing, or when partly frozen.
CHOCOLATE ICE-CREAM. No. 1. (Very fine.)
Add four ounces of grated chocolate to a cupful of sweet milk,
then mix it thoroughly to a quart of thick sweet cream; no
flavoring is required but vanilla. Sweeten with a cupful of sugar;
beat again and freeze.
CHOCOLATE ICE-CREAM. No. 2.
Beat two eggs very light and cream them with two cupfuls of
sugar. Scald a pint of milk and turn on by degrees, mixing well
with the sugar and eggs. Stir in this half a cupful of grated
chocolate; return to the fire and heat until it thickens, stirring
briskly; take off and set aside to cool. When thoroughly cold,
freeze.
COCOANUT ICE-CREAM.
One quart of cream, one pint of milk, three eggs, one cupful and
a half of sugar and one of prepared cocoanut, the rind and juice of
a lemon. Beat together the eggs and grated lemon rind and put with
the milk in the double boiler. Stir until the mixture begins to
thicken. Add the cocoanut and put away to cool. When cool add the
sugar, lemon juice and cream. Freeze.
CUSTARD ICE-CREAM.
Sweeten one quart of cream or rich milk with half a pound of
sugar and flavor to taste; put it over the fire in a farina-kettle;
as soon as it begins to boil, stir into it a tablespoonful of
cornstarch or rice flour which has been previously mixed smooth
with a little milk; after it has boiled a few minutes, take it off
the fire and stir in very gradually six eggs which have been beaten
until thick; when quite cold, freeze it as ice-cream.
STRAWBERRY ICE-CREAM.
Mix a cupful of sugar with a quart of ripe strawberries, let
them stand half a day, then mash and strain them through a coarse
towel, then add to the juice a full cupful of sugar and when
dissolved, beat in a quart of fresh thick cream. Raspberries,
pineapple and other fruits made the same.
FRUIT CREAM.
Make a rich, boiled custard; flavor with wine and vanilla; pour
it into a freezer. When half frozen, add pounded almonds, chopped
citron and brandy, peaches or chopped raisins. Have the freezer
half full of custard and fill up with the fruit. Mix well and
freeze again. Almost any kind of fruits that are preferred may be
substituted for the above.
TUTTI FRUTTI ICE-CREAM.
Take two quarts of the richest cream and add to it one pound of
pulverized sugar and four whole eggs; mix well together; place on
the fire, stirring constantly, and just bring to boiling point; now
remove immediately and continue to stir until nearly cold; flavor
with a tablespoonful of extract of vanilla; place in freezer and,
when half frozen, mix thoroughly into it one pound of preserved
fruits, in equal parts of peaches, apricots, gages, cherries,
pineapples, etc.; all of these fruits are to be cut up into small
pieces and mixed well with frozen cream. If you desire to
mold this ice sprinkle it with a little carmine, dissolved
in a teaspoonful of water, with two drops of spirits of ammonia;
mix in this color, so that it will be streaky or in veins like
marble.
ICE-CREAM WITHOUT A FREEZER.
Beat the yolks of eight eggs very light, and add thereto four
cupfuls of sugar, and stir well. Add to this, little by little, one
quart of rich milk that has been heated almost to boiling, beating
all the while; then put in the whites of eight eggs beaten to a
stiff froth. Then boil the mixture in a pail set inside another
containing hot water. Boil about fifteen minutes or until it is as
thick as a boiled custard, stirring steadily meanwhile. Pour into a
bowl to cool. When quite cold, beat into it three pints of rich
sweet cream and five teaspoonfuls of vanilla, or such other
flavoring as you prefer. Put it into a pail having a close-fitting
cover and pack in pounded ice and salt,—rock salt, not
the [Pg 379]common kind,—about three-fourths ice and
one-forth salt. When packed, before putting the ice on top of the
cover, beat the custard as you would batter, for five minutes
steady; then put on the cover and put the ice and salt over it, and
cover the whole with a thick mat, blanket or carpet and let it
stand for an hour. Then carefully uncover and scrape from the
bottom and sides of the pail the thick coating of frozen custard,
making every particle clear, and beat again very hard, until the
custard is a smooth, half-congealed paste. Do this thoroughly. Put
on the cover, ice, salt and blanket, and leave it for five or six
hours, replenishing the ice and salt if necessary.
FROZEN PEACHES.
One can or twelve large peaches, two coffeecupfuls of sugar, one
pint of water and the whites of three eggs beaten to a stiff froth;
break the peaches rather fine and stir all the ingredients
together; freeze the whole into form.
Frozen fruit of any kind can be made the same way; the fruit
should be mashed to a smooth pulp, but not thinned too much. In
freezing, care should be taken to prevent its getting lumpy.
FROZEN FRUITS.
The above recipe, increasing the quantity of peaches,
raspberries or whatever fruit you may use, and adding a small
amount of rich cream, make fine frozen fruits. In freezing, you
must be especially careful to prevent its getting lumpy.
LEMON ICE.
The juice of six lemons and the grated rind of three, a large
sweet orange, juice and rind; squeeze out all the juice and steep
it in the rind of orange and lemons a couple of hours; then squeeze
and strain through a towel, add a pint of water and two cupfuls of
sugar. Stir until dissolved, turn into a freezer, then proceed as
for ice-cream, letting it stand longer, two or three hours.
When fruit jellies are used, gently heat the water sufficiently
to melt them; then cool and freeze. Other flavors may be made in
this manner, varying the flavoring to taste.
PINEAPPLE SHERBET.
Grate two pineapples and mix with two quarts of water and a pint
of sugar; add the juice of two lemons and the beaten whites of four
eggs. Place in a freezer and freeze.
RASPBERRY SHERBET.
Two quarts of raspberries, one cupful of sugar, one pint and a
half of water, the juice of a large lemon, one tablespoonful of
gelatine. Mash the berries and sugar together and let them stand
two hours. Soak the gelatine in cold water to cover. Add one pint
of the water to the berries and strain. Dissolve the gelatine in
half a pint of boiling water, add this to the strained mixture and
freeze.
ORANGE-WATER ICE.
Add a tablespoonful of gelatine to one gill of water; let it
stand twenty minutes and add half a pint of boiling water; stir
until dissolved and add four ounces of powdered sugar, the strained
juice of six oranges and cold water enough to make a full quart in
all. Stir until the sugar is dissolved; pour into the freezing can
and freeze. (See LEMON ICE.)
ALMOND ICE.
Two pints of milk, eight ounces of cream, two ounces of
orange-flower water, eight ounces of sweet almonds, four ounces of
bitter almonds; pound all in a marble mortar, pouring in from time
to time a few drops of water; when thoroughly pounded add the
orange-flower water and half of the milk; pass this, tightly
squeezed, through a cloth; boil the rest of the milk with the cream
and keep stirring it with a wooden spoon; as soon as it is thick
enough, pour in the almond milk; give it one boiling, take it off
and let it cool in a bowl or pitcher before pouring it into the
mold for freezing.
CURRANT ICE.
A refreshing ice is made of currants or raspberries, or equal
portions of each. Squeeze enough fruit in a jelly-bag to make a
pint of juice; add a pint each of the water and sugar; pour the
whole, boiling hot, onto whites of three eggs, beaten to a stiff
froth, and whip the mixture thoroughly. When cool, freeze in the
usual manner. Part red raspberry juice is a much finer flavor.
Any juicy fruit may be prepared in this manner.
It depends as much upon the judgment of the cook as on the
materials used to make a good pudding. Everything should be the
best in the way of materials, and a proper attention to the rules,
with some practice, will ensure success.
Puddings are either boiled, baked or steamed; if boiled, the
materials should be well worked together, put into a thick cloth
bag, previously dipped in hot water, wringing it slightly and
dredging the inside thickly with flour; tie it firmly,
allowing room for it to swell; drop it into a kettle of
boiling water, with a small plate or saucer in the bottom to
keep it from sticking to the kettle. It should not cease boiling
one moment from the time it is put in until taken out, and the pot
must be tightly covered, and the cover not removed except when
necessary to add water from the boiling tea-kettle when the
water is getting low. When done, dip immediately in cold water and
turn out. This should be done just before placing on the table.
Or butter a tin pudding-mold or an earthen bowl; close it tight
so that water cannot penetrate; drop it into boiling water and boil
steadily the required time. If a bowl is used it should be well
buttered and not quite filled with the pudding, allowing room for
it to swell; then a cloth wet in hot water, slightly wringing it,
then floured on the inner side, and tied over the bowl, meeting
under the bottom.
To steam a pudding, put it into a tin pan or earthen dish; tie a
cloth over the top, first dredging it in flour, and set it in a
steamer. Cover the steamer closely; allow a little longer time than
you do for boiling.
Molds or basins for baking, steaming or boiling should be well
buttered before the mixture is put into them. Allow a little longer
time for steaming than for boiling.
Dumplings boiled the same way, put into little separate
cloths.
Batter puddings should be smoothly mixed and free from lumps. To
ensure this, first mix the flour with a very small portion of milk,
the yolks of the eggs and the sugar thoroughly beaten together, and
added to this; then add the remainder of the milk by degrees, then
the seasoning, then the beaten whites of eggs last. Much success in
making this kind of pudding depends upon a strict observance of
this rule; for, although the materials may be good, if the eggs are
put into the milk before they are mixed with the flour, there will
be a custard at the top and a soft dough at the bottom of your
dish.
All sweet puddings require a little salt to prevent
insipidity and to draw out the flavor of the several ingredients,
but a grain too much will spoil any pudding.
In puddings where wine, brandy, cider, lemon juice or any acid
is used, it should be stirred in last and gradually, or it is apt
to curdle the milk or eggs.
In making custard puddings (puddings made with eggs and
milk), the yolks of the eggs and sugar should be thoroughly beaten
together before any of the milk or seasoning is added, and the
beaten whites of eggs last.
In making puddings of bread, rice, sago, tapioca, etc., the eggs
should be beaten very light, and mixed with a portion of the milk,
before adding them to the other ingredients. If the eggs are mixed
with the milk, without having been thus beaten, the milk will be
absorbed by the bread, rice, sago, tapioca, etc., without rendering
them light.
The freshness of all pudding ingredients is of much importance,
as one bad article will taint the whole mixture.
When the freshness of eggs is doubtful, break each
one separately in a cup before mixing them all together. Should
there be a bad one amongst them, it can be thrown away; whereas, if
mixed with the good ones, the entire quantity would be spoiled. The
yolks and whites beaten separately make the articles they are put
into much lighter.
Raisins and dried fruit for puddings should be carefully picked
and, in many cases, stoned. Currants should be well washed, pressed
in a cloth and placed on a dish before the fire to get thoroughly
dry; they should be then picked carefully over, and every piece
of grit or stone removed from amongst them. To plump them, some
cooks pour boiling water over them and then dry them before the
fire.
Many baked pudding recipes are quite as good boiled. As a safe
rule boil the pudding twice as long as you would bake it;
and remember that a boiling pudding should never be touched after
it is once put on the stove; a jar of the kettle destroys the
lightness of the pudding. If the water boils down and more must be
added, it must be done so carefully that the mold will not hit the
side of the kettle, and it must not be allowed to stop boiling for
an instant.
Batter should never-stick to the knife when it is sent to the
table; it will do this both when less than sufficient number of
eggs is mixed with it and when it is not cooked enough; about four
eggs to the half pound of flour will make it firm enough to cut
smoothly.
When baked or boiled puddings are sufficiently solid, turn them
out of the dish they were baked in, bottom uppermost and strew over
them finely sifted sugar.
When pastry or baked puddings are not done through, and yet the
outside is sufficiently brown, cover them over with a piece of
white paper until thoroughly cooked; this prevents them from
getting burnt.
TO CLEAN CURRANTS.
Put them in a sieve or colander and sprinkle them thickly with
flour; rub them well until they are separated, and the flour, grit
and fine stems have passed through the strainer. Place the strainer
and currants in a pan of water and wash thoroughly; then lift the
strainer and currants together, and change the water until it is
clear. Dry the currants between clean towels. It hardens them to
dry in an oven.
TO CHOP SUET.
Break or cut in small pieces, sprinkle with sifted flour, and
chop in a cold place to keep it from becoming sticky and soft.
TO STONE RAISINS.
Put them in a dish and pour boiling water over them;
cover and let them remain in it ten minutes; it will soften so that
by rubbing each raisin between the thumb and finger, the seeds will
come out clean; then they are ready for cutting or chopping if
required.
APPLE DUMPLINGS.
Make a rich biscuit dough, the same as soda or baking-powder
biscuit, only adding a little more shortening. Take a piece of
dough out on the molding-board, roll out almost as thin as pie
crust; then cut into square pieces large enough to cover an apple.
Put into the middle of each piece two apple halves that have been
pared and cored; sprinkle on a spoonful of sugar and a pinch of
ground cinnamon, turn the ends of the dough over the apple and lap
them tight. Lay the dumplings in a dripping-pan buttered, the
smooth side upward. When the pans are filled, put a small piece of
butter on top of each, sprinkle over a large handful of sugar, turn
in a cupful of boiling water, then place in a moderate oven for
three-quarters of an hour. Baste with the liquor once while baking.
Serve with pudding-sauce or cream and sugar.
BOILED APPLE DUMPLINGS.
The same recipe as the above, with the exception that they are
put into a small coarse cloth well floured after being dipped in
hot water. Each cloth to be tied securely, but leaving room enough
for the dumpling to swell. Put them in a pot of boiling water and
boil three-quarters of an hour. Serve with sweet sauce. Peaches and
other fruits used in the same manner.
BOILED RICE DUMPLINGS, CUSTARD SAUCE.
Boil half a pound of rice, drain and mash it moderately fine.
Add to it two ounces of butter, three ounces of sugar, half a
saltspoonful of mixed ground spice, salt and the yolks of two eggs.
Moisten a trifle with a tablespoonful or two of cream. With floured
hands shape the mixture into balls, and tie them in floured pudding
cloths. Steam or boil forty minutes and send to table with a
custard sauce made as follows:—
Mix together four ounces of sugar and two ounces of butter
(slightly warmed). Beat together the yolks of two eggs and a gill
of cream; mix and pour the sauce in a double saucepan; set this in
a pan of hot water and whisk thoroughly three minutes. Set the
saucepan in cold water and whisk until the sauce is cooled.
SUET DUMPLINGS. No. 1.
One pint bowl of fine bread crumbs, one-half cupful of beef suet
chopped fine, the whites and yolks of four eggs beaten separately
and very light, one teaspoonful of cream of tartar sifted into half
a cupful of flour, half a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a little
water, and a teaspoonful of salt. Wet it all together with milk
enough to make a stiff paste. Flour your hands and make into balls.
Tie up in separate cloths that have been wrung out in hot water and
floured inside; leave room, when tying, for them to swell. Drop
them into boiling water and boil about three-quarters of an
hour. Serve hot, with wine sauce, or syrup and butter.
SUET DUMPLINGS. No. 2.
One cupful of suet chopped fine, one cupful of grated English
muffins or bread, one cupful of flour, half a teaspoonful of baking
powder, half a cupful of sugar, two eggs, one pint of milk, a large
pinch of salt. Sift together powder and flour, add the beaten eggs,
grated muffins, sugar, suet and milk; form into smooth batter,
which drop by tablespoonfuls into a pint of boiling milk, three or
four at a time; when done, dish and pour over the milk they were
boiled in. A Danish dish; very good.
PRESERVE DUMPLINGS.
Preserved peaches, plums, quinces, cherries or any other
sweetmeat; make a light crust, and roll a small piece of moderate
thickness and fill with the fruit in quantity to make the size of a
peach dumpling; tie each one in a dumpling cloth, well floured
inside, drop them into hot water and boil half an hour; when done,
remove the cloth, send to table hot and eat with cream.
OXFORD DUMPLINGS.
Beat until quite light one tablespoonful of sugar and the yolks
of three eggs, add half a cupful of finely chopped suet, half a
cupful of English currants, one cupful of sifted flour, in which
there has been sifted a heaping teaspoonful of baking powder, a
little nutmeg, one teaspoonful of salt and, lastly, the beaten
whites of the eggs; flour your hands and make it into balls the
size of an egg; boil in separate cloth one hour or more. Serve with
wine sauce.
LEMON DUMPLINGS.
Mix together a pint of grated bread crumbs, half a cupful of
chopped suet, half a cupful of moist sugar, a little salt and a
small tablespoonful of flour, adding the grated rind of a lemon.
Moisten it all with the whites and yolks of two eggs well
beaten and the juice of the lemon, strained. Stir it all well
together and put the mixture into small cups well buttered; tie
them down with a cloth dipped in flour and boil three-quarters of
an hour. Turn them out on a dish, strew sifted sugar over them and
serve with wine sauce.
BOILED APPLE PUFFETS.
Three eggs, one pint of milk, a little salt, sufficient flour to
thicken as waffle batter, one and one-half teaspoonfuls of baking
powder. Fill teacups alternately with a layer of batter and then of
apples chopped fine. Steam one hour. Serve hot with flavored cream
and sugar. You can substitute any fresh fruit or jams your taste
prefers.
COMMON BATTER.
For boiled puddings, fritters, etc., is made with one cupful of
milk, a pinch of salt, two eggs, one tablespoonful of melted
butter, one cupful of flour and a small teaspoonful of baking
powder. Sift the flour, powder and salt together, add the melted
butter, the eggs well beaten and the milk; mix into a very smooth
batter, a little thicker than for griddle-cakes.
ALMOND PUDDING.
Turn boiling water on to three-fourths of a pound of sweet
almonds, let it remain until the skin comes off easily; rub with a
dry cloth; when dry, pound fine with one large spoonful of
rose-water; beat six eggs to a stiff froth with three spoonfuls of
fine white sugar; mix with one quart of milk, three spoonfuls of
pounded crackers, four ounces of melted butter, and the same of
citron cut into bits; add almonds, stir altogether and bake in a
small pudding-dish with a lining and rim of pastry. This pudding is
best when cold. It will bake in half an hour in a quick oven.
APPLE PUDDING, BAKED.
Stir two tablespoonfuls of butter and half a cupful of sugar to
a cream; stir into this the yolks of four eggs, well beaten, the
juice and [Pg 387]grated rind of one lemon and half a dozen sound,
green tart grated. Now stir in the four beaten whites of the eggs,
season with cinnamon or nutmeg; bake. To be served cold with
cream.
BOILED APPLE PUDDING.
Take three eggs, three apples, a quarter of a pound of bread
crumbs, one lemon, three ounces of sugar, three ounces of currants,
half a wine-glassful of wine, nutmeg, butter and sugar for sauce.
Pare, core and mince the apples and mix with the bread crumbs,
nutmeg, grated sugar, currants; the juice of the lemon and half the
rind grated. Beat the eggs well, moisten the mixture with these and
beat all together, adding the wine last; put the pudding in a
buttered mold, tie it down with a cloth; boil one hour and a half
and serve with sweet sauce.
BIRDS' NEST PUDDING.
Core and peel eight apples, put in a dish, fill the places from
which the cores have been taken with sugar and a little grated
nutmeg; cover and bake. Beat the yolks of four eggs light, add two
teacupfuls of flour, with three even teaspoonfuls of baking powder
sifted with it, one pint of milk with a teaspoonful of salt; then
add the whites of the eggs well beaten, pour over the apples and
bake one hour in a moderate oven. Serve with sauce.
BREAD AND BUTTER PUDDING. No. 1.
Butter the sides and bottom of a deep pudding-dish, then butter
thin slices of bread, sprinkle thickly with sugar, a little
cinnamon, chopped apple, or any fruit you prefer between each
slice, until your dish is full. Beat up two eggs, add a
tablespoonful of sifted flour; stir with the three cupfuls of milk
and a little salt; pour over this the bread, let it stand one hour
and then bake slowly, with a cover on, three-quarters of an hour;
then take the cover off and brown. Serve with wine and lemon
sauce.
Pie-plant, cut up in small pieces with plenty of sugar, is fine
made in this manner.
BREAD AND BUTTER PUDDING. No. 2.
Place a layer of stale bread, rolled fine, in the bottom of a
pudding-dish, then a layer of any kind of fruit; sprinkle on a
little sugar, [Pg 388]then another layer of bread crumbs and
of fruit; and so on until the dish is full, the top layer being
crumbs. Make a custard as for pies, add a pint of milk and mix.
Pour it over the top of the pudding and bake until the fruit is
cooked.
Stale cake, crumbed fine, in place of bread, is an
improvement.
COLD BERRY PUDDING.
Take rather stale bread—baker's bread or light
home-made—cut in thin slices and spread with butter. Add a
very little water and a little sugar to one quart or more of
huckleberries and blackberries, or the former alone. Stew a few
minutes until juicy; put a layer of buttered bread in your buttered
pudding-dish, then a layer of stewed berries while hot and so on
until full; lastly, a covering of stewed berries. It may be
improved with a rather soft frosting over the top. To be eaten cold
with thick cream and sugar.
APPLE TAPIOCA PUDDING.
Put one teacupful of tapioca and one teaspoonful of salt into
one pint and a half of water, and let it stand several hours where
it will be quite warm, but not cook; peel six tart apples, take out
the cores, fill them with sugar, in which is grated a little nutmeg
and lemon peel, and put them in a pudding-dish; over these pour the
tapioca, first mixing with it one teaspoonful of melted butter and
a cupful of cold milk, and half a cupful of sugar; bake one hour;
eat with sauce.
When fresh fruits are in season, this pudding is exceedingly
nice, with damsons, plums, red currants, gooseberries or apples;
when made with these, the pudding must be thickly sprinkled over
with sifted sugar.
Canned or fresh peaches may be used in place of apples in the
same manner, moistening the tapioca with the juice of the canned
peaches in place of the cold milk. Very nice when quite cool to
serve with sugar and cream.
APPLE AND BROWN-BREAD PUDDING.
Take a pint of brown bread crumbs, a pint bowl of chopped
apples, mix; add two-thirds of a cupful of finely-chopped suet, a
cupful of raisins, one egg, a tablespoonful of flour, half a
teaspoonful of salt. Mix with half a pint of milk, and boil in
buttered molds about two hours. Serve with sauce flavored with
lemon.
APPLE-PUFF PUDDING.
Put half a pound of flour into a basin, sprinkle in a little
salt, stir in gradually a pint of milk; when quite smooth add three
eggs; butter a pie-dish, pour in the batter; take three-quarters of
a pound of apples, seed and cut in slices, and put in the batter;
place bits of butter over the top; bake three-quarters of an hour;
when done, sprinkle sugar over the top and serve hot.
PLAIN BREAD PUDDING, BAKED.
Break up about a pint of stale bread after cutting off the
crust, pour over it a quart of boiling milk; add to this a piece of
butter the size of a small egg; cover the dish tight and let it
stand until cool; then with a spoon mash it until fine, adding a
teaspoonful of cinnamon and one of nutmeg grated, half a cupful of
sugar and one-quarter of a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a
little hot water. Beat up four eggs very light and add last. Turn
all into a well-buttered pudding-dish and bake three-quarters of an
hour. Serve it warm with hard sauce.
This recipe may be steamed or boiled; very nice either way.
SUPERIOR BREAD PUDDINGS.
One and one-half cupfuls of white sugar, two cupfuls of fine,
dry bread crumbs, five eggs, one tablespoonful of butter, vanilla,
rose-water or lemon flavoring, one quart of fresh rich milk and
half a cupful of jelly or jam. Rub the butter into a cupful of
sugar; beat the yolks very light, and stir these together to a
cream. The bread crumbs soaked in milk come next, then the
flavoring. Bake in a buttered pudding-dish—a large one and
but two-thirds full—until the custard is "set." Draw to the
mouth of the oven, spread over with jam or other nice fruit
conserve. Cover this with a meringue made of the whipped whites and
half a cupful of sugar. Shut the oven and bake until the meringue
begins to color. Eat cold with cream. In strawberry season,
substitute a pint of fresh fruit for preserves. It is then
delicious. Serve with any warm sauce.
BOILED BREAD PUDDING.
To one quart of bread crumbs soaked soft in a cup of hot milk,
add one cupful of molasses, one cupful of fruit or chopped raisins,
one teaspoonful each of spices, one tablespoonful of butter, a
teaspoonful of [Pg 390]salt, one teaspoonful of soda, about a
cupful of flour sifted; boil or steam three hours. Serve with sweet
sauce.
ALMOND PUDDING. No. 1.
Put two quarts of milk into a double boiler; stir into it two
heaping tablespoonfuls of sifted flour that has been stirred to a
cream, with a little of the milk. When it boils, care should be
taken that it does not burn; when cooked, take from the fire and
let it cool. Take the skins off from two pounds of sweet almonds,
pound them fine, stir them into the milk; add a teaspoonful of
salt, a cupful of sugar, flavoring and six well-beaten eggs, the
yolks and whites beaten separately. Put bits of butter over the
top. Bake one hour. A gill of brandy or wine improves it.
ALMOND PUDDING. No. 2.
Steep four ounces of crumbs of bread, sliced, in one and
one-half pints of cream, or grate the bread; then beat half a pound
of blanched almonds very fine till they become a paste, with two
teaspoonfuls of orange-flower water; beat up the yolks of eight
eggs and the whites of four; mix all well together; put in a
quarter of a pound of loaf sugar and stir in three or four ounces
of melted butter; put it over the fire, stirring it until it is
thick; lay a sheet of paper at the bottom of a dish and pour in the
ingredients; bake half an hour. Use the remaining four whites of
eggs for a meringue for the top.
BATTER PUDDING, BAKED.
Four eggs, the yolks and whites beaten separately, one pint of
milk, one teaspoonful of salt, one teaspoonful of baking powder,
two cupfuls of sifted flour. Put the whites of the eggs in last.
Bake in an earthen dish that can be set on the table. Bake
forty-five minutes; serve with rich sauce.
BOILED BATTER PUDDING.
Sift together a pint of flour and a teaspoonful of baking powder
into a deep dish, sprinkle in a little salt, adding also a
tablespoonful of melted butter. Stir into this gradually a pint of
milk; when quite smooth, add four eggs, yolks and whites beaten
separately. Now add enough more flour to make a very stiff
batter. If liked, any kind of fruit may be stirred into this; a
pint of berries or sliced fruit. Boil two hours. Serve with cream
and sugar, wine sauce, or any sweet sauce.
CUSTARD PUDDING. No. 1.
Take five tablespoonfuls out of a quart of cream or rich milk
and mix them with two large spoonfuls of fine flour. Set the rest
of the milk to boil, flavoring it with bitter almonds broken up.
When it has boiled hard, take it off, strain it and stir it in the
cold milk and flour. Set it away to cool and beat well eight yolks
and four whites of eggs; add them to the milk and stir in, at the
last, a glass of brandy or white wine, a teaspoonful of powdered
nutmeg and half a cupful of sugar. Butter a large bowl or mold;
pour in the mixture; tie a cloth tightly over it; put it into a pot
of boiling water and boil it two hours, replenishing the pot with
hot water from a tea-kettle. When the pudding is done, let it get
cool before you turn it out. Eat it with butter and sugar stirred
together to a cream and flavored with lemon juice or orange.
CUSTARD PUDDING. No. 2.
Pour one quart of milk in a deep pan and let the pan stand in a
kettle of boiling water, while you beat to a cream eight eggs and
six tablespoonfuls of fine sugar and a teaspoon of flour; then stir
the eggs and sugar into the milk and continue stirring until it
begins to thicken; then remove the pan from the boiling water,
scrape down the sides, stir to the bottom until it begins to cool,
add a tablespoonful of peach-water, or any other flavor you may
prefer, pour into little cups and, when cold, serve.
CUSTARD PUDDINGS.
The recipe for COMMON CUSTARD, with the addition of chocolate
grated, banana, or pineapple or cocoanut, makes successfully those
different kinds of puddings.
APPLE CUSTARD PUDDINGS.
Put a quart of pared and quartered apples into a stewpan, with
half a cupful of water and cook them until they are soft. Remove
from the fire and add half a cupful of sugar, two tablespoonfuls of
butter and the grated rind and the juice of a lemon. Have ready
mixed two cupfuls of grated bread crumbs and two tablespoonfuls of
flour; add this also to the apple mixture, after which stir in two
well-beaten eggs. Turn all into a well-buttered pudding-dish and
bake forty-five minutes in a moderate oven. Serve with sugar and
cream or hard sweet sauce.
CREAM PUDDING.
Beat the yolks and whites of six eggs well and stir them into
one pint of flour, one pint of milk, a little salt and a bit of
soda dissolved in a little water, the grated rind of a lemon and
three spoonfuls of sugar; just before baking stir in one pint of
cream and bake in a buttered dish. Eat with cream.
CREAM MERINGUE PUDDING.
Stir to a cream half a cupful of sugar with the white of one egg
and the yolks of four. Add one quart of milk and mix thoroughly.
Put four tablespoonfuls of flour and a teaspoonful of salt into
another dish, and pour half a cupful of the milk and egg mixture
upon them, and beat very smooth, gradually adding the rest of the
milk and egg mixture. Turn this all into a double boiler surrounded
by boiling water; stir this until smooth and thick like cream, or
about fifteen minutes; then add vanilla or other extract. Rub all
through a strainer into a well-buttered pudding-dish. Now beat the
remaining three whites of eggs to a stiff froth, and gradually add
three tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar, and spread roughly over the
pudding. Cook for twenty minutes in a moderate oven. Serve
cold.
CORNSTARCH PUDDING.
Reserve half a cupful of milk from a quart and put the remainder
on the stove in a double boiler. Mix four large tablespoonfuls of
cornstarch and a teaspoonful of salt with the half cupful of milk;
then stir the mixture into the boiling milk and beat well for two
minutes. Cover the boiler and cook the pudding for twelve minutes;
then pour it into a pudding-dish and set in a cool place for half
an hour. When the time for serving comes, make a sauce in this
manner: Beat the whites of two eggs to a stiff, dry froth, and beat
into this two tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar. As soon as the
sugar has been well mixed with the whites, add half of a large
tumbler of currant jelly, or any other bright jelly, or any kind of
preserved fruit may be used. If you prefer, serve sugar and cream
with the pudding instead of a sauce.
COLD FRUIT PUDDING.
Throw into a pint of new milk the thin rind of a lemon, heat it
slowly by the side of the fire and keep at the boiling point until
[Pg 393]strongly flavored. Sprinkle in a small pinch of salt
and three-quarters of an ounce of the finest isinglass or gelatine.
When dissolved, strain through muslin into a clean saucepan with
five ounces of powdered sugar and half a pint of rich cream. Give
the whole one boil, stir it briskly and add by degrees the
well-beaten yolks of five eggs. Next thicken the mixture as a
custard over a slow fire, taking care not to keep it over the fire
a moment longer than necessary; pour it into a basin and flavor
with orange-flower water or vanilla. Stir until nearly cold, then
add two ounces of citron cut in thin strips and two ounces of
candied cherries. Pour into a buttered mold. For sauce use any kind
of fruit syrup.
CUBAN PUDDING.
Crumble a pound of sponge cakes, an equal quantity, or less if
preferred, of cocoanut, grated in a basin. Pour over two pints of
rich cream previously sweetened with a quarter of a pound of loaf
sugar and brought to the boiling point. Cover the basin and when
the cream is soaked up stir in it eight well-beaten eggs. Butter a
mold, arrange four or five ounces of preserved ginger around it,
pour in the pudding carefully and tie it down with a cloth. Steam
or boil slowly for an hour and a half; serve with the syrup from
the ginger, which should be warmed and poured over the pudding.
CRACKER PUDDING.
Of raspberries, may be made of one large teacupful of cracker
crumbs, one quart of milk, one spoonful of flour, a pinch of salt,
the yolks of three eggs, one whole egg and half a cupful of sugar.
Flavor with vanilla, adding a little pinch of salt. Bake in a
moderate oven. When done, spread over the top, while hot, a pint of
well-sugared raspberries. Then beat the whites of the three eggs
very stiff, with two tablespoonfuls of sugar, a little lemon
extract, or whatever one prefers. Spread this over the berries and
bake a light brown. Serve with fruit sauce made of raspberries.
BAKED CORN MEAL PUDDING, WITHOUT EGGS.
Take a large cupful of yellow meal and a teacupful of cooking
molasses and beat them well together; then add to them a quart of
boiling milk, some salt and a large tablespoonful of powdered
ginger, add a cupful of finely-chopped suet or a piece of butter
the size of an egg. [Pg 394]Butter a brown earthen pan and turn
the pudding in, let it stand until it thickens; then as you put it
into the oven, turn over it a pint of cold milk, but do not stir
it, as this makes the jelly. Bake three hours. Serve warm with hard
sauce.
This recipe has been handed down from mother to daughter for
many years back in a New England family.
BAKED CORN MEAL PUDDING, WITH EGGS.
One small cupful of Indian meal, one-half cupful of wheat flour
Stirred together with cold milk. Scald one pint of milk and stir
the mixture in it and cook until thick; then thin with cold milk to
the consistency of batter, not very thick; add half a cupful of
sugar, half a cupful of molasses, two eggs, two tablespoonfuls of
butter, a little salt, a tablespoonful of mixed cinnamon and
nutmeg, two-thirds of a teaspoonful of soda added just before
putting it into the oven. Bake two hours. After baking it half an
hour, stir it up thoroughly, then finish baking.
Serve it up hot, eat it with wine sauce, or with butter and
syrup.
BOILED CORN MEAL PUDDING.
Warm a pint of molasses and a pint of milk, stir well together;
beat four eggs and stir gradually into molasses and milk; add a
cupful of beef suet chopped fine, or half a cupful of butter, and
corn meal sufficient to make a thick batter; add a teaspoonful of
pulverized cinnamon, the same of nutmeg, a teaspoonful of soda, one
of salt, and stir all together thoroughly; dip a cloth into boiling
water, shake, flour a little, turn in the mixture, tie up, leaving
room for the pudding to swell, and boil three hours; serve hot with
sauce made of drawn butter, wine and nutmeg.
BOILED CORN MEAL PUDDING, WITHOUT EGGS.
To one quart of boiling milk, stir in a pint and a half of
Indian meal, well sifted, a teaspoonful of salt, a cupful of
molasses, half a cupful of chopped suet and a teaspoonful of
dissolved soda; tie it up tight in a cloth, allowing room for it to
swell, and boil four hours. Serve with sweet sauce.
CORN MEAL PUFFS.
Into one quart of boiling milk stir eight tablespoonfuls of
Indian meal, four tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar and a
teaspoonful of nutmeg; let the whole boil five minutes, stirring
constantly to prevent its adhering to the saucepan; then remove it
from the fire, and when it has become cool stir into it six eggs,
beaten as light as possible; mix well, and pour the mixture into
buttered teacups, nearly filling them; bake in a moderate oven half
an hour; serve with lemon sauce.
DELICATE INDIAN PUDDING.
One quart milk, two heaping tablespoonfuls of Indian meal, four
of sugar, one of butter, three eggs, one teaspoonful of salt. Boil
milk in double boiler, sprinkle the meal into it, stirring all the
while; cook twelve minutes, stirring often. Beat together the eggs,
salt, sugar and one-half teaspoonful of ginger. Stir the butter
into the meal and milk. Pour this gradually over the egg mixture.
Bake slowly one hour. Serve with sauce of heated syrup and
butter.
COTTAGE PUDDING.
One heaping pint of flour, half a cupful of sugar, one cupful of
milk, one teaspoonful of soda dissolved in the milk, one
tablespoonful of butter, two teaspoonfuls of cream of tartar rubbed
dry in the flour; flavor with nutmeg; bake in a moderate
oven; cut in slices and serve warm with wine or brandy sauce, or
sweet sugar sauce.
FRENCH COCOANUT PUDDING. No. 1.
One quart of milk, three tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, the yolks
of four eggs, half a cupful of sugar and a little salt; put part of
the milk, salt and sugar on the stove and let it boil; dissolve the
cornstarch in the rest of the milk; stir into the milk and while
boiling add the yolks and a cupful of grated cocoanut. Flavor with
vanilla.
Frosting.—The whites of four eggs beaten to a stiff
froth, half a cupful of sugar, flavor with lemon; spread it on the
pudding and put it into the oven to brown, saving a little of the
frosting to moisten the top; then put on grated cocoanut to give it
the appearance of snowflake.
COCOANUT PUDDING. No. 2.
Half a pound of grated cocoanut Then mix with it half a cupful
of stale sponge cake, crumbled fine. Stir together until very light
half a cupful of butter and one of sugar, add a coffeecupful
of rich milk or cream. Beat six eggs very light and stir them
gradually into the butter and sugar in turn, with the grated
cocoanut. Having stirred the whole very hard, add two teaspoonfuls
of vanilla; stir again, put into a buttered dish and bake until
set, or about three-quarters of an hour. Three of the whites of the
eggs could be left out for a meringue on the top of the pudding.
Most excellent.
COCOANUT PUDDING. No. 3.
A cup of grated cocoanut put into the recipes of Cracker Pudding
and Bread Pudding, makes good cocoanut pudding.
CHERRY PUDDING, BOILED OR STEAMED.
Two eggs well beaten, one cupful of sweet milk, sifted flour
enough to make a stiff batter, two large teaspoonfuls of
baking powder, a pinch of salt and as many cherries as can be
stirred in. Boil one hour or steam and serve with liquid sauce.
Cranberries, currants, peaches, cherries, or any tart fruit is
nice used with this recipe. Serve with sweet sauce.
CHERRY PUDDING. No. 2.
Make a crust or paste of two cupfuls of flour, two teaspoonfuls
of baking powder, a teaspoonful of salt; wet up with milk or water;
roll out a quarter of an inch thick, butter a large common bowl and
line it with this paste, leaving it large enough to lap over the
top; fill it with stoned cherries and half a cupful of sugar.
Gather the paste closely over the top, sprinkle a little with dry
flour and cover the whole with a linen cloth, fastening it with a
string. Put it into a pot of boiling water and cook for an hour and
a half. Serve with sweet sauce.
ENGLISH PLUM PUDDING. (The Genuine.)
Soak one pound of stale bread in a pint of hot milk and let it
stand and cool. When cold, add to it one-half pound of sugar and
the yolks of eight eggs beaten to a cream, one pound of raisins,
stoned and [Pg 397]floured, one pound of Zante currants, washed and
floured, a quarter of a pound of citron cut in slips and dredged
with flour, one pound of beef suet, chopped fine and salted,
one glass of wine, one glass of brandy, one nutmeg and a
tablespoonful of mace, cinnamon and cloves mixed; beat the whole
well together and, as the last thing, add the whites of the eight
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; pour into a cloth, previously
scalded and dredged with flour, tie it firmly, leaving room for the
pudding to swell and boil six hours. Serve with wine or brandy
sauce.
It is best to prepare the ingredients the day before and cover
closely.
CHRISTMAS PLUM PUDDING. (By Measure.)
One cupful of finely-chopped beef suet, two cupfuls of fine
bread crumbs, one heaping cupful of sugar, one cupful of seeded
raisins, one cupful of well-washed currants, one cupful of chopped
blanched almonds, half a cupful of citron, sliced thin, a
teaspoonful of salt, one of cloves, two of cinnamon, half a grated
nutmeg and four well-beaten eggs. Dissolve a level teaspoonful of
soda in a tablespoonful of warm water. Flour the fruit thoroughly
from a pint of flour; then mix the remainder as follows: In a large
bowl put the well-beaten eggs, sugar, spices and salt in one cupful
of milk. Stir in the fruit, chopped nuts, bread crumbs and suet,
one after the other, until all are used, putting in the dissolved
soda last and adding enough flour to make the fruit stick together,
which will take all the pint. Boil or steam four hours. Serve with
wine or brandy or any well-flavored sauce.
BAKED PLUM PUDDING.
It will be found best to prepare the ingredients the day before
and cover closely. Grate a loaf of stale bread, or enough for a
pint of crumbs; boil one quart of milk and turn boiling hot over
the grated bread; cover and let steep an hour; in the meantime
pick, soak and dry half a pound of currants, half a pound of
raisins, a quarter of a pound of citron cut in large slips, one
nutmeg, one tablespoonful of mace and cinnamon mixed, one cupful of
sugar, with half of a cupful of butter; when the bread is ready mix
with it the butter, sugar, spice and citron, adding a glassful of
white wine; beat eight eggs very light, and when the mixture is
quite cold, stir them gradually in; then add by degrees the raisins
and currants dredged with flour; stir the whole [Pg 398]very
hard; put it into a buttered dish; bake two hours, send to the
table warm. Eat with wine sauce, or wine and sugar. Most
excellent.
PLUM PUDDING, WITHOUT EGGS.
This delicious, light pudding is made by stirring thoroughly
together the following ingredients: One cupful of finely-chopped
beef suet, two cupfuls of fine bread crumbs, one cupful of
molasses, one of chopped raisins, one of well-washed currants, one
spoonful of salt, one teaspoonful each of cloves, cinnamon,
allspice and carbonate of soda, one cupful of milk and flour enough
to make a stiff batter. Put into a well-greased pudding-mold, or a
three-quart pail and cover closely. Set this pail into a larger
kettle, close covered, and half full of boiling water, adding
boiling water as it boils away. Steam not less than four hours.
This pudding is sure to be a success, and is quite rich for one
containing neither eggs nor butter. One-half of the above amount is
more than eight persons would be able to eat, but it is equally
good some days later, steamed again for an hour, if kept closely
covered meantime. Serve with wine sauce or common sweet sauce.
CABINET PUDDING.
Butter well the inside of a pudding-mold. Have ready a cupful of
chopped citron, raisins and currants. Sprinkle some of this fruit
on the bottom of the mold, then slices of stale sponge cake; shake
over this some spices, cinnamon, cloves and nutmeg, then fruit
again and cake, until the mold is nearly full. Make a custard of a
quart of milk, four eggs, a pinch of salt, two tablespoonfuls of
melted butter; pour this over the cake without cooking it; let it
stand and soak one hour; then steam one hour and a half. Serve with
wine sauce or a custard. Seasoned with wine.
BAKED CRANBERRY PUDDING.
Pour boiling water on a pint of bread crumbs; melt a
tablespoonful of butter and stir in. When the bread is softened,
add two eggs and beat thoroughly with the bread. Then put in a pint
of the stewed fruit and sweeten to your taste. Fresh fruit of many
kinds can be used instead of cranberries. Slices of peaches put in
layers are delicious. Serve with sweet sugar sauce.
ORANGE PUDDING. No. 1.
One pint of milk, the juice of six oranges and the rind of
three, eight eggs, half a cupful of butter, half a cupful of
granulated sugar, one tablespoonful of ground rice, paste to line
the pudding-dish. Mix the ground rice with a little of the cold
milk. Put the remainder of the milk in the double boiler, and when
it boils stir in the mixed rice. Stir for five minutes; then add
the butter and set away to cool. Beat together the sugar, the yolks
of eight eggs and whites of four. Grate the rinds and squeeze the
juice of the oranges into this. Stir all into the cooked mixture.
Have a pudding-dish holding about three quarts lined with paste.
Pour the preparation into this and bake in a moderate oven for
forty minutes. Beat the remaining four whites of the eggs to a
stiff froth and gradually beat in the powdered sugar. Cover the
pudding with this. Return to the oven and cook ten minutes, leaving
the door open. Set away to cool. It must be ice cold when
served.
ORANGE PUDDING. No. 2.
Five sweet oranges, one coffeecupful of white sugar, one pint of
milk, the yolks of three eggs, one tablespoonful of cornstarch.
Peel and cut the oranges into thin slices, taking out the seeds;
pour over them the sugar and let them stand while you make the
rest. Now set the milk in a suitable dish into another of boiling
water, let the milk get boiling hot, add a piece of butter as large
as a nutmeg, the cornstarch made smooth with a little cold milk,
and the well-beaten yolks of the eggs and a little flavoring. Stir
it all well together until it is smooth and cooked. Set it off and
pour it over the oranges. Beat the whites to a stiff froth, adding
two tablespoonfuls of sugar, spread over the top for frosting. Set
into the oven a few minutes to brown. Eat cold. Berries, peaches
and other fruits may be substituted.
BAKED LEMON PUDDING. (Queen of Puddings.)
Ingredients.—One quart of milk, two cupfuls of
bread crumbs, four eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, butter
the size of an egg, one cupful of white sugar, one large
lemon—juice and grated rind. Heat the milk and pour over the
bread crumbs, add the butter, cover and let it get soft. When cool,
beat the sugar and yolks and add to the mixture, also the grated
rind. Bake in a buttered dish until firm and [Pg 400]slightly brown, from a half to three-quarters of an
hour. When done, draw it to the door of the oven and cover with a
meringue made of the whites of the eggs, whipped to a froth with
four tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar and the lemon juice; put it
back in the oven and brown a light straw color. Eat warm, with
lemon sauce.
LEMON PUDDING.
A small cupful of butter, the grated peel of two large lemons
and the juice of one, the yolks of ten eggs and whites of five, a
cupful and a half of white sugar. Beat all together and, lining a
deep pudding-dish with puff paste, bake the lemon pudding in it;
while baking, beat the whites of the remaining five eggs to a stiff
froth, whip in fine white sugar to taste, cover the top of the
pudding (when baked) with the meringue and return to the oven for a
moment to brown; eat cold, it requires no sauce.
BOILED LEMON PUDDING.
Half a cupful of chopped suet, one pint of bread crumbs, one
lemon, one cupful of sugar, one of flour, a teaspoonful of salt and
two eggs, milk. First mix the suet, bread crumbs, sugar and flour
well together, adding the lemon peel, which should be the yellow
grated from the outside, and the juice, which should be strained.
When these ingredients are well mixed, moisten with the eggs and
sufficient milk to make the pudding of the consistency of thick
batter; put it into a well-buttered mold and boil for three and a
half hours; turn it out, strew sifted sugar over and serve warm
with the lemon sauce, or not, at pleasure.
LEMON PUDDING, COLD.
One cupful of sugar, four eggs, the whites and yolks beaten
separately, two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, one pint of milk, one
tablespoonful of butter and the juice and rind of two lemons. Wet
the cornstarch in some of the milk, then stir it into the remainder
of the milk, which should be boiling on the stove, stirring
constantly and briskly for five minutes. Take it from the stove,
stir in the butter and let it cool. Beat the yolks and sugar
together, then stir them thoroughly into the milk and cornstarch.
Now stir in the lemon juice and grated rind, doing it very
gradually, making it very smooth. Bake in a well-buttered dish. To
be eaten cold. Oranges may be [Pg
401]used in place of
lemons. This also may be turned while hot into several small
cups or forms previously dipped in cold water, place them aside; in
one hour they will be fit to turn out. Serve with cream and sugar.
Should be boiled altogether, not baked.
ROYAL SAGO PUDDING.
Three-quarters of a cupful of sago washed and put into one quart
of milk; put it into a saucepan, let it stand in boiling water on
the stove or range until the sago has well swelled. While hot, put
in two tablespoonfuls of butter with one cupful of white sugar and
flavoring. When cool, add the well-beaten yolks of four eggs, put
in a buttered pudding-dish, and bake from half to three-quarters of
an hour; then remove it from the oven and place it to cool. Beat
the whites of the eggs with three tablespoonfuls of powdered white
sugar till they are a mass of froth; spread the pudding with either
raspberry or strawberry jam, and then spread on the frosting; put
in the oven for two minutes to slightly brown. If made in summer,
be sure and keep the whites of the eggs on ice until ready for use
and beat them in the coolest place you can find, as it will make a
much richer frosting.
The small white sago called pearl is the best. The large brown
kind has an earthy taste. It should always be kept in a covered jar
or box.
This pudding, made with tapioca, is equally as good. Serve with
any sweet sauce.
SAGO APPLE PUDDING.
One cupful of sago in a quart of tepid water, with a pinch of
salt, soaked for one hour; six or eight apples pared and cored, or
quartered, and steamed tender and put in the pudding-dish; boil and
stir the sago until clear, adding water to make it thin, and pour
it over the apples; bake one hour. This is good hot, with butter
and sugar, or cold with cream and sugar.
PLAIN SAGO PUDDING.
Make the same as TAPIOCA PUDDING, substituting sago for
tapioca.
CHOCOLATE PUDDING. No. 1.
Make cornstarch pudding with a quart of milk, three
tablespoonfuls of cornstarch and three tablespoonfuls of sugar.
When done, [Pg 402]remove about half and flavor to taste, and then
to that remaining in the kettle add an egg beaten very light, and
four tablespoonfuls of vanilla chocolate grated and dissolved in a
little milk. Put in a mold, alternately the dark and light. Serve
with whipped cream or boiled custard. This is more of a blanc mange
than a pudding.
CHOCOLATE PUDDING. No. 2.
One quart of sweet milk, three-quarters of a cupful of grated
chocolate; scald the milk and chocolate together; when cool,
add the yolks of five eggs, one cupful of sugar; flavor with
vanilla. Bake about twenty-five minutes. Beat the five whites of
eggs to a stiff froth, adding four tablespoonfuls of fine sugar,
spread evenly over the top and brown slightly in the oven.
CHOCOLATE PUDDING. No. 3.
One quart of milk, fourteen even tablespoonfuls of grated bread
crumbs, twelve tablespoonfuls grated chocolate, six eggs, one
tablespoonful vanilla, sugar to make very sweet. Separate the yolks
and whites of four eggs, beat up the four yolks and two whole eggs
together very light with the sugar. Put the milk on the range, and
when it come to a perfect boil pour it over the bread and
chocolate; add the beaten eggs and sugar and vanilla; be sure it is
sweet enough; pour into a buttered dish; bake one hour in a
moderate oven. When cold, and just before it is served, have the
four whites beaten with a little powdered-sugar and flavor with
vanilla and use as a meringue.
CHOCOLATE PUDDING. No. 4.
Half a cake of chocolate broken in one quart of milk and put on
the range until it reaches boiling point; remove the mixture from
the range; add four teaspoonfuls of cornstarch mixed with the yolks
of three eggs and one cup and a half of sugar; stir constantly
until thick; remove from the fire and flavor with vanilla; pour the
mixture in a dish; beat the whites of the three eggs to a stiff
froth and add a little sugar; cover the top of the pudding with a
meringue and set in the oven until a light brown. Serve cold.
TAPIOCA PUDDING.
Five tablespoonfuls of tapioca, one quart of milk, two ounces of
butter, a cupful of sugar, four eggs, flavoring of vanilla or
bitter almonds. Wash the tapioca and let it stew gently in the milk
on the back part of the stove for a quarter of an hour,
occasionally stirring it; then let it cool, mix with it the butter,
sugar and eggs, which should be well-beaten, and flavor with either
of the above ingredients. Butter a dish, put in the pudding and
bake in a moderate oven for an hour. If the pudding is boiled, add
a little more tapioca and boil it in a buttered basin one and a
half hours.
STRAWBERRY TAPIOCA.
This makes a most delightful dessert. Soak over night a large
teacupful of tapioca in cold water; in the morning, put half of it
in a buttered yellow-ware baking-dish, or any suitable
pudding-dish. Sprinkle sugar over the tapioca; then on this put a
quart of berries, sugar and the rest of the tapioca. Fill the dish
with water, which should cover the tapioca about a quarter of an
inch. Bake in a moderately hot oven until it looks clear. Eat cold
with cream or Custard. If not sweet enough, add more sugar at
table; and in baking, if it seems too dry, more water is
needed.
A similar dish may be made, using peaches, either fresh or
canned.
RASPBERRY PUDDING.
One-quarter cup of butter, one-half cupful of sugar, two cupfuls
of jam, six cupfuls of soft bread crumbs, four eggs. Rub the butter
and sugar together, beat the eggs, yolks and whites separately,
mash the raspberries, add the whites beaten to a stiff froth, stir
all together to a smooth paste; butter a pudding dish, cover the
bottom with a layer of the crumbs, then a layer of the mixture;
continue the alternate layers until the dish is full, making the
last layer of crumbs; bake one hour in a moderate oven. Serve in
the dish in which it is baked and serve with fruit sauce made with
raspberries. This pudding may be made the same with any other kind
of berries.
PEAR, PEACH AND APPLE PUDDING.
Pare some nice ripe pears (to weigh about three-fourths of a
pound); put them in a saucepan with a few cloves, some lemon or
[Pg 404]orange peel, and stew about a quarter of an hour in
two cupfuls of water; put them in your pudding-dish, and having
made the following custard, one pint of cream or milk, four eggs,
sugar to taste, a pinch of salt and a tablespoonful of flour; beat
eggs and sugar well, add the flour, grate some nutmeg, add the
cream by degrees, stirring all the time,—pour this over the
pears and bake in a quick oven. Apples or peaches may be
substituted.
Serve cold with sweetened cream.
FIG PUDDINGS.
Half a pound of good dried figs, washed, wiped and minced, two
cupfuls of fine, dry bread crumbs, three eggs, half a cupful of
beef suet, powdered, two scant cupfuls of sweet milk, half a cupful
of white sugar, a little salt, half a teaspoonful of baking powder,
stirred in half a cupful of sifted flour. Soak the crumbs in milk,
add the eggs, beaten light, with sugar, salt, suet, flour and figs.
Beat three minutes, put in buttered molds with tight top, set in
boiling water with weight on cover to prevent mold from upsetting,
and boil three hours. Eat hot with hard sauce or butter, powdered
sugar, one teaspoonful of extract of nutmeg.
FRUIT PUDDING, CORN MEAL.
Take a pint of hot milk and stir in sifted Indian meal till the
batter is stiff; add a teaspoonful of salt and half a cup of
molasses, adding a teaspoonful of soda dissolved; then stir in a
pint of whortleberries or chopped sweet apple; tie in a cloth that
has been wet, and leave room for it to swell, or put in a
pudding-pan and tie a cloth over; boil three hours; the water must
boil when it is put in; you can use cranberries and sweet
sauce.
APPLE CORN MEAL PUDDING.
Pare and core twelve pippin apples; slice them very thin; then
stir into one quart of new milk one quart of sifted corn meal; add
a little salt, then the apples, four spoonfuls of chopped suet and
a teacupful of good molasses, adding a teaspoonful of soda
dissolved; mix these well together, pour into a buttered dish and
bake four hours; serve hot with sugar and wine sauce. This is the
most simple, cheap and luxuriant fruit pudding that can be
made.
RHUBARB OR PIE-PLANT PUDDING.
Chop rhubarb pretty fine, put in a pudding dish and sprinkle
sugar over it; make a batter of one cupful of sour milk, two eggs,
a piece of butter the size of an egg, half a teaspoonful of soda
and enough flour to make batter about as thick as for cake. Spread
it over the rhubarb and bake till done. Turn out on a platter
upside down, so that the rhubarb will be on top. Serve with sugar
and cream.
FRUIT PUDDINGS.
Fruit puddings, such as green gooseberry, are very nice made in
a basin, the basin to be buttered and lined with a paste, rolling
it round to the thickness of half an inch; then get a pint of
gooseberries and three ounces of sugar; after having made your
paste, take half the fruit and lay it at the bottom of your basin;
then add half your sugar, then put the remainder of the
gooseberries in and the remainder of the sugar; on that, draw your
paste to the centre, join the edges well together, put the cloth
over the whole, tying it at the bottom, and boil in plenty of
water. Fruit puddings of this kind, such as apples and rhubarb,
should be done in this manner.
Boil for an hour, take out of the saucepan, untie the cloth,
turn out on a dish, or let it remain in the basin and serve with
sugar over.
A thin cover of the paste may be rolled round and put over the
pudding.
Ripe cherries, currants, raspberries, greengages, plums and such
like fruit, will not require so much sugar, or so long boiling.
These puddings are also very good steamed.
SNOW PUDDING.
One-half a package Cox's gelatine; pour over it a cupful of cold
water and add one and a half cupfuls of sugar; when 'soft, add one
cupful of boiling water and the juice of one lemon; then the whites
of four well-beaten eggs; beat all together until it is light and
frothy, or until the gelatine will not settle clear in the bottom
of the dish after standing a few minutes; put it on a glass dish.
Serve with a custard made of one pint of milk, the yolks of four
eggs, four tablespoonfuls of sugar and the grated rind of a lemon;
boil.
DELMONICO PUDDING.
Three tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, the yolks of five eggs, six
tablespoonfuls of sugar; beat the eggs light, then add the sugar
and beat again till very light; mix the cornstarch with a little
cold milk; mix all together and stir into one quart of milk just as
it is about to boil, having added a little salt; stir it until it
has thickened well; pour it into a dish for the table and place it
in the oven until it will bear icing; place over the top a layer of
canned peaches or other fruit (and it improves it to mix the syrup
of the fruit with the custard part); beat the whites to a stiff
froth with two tablespoonfuls of white sugar to an egg; then put it
into the oven until it is a light brown.
This is a very delicate and delicious pudding.
SAUCER PUDDINGS.
Two tablespoonfuls of flour, two tablespoonfuls of powdered
sugar, three eggs, a teacupful of milk, butter, preserve of any
kind. Mix the flour and sugar, beat the eggs, add them to the milk,
and beat up with the flour and sugar. Butter well three saucers,
half fill them, and bake in a quick oven about twenty minutes.
Remove them from the saucers when cool enough, cut in half, and
spread a thin layer of preserves between each half; close them
again, and serve with cream.
NANTUCKET PUDDING.
One quart of berries or any small fruit, two tablespoonfuls of
flour, two tablespoonfuls of sugar; simmer together and turn into
molds; cover with frosting as for cake, or with whipped eggs and
sugar, browning lightly in the oven; serve with cream.
TOAST PUDDING.
Toast several thin slices of stale bread, removing the crust,
butter them well, and pour over them hot stewed fruit in alternate
layers. Serve warm with rich hot sauce.
PLAIN RICE PUDDING.
Pick over, wash and boil, a teacupful of rice; when soft drain
off the water; while warm, add to it a tablespoonful of cold
butter. When cool, mix with it a cupful of sugar, a teaspoonful of
grated [Pg 407]nutmeg and one of ground cinnamon. Beat up four eggs
very light, whites and yolks separately; add them to the rice; then
stir in a quart of sweet milk gradually. Butter a pudding-dish,
turn in the mixture and bake one hour in a moderate oven. Serve
warm, with sweet wine sauce.
If you have cold cooked rice, first soak it in the milk and
proceed as above.
RICE PUDDING. (Fine.)
Wash a teacupful of rice and boil it in two teacupfuls of water;
then add, while the rice is hot, three tablespoonfuls of butter,
five tablespoonful of sugar, five eggs well beaten, one
tablespoonful of powdered nutmeg, a little salt, one glass of wine,
a, quarter of a pound of raisins, stoned and cut in halves, a
quarter of a pound of Zante currants, a quarter of a pound of
citron cut in slips, and one quart of cream; mix well, pour into a
buttered dish and bake an hour in a moderate oven.
RICE MERINGUE.
One cupful of carefully sorted rice boiled in water until it is
soft; when done, drain it so as to remove all the water; cool it,
and add one quart of new milk, the well-beaten yolks of three eggs,
three tablespoonfuls of white sugar and a little nutmeg, or flavor
with lemon or vanilla; pour into a baking dish and bake about half
an hour. Let it get cold; beat the whites of the eggs, add two
tablespoonfuls of sugar, flavor with lemon or vanilla; drop or
spread it over the pudding and slightly brown it in the oven.
RICE LEMON PUDDING.
Put on to boil one quart of milk, and when it simmers stir in
four tablespoonfuls of rice flour that has been moistened in a
little milk; let it come to a boil and remove from the fire; add
one quarter of a pound of butter, and, when cool, the grated peel
with the juice of two lemons, and the yolks and beaten whites of
four eggs; sweeten to taste; one wine-glassful of wine, put in the
last thing, is also an improvement.
RICE PUDDING WITHOUT EGGS.
Two quarts of milk, two-thirds of a cupful of rice, a cupful of
sugar, a piece of butter as large as a walnut, a teaspoonful of
cinna[Pg 408]mon, a little nutmeg and a pinch of salt. Put into a
deep pudding-dish, well buttered, set into a moderate oven; stir it
once or twice until it begins to cook, let it remain in the oven
about two hours (until it is the consistency of cream). Eat
cold.
FRUIT RICE PUDDING.
One large teacupful of rice, a little water to cook it
partially; dry, line an earthen basin with part of it; fill nearly
full with pared, cored and quartered apples, or any fruit you
choose; cover with the balance of your rice; tie a cloth tightly
over the top and steam one hour. To be eaten with sweet sauce. Do
not butter your dish.
BOILED RICE PUDDING. No. 1.
One cupful of cold boiled rice, one cupful of sugar, four eggs,
a pinch of soda and a pinch of salt. Put it all in a bowl and beat
it up until it is very light and white. Beat four ounces of butter
to a cream, put it into the pudding and ten drops of essence of
lemon. Beat altogether for five minutes. Butter a mold, pour the
pudding into it and boil for two hours. Serve with sweet fruit
sauce.
BOILED RICE PUDDING. No. 2.
Wash two teacupfuls of rice and soak it in water for half an
hour; then turn off the water and mix the rice with half a pound of
raisins stoned and cut in halves; add a little salt, tie the whole
in a cloth, leaving room for the rice to swell to twice its natural
size, and boil two hours in plenty of water; serve with wine
sauce.
RICE SNOW-BALLS.
Wash two teacupfuls of rice and boil it in one teacupful of
water and one of milk, with a little salt; if the rice is not
tender when the milk and water are absorbed, add a little more milk
and water; when the rice is tender, flavor with vanilla, form it
into balls, or mold it into a compact form with little cups; place
these rice balls around the inside of a deep dish, fill the dish
with a rich soft custard and serve either hot or cold. The custard
and balls should be flavored with the same.
PRUNE PUDDING.
Heat a little more than a pint of sweet milk to the boiling
point, then stir in gradually a little cold milk in which you have
rubbed smooth a heaping tablespoonful of cornstarch; add sugar to
suit your taste, three well-beaten eggs, about a teaspoonful of
butter and a little grated nutmeg. Let this come to a boil, then
pour it in a buttered pudding-dish, first adding a cupful of stewed
prunes, with the stones taken out. Bake for from fifteen to twenty
minutes, according to the state of the oven. Serve with or without
sauce. A little cream improves it if poured over it when placed in
saucers.
BLACKBERRY OR WHORTLEBERRY PUDDING.
Three cupfuls of flour, one cupful of molasses, half a cupful of
milk, a teaspoonful of salt, a little cloves and cinnamon, a
teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a little of the milk. Stir in a
quart of huckleberries, floured. Boil in a well-buttered mold two
hours. Serve with brandy sauce.
BAKED HUCKLEBERRY PUDDING.
One quart of ripe fresh huckleberries or blueberries, half a
teaspoonful of mace or nutmeg, three eggs, well beaten, separately,
two cupfuls of sugar, one tablespoonful of cold butter, one cupful
of sweet milk, one pint of flour, two teaspoonfuls of baking
powder. Roll the berries well in the flour and add them last of
all. Bake half an hour and serve with sauce. There is no more
delicate and delicious pudding than this.
FRUIT PUDDING.
This pudding is made without cooking and is nice prepared the
day before using.
Stew currants or any small fruits, either fresh or dried,
sweeten with sugar to taste and pour hot over thin slices of
bread with the crust cut off, placed in a suitable dish, first a
layer of bread, then the hot stewed fruit, then bread and fruit,
then bread, leaving the fruit last. Put a plate over the top and,
when cool, set it on ice. Serve with sugar and cream.
This pudding is very fine made with Boston crackers split open
and placed in layers with stewed peaches.
BOILED CURRANT PUDDING.
Five cupfuls of sifted flour in which two teaspoonfuls of baking
powder have been sifted, one-half a cupful of chopped suet, half a
pound of currants, milk, a pinch of salt. Wash the currants, dry
them thoroughly and pick away any stalks or grit; chop the suet
finely; mix all the ingredients together and moisten with
sufficient milk to make the pudding into a stiff batter; tie it up
in a floured cloth, put it into boiling water and boil for three
hours and a half. Serve with jelly sauce made very sweet.
TRANSPARENT PUDDING.
A small cupful of fresh butter warmed, but not melted, one
cupful of sifted sugar creamed with the butter, a teaspoonful of
nutmeg, grated, eight eggs, yolks and whites beaten separately.
Beat the butter and sugar light and then add the nutmeg and the
beaten eggs, which should be stirred in gradually; flavor with
vanilla, almond, peach or rose-water; stir hard; butter a
deep dish, line with puff paste and bake half an hour. Then make a
meringue for the top and brown. Serve cold.
SWEET-POTATO PUDDING.
To a large sweet potato, weighing two pounds, allow half a pound
of sugar, half a pound of butter, one gill of sweet cream, one gill
of strong wine or brandy, one grated nutmeg, a little lemon peel
and four eggs. Boil the potato until thoroughly done, mash up fine,
and while hot add the sugar and butter. Set aside to cool while you
beat the eggs light and add the seasoning last. Line tin plates
with puff paste, and pour in the mixture, bake in a moderate but
regularly heated oven. When the puddings are drawn from the fire,
cover the top with thinly-sliced bits of preserved citron or quince
marmalade. Strew the top thickly with granulated white sugar and
serve, with the addition of a glass of rich milk for each person at
table.
PINEAPPLE PUDDING.
Butter a pudding-dish and line the bottom and sides with slices
of stale cake (sponge cake is best); pare and slice thin a large
pineapple, place in the dish first a layer of pineapple, then strew
with sugar, then more pineapple, and so on until all is used. Pour
over a [Pg 411]small teacupful of water and cover with slices of
cake which have been dipped in cold water; cover the whole with a
buttered plate and bake slowly for two hours.
ORANGE ROLEY POLEY.
Make a light dough the same as for apple dumplings, roll it out
into a long narrow sheet, about quarter of an inch thick. Spread
thickly over it peeled and sliced oranges, sprinkle it plentifully
with white sugar, scatter over all a teaspoonful or two of grated
orange peel, then roll it up. Fold the edges well together to keep
the juices from running out. Boil it in a floured cloth one hour
and a half. Serve it with lemon sauce. Fine.
ROLEY POLEY PUDDING. (Apple.)
Peel, core and slice sour apples; make a rich biscuit dough, or
raised biscuit dough may be used if rolled thinner; roll not quite
half an inch thick, lay the slices on the paste, roll up, tuck in
the ends, prick deeply with a fork, lay it in a steamer and steam
hard for an hour and three-quarters. Or wrap it in a pudding-cloth
well floured, tie the ends, baste up the sides, plunge into boiling
water and boil continually an hour and a half, perhaps more. Stoned
cherries, dried fruits, or any kind of berries, fresh or dried, may
be used.
FRUIT PUFF PUDDING.
Into one pint of flour stir two teaspoonfuls baking powder and a
little salt; then sift and stir the mixture into milk, until very
soft. Place well-greased cups in a steamer, put in each a spoonful
of the above batter, then add one of berries or steamed apples,
cover with another spoonful of batter and steam twenty minutes.
This pudding is delicious made with strawberries and eaten with a
sauce made of two eggs, half a cup butter, a cup of sugar beaten
thoroughly with a cup of boiling milk and one cup of
strawberries.
SPONGE CAKE PUDDING. No. 1.
Bake a common sponge cake in a flat-bottomed pudding-dish; when
ready to use, cut in six or eight pieces, split and spread with
butter and return them to the dish. Make a custard with four eggs
[Pg 412]to a quart of milk; flavor and sweeten to taste;
pour over the cake and bake one-half hour. The cake will swell and
fill the custard. Serve with or without sauce.
SPONGE CAKE PUDDING. No. 2.
Butter pudding-mold; fill the mold with small sponge cakes or
slices of stale plain cake that have been soaked in a liquid made
by dissolving one-half pint of jelly in a pint of hot water. This
will be of as fine a flavor and much better for all than if the
cake had been soaked in wine. Make a sufficient quantity of custard
to fill the mold and leave as much more to be boiled in a dish by
itself. Set the mold, after being tightly covered, into a kettle
and boil one hour. Turn out of the mold and serve with some of the
other custard poured over it.
GRAHAM PUDDING.
Mix well together one-half a coffeecupful of molasses,
one-quarter of a cupful of butter, one egg, one-half a cupful of
milk, one-half a teaspoonful of pure soda, one and one-half cupfuls
of good Graham flour, one small teacupful of raisins, spices to
taste. Steam four hours and serve with brandy or wine sauce, or any
sauce that may be preferred. This makes a showy as well as a light
and wholesome dessert, and has the merit of simplicity and
cheapness.
BANANA PUDDING.
Cut sponge cake in-slices, and, in a glass dish, put alternately
a layer of cake and a layer of bananas sliced. Make a soft custard,
flavor with a little wine, and pour over it. Beat the whites of the
eggs to a stiff froth and heap over the whole.
Peaches cut up, left a few hours in sugar and then scalded, and
added when cold to thick boiled custard, made rather sweet, are a
delicious dessert.
DRIED PEACH PUDDING.
Boil one pint of milk and while hot turn it over a pint of
bread-crumbs. Stir into it a tablespoonful of butter, one pint of
dried peaches stewed soft. When all is cool, add two well-beaten
eggs, half a cupful of sugar and a pinch of salt; flavor to taste.
Put into a well-buttered pudding-dish and bake half an hour.
SUET PUDDING, PLAIN.
One cupful of chopped suet, one cupful of milk, two eggs beaten,
half a teaspoonful of salt and enough flour to make a stiff batter,
but thin enough to pour from a spoon. Put into a bowl, cover with a