# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
Sixtieth session
Item 68 (b) of the provisional agenda*
New Partnership for Africa's Development: progress in implementation and international support: causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
Progress report of the Secretary-General
Contents
Introduction
The progress made in the implementation of the recommendations contained in the 1998 report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa (A/52/871-S/1998/318) has been monitored and reported to the General Assembly since 2000.
The present report responds to the request of the General Assembly, in its resolution 59/255 of 23 December 2004, to the Secretary-General to submit to it at its sixtieth session a further report, taking into account recent developments.
The progress made in the implementation of some of the recommendations of 1998, especially those relating to economic and social development, is dealt with in the report of the Secretary-General entitled “New Partnership for Africa's Development: third consolidated report on progress in implementation and international support” (A/60/178).
The present report should therefore be viewed as a complement to and should be read together with that report.
Overview of trends and sources of conflict in Africa
When the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa was first issued in 1998, 14 countries in the region were in a state of armed conflict or civil strife.
At present, only three African countries1 are engaged in major conflict, although a number of others are experiencing civil strife of a lower intensity, involving ethnic and religious violence.
Despite the reduction in major conflicts throughout Africa, civil strife in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the Darfur region of the Sudan have resulted in great and horrific loss of life, brutality and human dislocation; moreover, the international community's response to these crises has thus far been slow and inadequate.
Efforts to address the crisis in Darfur highlight the need for improved African Union (AU) capacity to undertake effective peacekeeping operations and therefore also the importance of the United Nations system, the European Union and other development partners increasing their support to the AU to enhance its capabilities and effectiveness.
Most African countries enjoy relatively stable political conditions and the majority have democratically elected Governments.
Under the Lomé Declaration,2 the AU opposes any unconstitutional change of government that takes place in a member State of the AU.3 The resolve of African leaders has been tested in relation to a number of Governments, most recently in Togo, where the AU resisted an unconstitutional takeover and supported the holding of elections.
Despite a number of positive trends and advances in Africa, the conditions required for sustained peace and development have yet to be consolidated throughout the continent.
The Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change delineated the key threats which, if not addressed in an effective and timely manner, may become the source of new conflicts.4 Of the six clusters of threats identified by the High-Level Panel, the two most inimical to durable peace and sustainable development in Africa are (a) economic and social threats, including poverty, infectious disease and environmental degradation and (b) internal conflict, including civil war, genocide and other large-scale atrocities.
While the attention of the international community has been forcefully directed to the importance of these threats, there is concern that the financial and human resources required to solve the multidimensional interlinked problems will fall well short of what is needed.5
Progress made in the implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General
In the past year, further progress has been made in the implementation of the recommendations of 1998.
Action taken, progress made and constraints encountered are described below.
Enhancing the environment for peace: peacemaking and prevention of conflict
The International Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes region was organized by the 11 core countries of the region with the support of the United Nations, the AU and concerned subregional organizations, to launch a process that will promote dialogue and interaction and ultimately consolidate peace in the region.
The Heads of State and Government segment of the conference, held on 19 and 20 November 2004, adopted the Dar es Salaam Declaration of Principles on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes region.
In the Declaration, the leaders expressed their collective determination to transform the Great Lakes region into a space of sustainable peace and security, political and social stability, and shared growth and development for their States and peoples.
Concerning peace and security, they committed themselves to (a) fully supporting the national peace processes in the region and refraining from any acts, statements or attitudes likely to affect them negatively; (b) fighting genocide in the Great Lakes region; (c) strengthening cooperation in the area of defence and security and promoting confidence-building; and (d) promoting common policies to put an end to the proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons, ensuring security at common borders and intensifying the fight against transborder crime and terrorism.
The International Conference was preceded in October 2004 by a regional women's meeting which adopted the Kigali Declaration.
This declaration called for legislative reforms in order to uphold women's human rights and focus attention on the specific needs of female ex-combatants in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
The recommendations contained in the Kigali Declaration were later integrated into the Dar es Salaam Declaration.
An advance was made in United Nations efforts to establish conditions for sustainable peace in northern Uganda with the organization in December 2004 of the first face-to-face meeting between a delegation from the Government of Uganda and representatives of the Lord's Resistance Army.
Peacemaking efforts have been spearheaded by a national mediator, Ms. Betty Bigombe, and supported by the international community.
The United Nations has closely monitored the situation in northern Uganda, provided political and strategic advice to the national mediator and engaged in high-level advocacy to promote a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The United Nations also continued to work with the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission with a view to finding a lasting solution to the inter-State border problem.
A tripartite summit was held in May 2005 to review progress in the demarcation process.
The Department of Political Affairs continued to provide substantial support to my Special Adviser and Mediator in his effort to help Equatorial Guinea and Gabon find a peaceful settlement to their dispute concerning sovereignty over the islet of Mbanie and delimitation of their land and maritime borders.
In addition, I have dispatched special envoys to various African States to provide timely and discreet facilitation and to prevent tensions from deteriorating into open conflict.
In 2004, the AU Peace and Security Council was established with a mandate to identify threats to peace and also to have an operational role in peacekeeping.
The AU led a number of multi-party mediation efforts to the Sudan during the past year.
These efforts concluded in agreement on a protocol on the improvement of the humanitarian situation in Darfur.
The AU capacity to intervene and mediate in conflicts has been strengthened by the establishment of the African Peace Facility, funded initially by the European Union to support AU peace operations and capacity-building.
In addition to European Union contributions, the Group of Eight (G-8) countries reported providing direct bilateral technical assistance and financial support to the AU, as well as to certain regional organizations such as the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) in order to support their conflict prevention and crisis management efforts.
Within the framework of the Joint Africa/G-8 Plan to Enhance African Capabilities to Undertake Peace Support Operations, adopted at Evian, France, in June 2003, a consultation between the AU, the regional economic communities and other partners took place in Addis Ababa in April 2005.
The participants in the consultation supported full operationalization of the African Peace and Security Architecture, including the establishment of the Panel of the Wise, the African Standby Force and the Continental Early Warning System, and the early finalization of the memorandum of understanding between the AU and the regional economic communities.
The consultation participants also agreed to cooperate in developing the “roadmap” for establishing the Continental Early Warning System to facilitate data collection and analysis for decision-making purposes.
Establishing the full complement of structures of the African Peace and Security Architecture is crucial to enabling the AU to recognize and diffuse tensions at an early stage through mediation and other intercessions.
Equally important is the need to support the establishment by the AU of the Continental Early Warning System to facilitate the formulation and implementation of appropriate and timely response strategies to potential crises.
The United Nations system must also do more to strengthen the analytical capacity of regional organizations such as IGAD and ECOWAS to avert new crises in Africa.
Peacekeeping
United Nations peacekeeping
During 2004 and 2005, United Nations peacekeeping faced tremendous challenges from a surge of operations, particularly in Africa.
Even as a major commitment in Sierra Leone was being reduced, the Security Council established a large new peacekeeping operation in the Sudan in March 2005.
The challenges facing the new operation in the Sudan are enormous, given the complexity of the situation, the sheer size of Africa's largest country, the absence of infrastructure in many areas and the proliferation of landmines around towns and logistic routes.
Creating conditions for the safe return of more than 500,000 refugees and some four million internally displaced persons will be one of the keys to the consolidation of peace.
Despite these challenges, the prospect for peace between the north and south of the Sudan is promising.
It is crucial that Governments deliver on the generous pledges of support they made to the Sudan at the April 2005 donor conference in Oslo.
In Côte d'Ivoire, the United Nations, in close cooperation with the AU and ECOWAS, has worked to create a more conducive climate for peace.
An agreement signed in Pretoria on 6 April 2005 under the auspices of the AU Mediator, President Thabo Mbeki, called on the United Nations to play a major role in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, the preparation of elections and the restoration of security in the north of the country.
The goal is to proceed with the full and unconditional implementation of the Pretoria Agreement.
The United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) replaced the United Nations Mission in Côte d'Ivoire in April 2004 and has endeavoured to prevent hostilities by patrolling the Zone of Confidence, monitoring the arms embargo established under Security Council resolution 1572 (2004) and providing security to Forces nouvelles ministers.
In Liberia, steady progress has been made with the support of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) which has contributed significantly to creating a stable security environment, establishing a functional government, disarming, demobilizing, rehabilitating and reintegrating ex-combatants, and commencing the return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Preparations for the 11 October 2005 elections remain on course and the restructuring of the Liberian military is proceeding.
The Government will need continued assistance so that it can deliver basic services and extend its authority nationwide, while addressing concerns about the lack of transparency in the collection and use of public revenues.
The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) continued to make progress in complying with the benchmarks established for it by the Security Council, which include strengthening the capacity of the Sierra Leonean armed forces and police to maintain security and stability nationwide, as well as consolidating State authority throughout the country.
The ongoing challenges will require a strong presence of the United Nations system after the departure of UNAMSIL, to help Sierra Leone consolidate peace.
In Western Sahara, efforts continue to be made to overcome the deadlock so that the people can exercise their right to self-determination.
Meanwhile, the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) maintained its support of confidence-building measures, led by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), including the exchange of family visits between Western Sahara and the refugee camps in the Tindouf area of Algeria.
The Burundi peace process remained on track, with several positive developments, including the holding of a successful referendum on the post-transition constitution on 28 February 2005, the signing of a declaration on the cessation of hostilities and the holding of local council elections in June 2005.
The United Nations also supported efforts to establish an international judicial commission of inquiry in Burundi.
The feasibility report on establishing the commission was published in March 2005 and proposed the creation of a twin mechanism, a mixed truth commission and a special chamber within the court system to bring to justice those bearing the greatest responsibility for crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes and to end the climate of impunity.
The United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) brought greater peace and stability to the Temporary Security Zone and adjacent areas between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
UNMEE urged the parties to begin peaceful dialogue in order to address outstanding issues and proceed with the demarcation of the border without further delay.
In this regard, I have encouraged the international community to intensify efforts to help the parties along such a path to lasting peace.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite some progress by the Transitional Government in extending its authority, power-sharing was complicated by the fragile relations between its members.
Preparations for elections were initiated and a draft constitution was adopted by the National Assembly.
The United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) assisted in ensuring that the country's constitutional framework and its electoral laws were consistent with internationally accepted principles.
The March 2005 announcement by the Forces démocratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) of their intention to renounce violence against Rwanda and to enter the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process was an important development.
Despite MONUC preparations for repatriating the remaining FDLR combatants, there has been no tangible progress in that respect since the March announcement.
UNHCR, however, helped some 9,000 civilians to return to Rwanda last year from the rain forest of eastern Congo, where tens of thousands of additional Rwandan civilians were believed to be living more than 10 years after the start of the conflict.
African peacekeeping missions
The AU is becoming a significant factor in peacekeeping in Africa.
The first AU full-fledged peacekeeping operation, the African Mission in Burundi, was deployed from April 2003 until responsibility for peace operations was turned over to the United Nations Operations in Burundi (ONUB), effective 1 June 2004, in line with Security Council resolution 1545 (2004).
In December 2004, the Government of the Sudan, the Justice and Equality Movement and the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army requested the AU to operationalize the African Mission in Sudan rapidly and fully and strengthen the Ceasefire Commission to ensure effective implementation of the Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement and the agreed Protocols thereto.
Regarding Somalia, the AU mission to Mogadishu endeavoured to prepare a safe environment for the anticipated peacebuilding mission of IGAD.
ECOWAS has initiated an effort to develop subregional brigades for the African Standby Force and has been involved in peace-related operations, such as conducting a mediator's visit to Liberia and an ECOWAS mission to Côte d'Ivoire in cooperation with the United Nations mission in 2004.
United Nations support for regional and subregional peacekeeping efforts
A major focus of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has been to cooperate with and to develop mutually supportive peacekeeping activities with African regional and subregional organizations.
In cooperation with the Department of Political Affairs, it has assisted the AU in developing the concepts for the emerging continental peace and security architecture, including the African Standby Force.
In May 2004, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations provided technical assistance to improve the AU Situation Room and early warning capability.
The assistance mission, conducted jointly with the European Union, was aimed at completing the third phase of the project to enhance the AU information and crisis management capacity.
In all United Nations missions where the AU has observers or some other presence, including those in Western Sahara (MINURSO), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), Burundi (ONUB), Liberia (UNMIL), Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and Eritrea-Ethiopia (UNMEE), the two organizations work closely together, supporting and complementing each other's efforts.
The United Nations Assistance Cell in Addis Ababa actively supported the AU in developing the plan for the African Mission in Sudan and in managing the operation.
The cell includes military, police and logistics experts.
The United Nations is currently reviewing an AU request to expand the remit of the United Nations Assistance Cell to provide logistical, planning and management support on all peacekeeping matters.
The United Nations has provided logistical and other technical support for operations in the ECOWAS area and “re-hatted” the ECOWAS troops in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Côte d'Ivoire.
The two organizations are cooperating in controlling the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
Cooperation is facilitated through the United Nations peacekeeping operations in the area, as well as the through the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political Affairs have agreed to provide capacity-building support through a staff exchange programme with African regional organizations.
In June 2005, the two departments hosted seven staff members of the ECOWAS Observation and Monitoring Centre for short-term training with relevant divisions of the United Nations Secretariat.
The United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) supports regional and subregional organizations in developing capacity to play an active role in conflict prevention and resolution.
UNOWA has facilitated and coordinated information exchange with a view to addressing cross-cutting issues confronting the West African subregion, such as small arms proliferation and movement of rebels across borders.
C. Post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction activities
Developing a more comprehensive and integrated post-conflict recovery and reconstruction approach is key to preventing the vestiges of past conflict from disrupting fledgling peace and stability.
In this section, the range of actions and programmes that have been initiated to support post-conflict recovery are reviewed.
The New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) secretariat has been tasked by the AU with developing a strategic policy framework for post-conflict reconstruction.
The objective of the NEPAD African Post-Conflict Reconstruction Policy Framework is to establish an African-led agenda for post-conflict reconstruction and to address the nexus between its peace, security, development and humanitarian dimensions in Africa.
The Framework seeks to encourage mutual consistency at a programme and policy level between the AU/NEPAD, regional economic communities, member States, civil society and the private and financial sectors in transitional countries, on the one hand, and the international and non-governmental organizations, humanitarian aid providers and private contractors that constitute the range of external actors, on the other hand.
A regional workshop, in which numerous development partners participated, was held in October 2004 to discuss the role of NEPAD and the development of the Policy Framework.
Inputs from the workshop were incorporated in the strategic policy framework for post-conflict reconstruction on the continent.
The Framework which was completed in June 2005 will be submitted to relevant partners and stakeholders.
Promotion of human security and human rights in Africa
Ensuring basic human security is critical to sustaining post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction in Africa.
It requires that people from all cultural, religious and ethnic groups be protected and empowered.
International organizations, especially those operating in the humanitarian and developmental domains, need to address the diverse threats to human security in a comprehensive and coherent manner.
For this purpose, the United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, managed by the Human Security Unit of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has been providing support for projects carried out by United Nations organizations in post-conflict countries, such as the Sudan, Burundi and Liberia.
Human security at the community and individual level, as mentioned in my report “In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all” (A/59/2005) is important for durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
In Uganda, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) convened a workshop on the protection of civilians, in Kampala in September 2004, for national and local government officials, United Nations agencies, NGOs and civil society.
The workshop identified key challenges and action that could be taken to improve the protection of civilians, particularly those affected by the conflict in northern Uganda.
A national protection network was developed which is now being implemented through protection working groups.
Similarly, in Togo, the OCHA West African Regional Office in Dakar organized a workshop on protection of civilians and international humanitarian law for government officials and representatives of civil society, to support the promotion of human rights.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to combat violence against civilians, including sexual and gender-based violence and harassment of humanitarian personnel, OCHA regularly meets with senior government officials and representatives of the armed forces to advocate for better compliance.
United Nations multidimensional peacekeeping operations include human rights officers who help monitor the human rights situation and mainstream human rights protection approaches within all mission activities.
Efforts are made through mission bulletins and radio stations to campaign for the protection and promotion of human rights to enhance a culture of peace.
For example, protection groups chaired by UNOCI and comprising United Nations agencies, NGOs and government representatives held regular meetings to discuss human rights issues in the host country and issued periodic reports in an effort to raise awareness and ensure accountability.
Support in re-establishing governmental structures and the rule of law
United Nations peace support activities are aimed at promoting a peaceful environment and the rule of law to help prevent relapses into conflict.
The Organization's multidimensional peacekeeping missions often include civilian police, civil affairs and electoral campaign components that work closely with local authorities and concerned agencies in the mission area to establish firm ground for post-conflict peacebuilding and the development of democratic governance.
Specific measures taken to address causes of conflict include support to Governments for re-establishing their authority over their national territories through the restoration of judicial structures and the rule of law, assistance in comprehensive electoral reform and the rehabilitation of administrative infrastructures.
In Côte d'Ivoire, UNOCI has been coordinating closely with the Government of National Reconciliation, the AU and ECOWAS to address the multiple causes of conflict in that country.
In Sierra Leone, where UNAMSIL is drawing down, the mission and the United Nations country team are implementing a transitional strategy aimed at addressing root causes of the conflict and building national capacity for conflict prevention and lasting peace.
Assistance is provided through diplomatic contacts, inter-agency collaboration and humanitarian networks.
With the support of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and in collaboration with UNAMSIL, the Government of Sierra Leone is developing a national crisis management programme and strategy under the Office of National Security.
The Security Council adopted resolution 1580 (2004), extending and revising the mandate of the United Nations Peace-Building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) until December 2005.
Under the revised mandate, the Office supports efforts to enhance political dialogue and promote national reconciliation and respect for the rule of law and human rights.
UNOGBIS strengthens the efforts of all national stakeholders to ensure the full restoration of constitutional normality, including through the holding of free and transparent presidential elections.
In April 2005, a Special Envoy of the Secretary-General was appointed for Guinea-Bissau to facilitate peaceful and credible presidential elections as an important transitional step towards the full restoration of constitutional order and stability.
The two Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on African countries emerging from conflict set up by the Economic and Social Council for Guinea-Bissau and Burundi have proved to be flexible and efficient mechanisms for bringing development partners together in support of countries which are searching for recovery and stability.
Both groups have undertaken missions in the field and held consultations with government authorities, major socio-economic stakeholders, United Nations agencies, including the Bretton Woods institutions, civil society organizations, donors and other development partners.
The operations of these Ad Hoc Advisory Groups have led to demand for the creation of similar mechanisms for other African countries emerging from conflicts.
Promotion of a culture of peace
United Nations peacekeeping missions are often engaged in the promotion of confidence-building measures between conflicting parties, civic organizations and various sectors of the population.
In cooperation with United Nations country teams, missions promote national reconciliation through peace education, establish community conflict resolution mechanisms and encourage implementation of truth and reconciliation commission recommendations.
They assist in developing programmes for inter-party dialogue to encourage interaction and regular consultation between parties in the Government and the opposition.
In conjunction with civic and religious organizations, they carry out community-based reconciliation activities at the grass-roots level.
United Nations public information and outreach sections work in close collaboration with the local press to promote peace and to diminish negative uses of the media, such as inciting ethnic hatred and violence.
UNMIL in Liberia and UNOCI in Côte d'Ivoire use their own radio stations to provide impartial news coverage and programming designed to promote a culture of peace and national reconciliation.
The Department of Political Affairs provided substantive support to my Special Representative for Somalia and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) in order to assist my efforts to advance the cause of peace and reconciliation through contacts with Somali leaders, civic organizations and Member States.
From 2002 to 2004 UNPOS/Department of Political Affairs worked to support the Somali National Reconciliation Conference under the auspices of IGAD to assist Somali leaders in establishing the Transitional Federal Government in October 2004.
UNPOS played the lead role in coordinating international support for the Transitional Federal Government to implement the agreements reached at the Somali National Reconciliation Conference and bring greater peace and stability to the country.
Controlling illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons
Control of the illicit traffic in small arms is an important national and cross-border concern in creating and maintaining a peaceful environment.
In Sierra Leone, UNAMSIL and UNDP provided support for the arms for development programme that removed small arms and light weapons from circulation in return for incentives based on community development projects.
The programme had a significant impact on confidence-building in local communities.
At the request of the Prime Minister of Côte d'Ivoire, UNOCI in collaboration with UNDP organized a meeting on small arms and light weapons from 17 to 20 May 2005 in Grand Bassam.
The meeting resulted in the adoption of a pilot programme on small arms and light weapons control and an international framework for the national commission on small arms and light weapons.
At the subregional level, a small arms and light weapons control project covering Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea has been developed at the initiative of UNDP and initial funding from donors for it is being sought.
In 2003, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa launched the small arms transparency and control regime in Africa project involving 10 countries: Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Djibouti, Gabon, Kenya, Mali, Mozambique, Nigeria, South Africa and Togo.
To date, almost all these countries have established national commissions for the fight against the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
Since the beginning of 2005, the project has moved into its second phase, which consists of taking stock of national capacity for the production of small arms and light weapons and ammunition.
In an effort to promote transparency in regard to small arms and light weapons, the United Nations Regional Centre, in collaboration with the AU, the Government of Mali and the UNDP Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery, organized a workshop in Mali on “Promoting transparency in the flows of small arms and light weapons in Africa”.
The workshop provided participants with an opportunity to learn about reporting techniques developed by the UNDP Bureau to enable Governments to prepare their national reports on implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was adopted by the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in July 2001.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and stability
Comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes constitute an important component of multidimensional peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction efforts.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration consists not only of reducing weapons circulation and disbanding armed groups, but also involves the reintegration of combatants into society.
While peace operations are often responsible for the disarmament and demobilization phases, they can also assist in the longer-term goal of reintegrating former combatants into civilian life, with the help of Governments and aid agencies.
If the expected benefits of peace do not materialize, many combatants or other neglected groups, such as unemployed youth, return to arms, either in their own country or in one of the other fragile neighbouring States faced with instability.
Adequate and more predictable sources of funding for reintegration and rehabilitation activities are therefore urgently needed.
In West Africa and the Great Lakes Region, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process has also included supporting efforts to repatriate ex-combatants to their places of origin.
UNMIL in Liberia disarmed and demobilized over one hundred thousand persons as part of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration exercises that ended in October 2004, during which time the Mission also oversaw the destruction of weapons and ammunition handed in by former combatants.
In Côte d'Ivoire, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process of UNOCI included verifying the withdrawal by the Forces nationales armées de Côte d'Ivoire (FANCI) and the Forces nouvelles of heavy weapons from the boundaries of the Zone of Confidence to agreed locations, which took place between 21 and 24 April 2005.
UNOCI will provide technical advice for and monitor the dismantling of the militias, as well as destroy weapons collected during the disarmament process.
After the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme in Sierra Leone was officially concluded, with over 55,000 ex-combatants having gone through the regular reintegration process, the focus shifted to community participation and reintegration, with particular emphasis on youth.
In Sierra Leone, the Government and the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa of the United Nations co-organized a conference on disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and stability in Africa from 21 to 23 June 2005 in Freetown.
It brought together over 100 African disarmament, demobilization and reintegration practitioners and stakeholders, as well as their international partners, to share experience and ideas on ways to improve the design, operationalization and implementation of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes.
The conference recommended the setting up of an operational network of African disarmament, demobilization and reintegration practitioners, strengthening the link between disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and peacebuilding programmes, supporting national ownership and addressing the regional dimension of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Other current initiatives include the Stockholm Initiative on Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration, which reviews funding, political and peacebuilding aspects of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, and the United Nations Inter-Agency Working Group on Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration which works to improve the way the United Nations collectively designs, implements and monitors programmes.
United Nations peace missions support the peace process in host countries by funding quick impact projects aimed at improving the living conditions of war-affected people and assisting in the rehabilitation of local economies.
Resources available for quick impact projects are used to finance projects in the areas of health, education, water and sanitation to contribute to the alleviation of hardship produced by the conflicts.
Sixty-two such projects costing approximately $630,000 have been approved since the establishment of UNOCI.
Projects are implemented in conjunction with governmental organizations and NGOs that possess the necessary expertise in these areas.
The mission in Sierra Leone has used quick impact programmes to help in the reintegration of ex-combatants, who have contributed to small-scale agriculture and infrastructure projects that have had a beneficial impact on the local communities, as well as on the demobilized ex-combatants.
Addressing economic and social challenges
Besides helping to address the root causes of conflicts, United Nations missions that operate in the same region coordinate their efforts to address cross-border security, as well as economic and social challenges, such as issues concerning youth and child soldiers, HIV/AIDS and illicit trade in natural resources.
Regular high-level meetings of the special representatives of the Secretary-General and force commanders are held to enable them to draw up joint plans of action and programmes focusing on issues of subregional concern.
Young people constitute the majority of the African population and are perceived as the future of the continent and its best opportunity of finding sustainable solutions to its most critical problems.
However, the worsening conditions for this vital section of the population, in particular high unemployment combined with a high incidence of HIV/AIDS, and poor access to health and educational services, have become a potential source of threat to peace and stability in the continent.
Young people need to be integrated as productive members into society through employment and vocational training.
Post-conflict countries such as Rwanda, Liberia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone have a pool of child soldiers who, when demobilized, lack employable skills and job opportunities.
Today, thousands of children continue to be abducted to serve as soldiers with armed forces and groups throughout Africa and I urge the international community and African Governments to give the utmost priority to addressing the critical issues of youth and unemployment, and in particular the debilitating problems of child soldiers.
In response to Security Council resolution 1308 (2000) of 17 July 2000 and the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth special session on 27 June 2001 (resolution S-26/2, annex), which called on the international community to address HIV/AIDS within the peacekeeping environment, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) has provided support to African Governments and civil society to strengthen their response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Uniformed services report much higher HIV/AIDS prevalence rates than the general population.
UNAIDS is working to ensure that the uniformed services become an important partner in the fight against HIV/AIDS, both within their ranks and in the broader community.
Through close partnerships with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, United Nations country teams and other United Nations agencies, UNAIDS has assisted national uniformed services from 30 countries in Africa, most recently the Sudan, Mozambique and South Africa.
UNAIDS has also advocated for and supported technical capacity within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to mainstream HIV/AIDS policy development and implementation at headquarters and at the mission level by financing an HIV/AIDS policy adviser in the Department.
The policy adviser develops guidelines and standard operating procedures for missions and assists in the recruitment of HIV/AIDS advisers for all major peacekeeping missions.
Currently, there are advisers in seven peacekeeping missions in Africa.
UNAIDS and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations are working together to initiate and implement HIV/AIDS outreach activities, both in host nations and in African troop-contributing countries.
The illegal exploitation of natural resources in conflict-prone and conflict-ridden countries is one of the contributory causes of conflict and of its recurrence, as experienced in Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone and Liberia, where natural resources have provided major funding for the perpetuation of wars.
There is a need to continue to address this issue and utilize a range of instruments to limit the trade in conflict resources, including targeted sanctions against persons, products or regimes, certification schemes and the creation of expert panels to investigate illicit commercial activities in conflict zones, as has been done in Liberia and Sierra Leone.
The Kimberley Process was developed in May 2000 as part of an international consultation process to stem the flow of conflict diamonds.
Since the launch of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, substantial progress has been made towards its implementation.
The Certification Scheme now encompasses all the significant diamond-producing countries, accounting for more than 99.8 per cent of global production, and is helping channel more diamonds into official government mechanisms in countries affected by conflict diamonds.
The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme remains crucial in contributing to the consolidation of peace and in averting a potential resumption of hostilities.
In Sierra Leone, UNAMSIL has been actively engaged in supporting the Government to ensure its control over diamonds.
As a result of this support, the Government of Sierra Leone has been able to extend its authority throughout the country, including in diamond mining areas, which has helped it to significantly increase official exports of diamonds.
Mobilizing resources for the reintegration of refugees and internally displaced persons
The United Nations system has supported efforts to mobilize development resources for the reintegration and rehabilitation of refugees, and to advocate for the early involvement of development actors in the transition period between humanitarian relief and development activities.
The continent again saw massive population movements during the past year.
At the end of 2004, Africa was home to over 13 million of the world's 25 million internally displaced persons.
The reintegration of returnees often poses a challenge and requires solid partnerships with a number of actors, including Governments and bilateral and multilateral agencies in order to share responsibilities and agree upon the way forward.
The inter-agency “4Rs” (repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and reconstruction) strategy is well under way in Sierra Leone, north-west Somalia, Angola and Liberia.
This integrated strategy involving all relevant stakeholders is designed to bridge effectively the gap between relief and longer-term development.
UNHCR continues to work closely with Governments and regional organizations to ensure adequate early warning of and planning for potential forced population movements.
It also provides emergency preparedness and response training for Governments, regional organizations, national NGOs and other partners in Africa.
In the peacebuilding context, a complete rebuilding of national justice systems and local administrative bodies is often required.
UNHCR, in collaboration with other agencies, contributes to these efforts in returnee areas.
It continues its capacity-building projects for national refugee administrations, including eligibility committees, to ensure that refugees have access to adequate refugee status determination procedures and receive protection counselling and interventions from the relevant government authorities and judicial bodies.
The Inter-Agency Internal Displacement Division of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs was established in July 2004 with the main objective of promoting system-wide improvements in the response to the needs of the internally displaced persons, as well as to provide targeted support to specific country situations.
Owing to widespread concern about insufficient protection for internally displaced persons in several conflict-ridden countries, the Division is currently exploring a number of initiatives to enhance their protection.
A more coordinated response to protection and assistance for internally displaced persons could help stabilize volatile political situations and prevent further population displacement, including cross-border movement.
Enhancing the role of women in conflict prevention and resolution, and in peacebuilding
The Security Council, in its resolutions 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 and 1366 (2001) of 30 August 2001, has addressed the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding.
The United Nations, in particular through the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), has supported women's equal participation and full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and security.
UNIFEM supported the Sierra Leone Law Reform Commission to facilitate a series of national consultations on discriminatory laws and women's rights, leading to a gender equality bill.
UNIFEM has built up a network of women's organizations, bringing women from opposing sides of the conflict together in dialogue to help them play a more significant role in the formal peace process.
UNIFEM has also supported the Network of Women Parliamentarians of Central Africa and has worked with women in Burundi to support the implementation of the Arusha Peace Accords.
UNIFEM also worked with women's organizations and partners to support women during the elections that were held in March 2004 in Rwanda.
These efforts resulted in a woman contesting the presidency and in women being selected for 48 per cent and 30 per cent of the seats in Parliament and the Senate, respectively.
Women were appointed to 32 per cent of Cabinet positions in the new Government.
Regarding gender and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, UNIFEM and the Canadian International Development Agency funded the first organization for demobilized women in the Great Lakes Region, the Ndabaga Association of Women Ex-Combatants in Rwanda.
Over 200 female ex-combatants from across the country attended a meeting in August 2004 which highlighted the lack of adequate attention being paid to the needs of women in the regional disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes and created opportunities for programming on gender and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in the subregion.
A new strategic partnership between UNIFEM and the World Bank is leading the Multi-country Demobilization and Reintegration Program for the greater Great Lakes Region.
Progress has been made in developing policies and guidelines relating to protection and assistance for women.
Yet, violence against women continues and often increases even as armed conflict draws to an end.
Gender-specific threats to women and girls compound the challenges of ensuring their protection and the delivery of aid.
Gender mainstreaming must increasingly be reflected in the work of United Nations organizations involved in peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction.
E. Financial and technical assistance to address underlying causes of conflict and support sustainable development
In its resolution 59/255, the General Assembly noted the support offered by the United Nations system in the context of conflict prevention and peace consolidation and called on Member States, in particular donor countries, as well as other development partners and relevant regional and subregional organizations, to continue to provide financial and technical assistance, in a coordinated and sustained manner, to support activities in Africa.6
The G-8 members have established significant new sources of finance for the AU African Peace and Security Architecture, provided capacity-building support to the AU Peace and Security Directorate and collectively doubled official development assistance since 2001 with a view to supporting the achievement in Africa of key Millennium Development Goals, such as poverty reduction.7
The World Bank has addressed the unique needs of conflict-affected countries in several of its country assistance strategies.
Furthermore, to facilitate recovery among the poorest African countries afflicted by conflict, the World Bank employs special guidelines for exceptional International Development Association (IDA) post-conflict allocations.
The primary objective of IDA re-engagement in the poorest post-conflict environments is to facilitate the transition to sustainable peace after hostilities have ceased and to support the resumption of economic and social development.
Additionally, the World Bank's Low-Income Countries under Stress Trust Fund and Post-Conflict Fund provide flexible sources of grant funding for many conflict-affected areas in Africa.
The World Bank also continues to support several demobilization and reintegration projects across the continent, perhaps most prominently the Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program for the greater Great Lakes Region.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) also helps countries emerging from conflict develop a coherent macroeconomic framework to serve as a basis for the disbursement of donor support.
IMF provides some post-conflict emergency assistance to countries that are not yet ready to implement the economic policies under the IMF traditional lending facilities.
IMF has identified capacity-building as a key instrument for helping countries that are emerging from conflict to re-establish essential institutions and assists through the provision of technical assistance and training and the posting of resident representatives and advisers.
The World Food Programme (WFP) works directly with African Governments to tackle food insecurity by providing food aid and technical assistance to address the major symptoms and causes of food insecurity faced by Governments throughout sub-Saharan Africa.
In 2003 and 2004, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) designed and implemented agricultural and rural development programmes and fostered participation and empowerment of the rural poor as a building block of the community-driven development approaches which form a crucial part of the long-term vision of democratic governance.
The United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) has continued to strengthen and expand its cooperation with the United Nations Secretariat in its activities in Africa.
UNIDO organized a ministerial round-table discussion on “Promoting productive capacity initiatives in Least Developed Countries and Africa” during the high-level segment of the Economic and Social Council in June 2004.
The meeting identified strategic constraints faced by the African countries that must be removed as part of the Africa Productive Capacity Initiative.
The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) has provided assistance to 16 African countries in the context of the joint International Trade Centre (ITC)/UNCTAD/World Trade Organization (WTO) integrated technical assistance programme to selected least developed and other African countries.
UNCTAD has also collaborated with other agencies in the context of the UNDP/AU project for trade capacity development for poverty reduction and human development for sub-Saharan Africa.
The integrated framework for trade-related technical assistance to support least developed countries in their trade and trade-related activities is being implemented in 23 African least developed countries.
The main objective of the World Trade Organization in its technical assistance for African countries is to enhance Africa's capacity to participate in the multilateral trading system.
The WTO secretariat's technical assistance plans for 2004 and 2005 continue to accord priority to the delivery of technical assistance to developing and least developed countries in Africa.
The Department of Economic and Social Affairs has coordinated the Africa Governance Inventory, a flexible management tool assisting African Governments and their development partners to improve programming, coordination, monitoring, evaluation and mobilization of resources in governance.
The inventory is also useful for sharing governance experience in Africa through the World Wide Web and for promoting regional partnerships.
Conclusions and recommendations
Many recent trends in Africa have been positive.
The number of major conflicts has been reduced, the innovative African Peer Review Mechanism has been initiated to support national efforts to enhance political, economic and corporate governance, and the continent has recorded improved growth rates, albeit insufficient to ensure achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, such as that of halving poverty by 2015.
Continuing efforts and support by the international community, including United Nations organizations, are necessary to reduce poverty and disease and to raise governmental capacity to provide services and security, and remain key to sustaining peace and development on a long-term basis.
Another important factor in addressing the causes of conflict and contributing to durable peace and sustainable development in Africa is the commitment of the international community, including United Nations organizations, to allocate increased financial, human and technical resources to support regional, subregional and national security and development efforts in Africa.
The international community should support efforts to provide adequate resources dedicated to capacity-building of regional organizations.
Early recognition of potential conflicts is critical to protecting lives and the social and economic fabric of societies.
The African Union's continental early warning system should be established as a matter of priority and should be complemented by enhanced collaboration with the United Nations.
Given the determination of the African Union to strengthen its peacekeeping operations and to take the lead in such efforts in Africa, it is vital for the international community to provide the necessary financial support to develop African Union peacekeeping capacity and to establish the African Standby Force.
In my report “In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all”, consideration of the use of United Nations-owned equipment and assessed contributions to assist African peacekeeping is recommended.
These are matters that require strong support from Member States, in particular contributors and members of the Security Council.
In the light of the growing demands for increased United Nations assistance to strengthen African Union Headquarters and peacekeeping capabilities, the United Nations has been providing limited logistical support to its African partners by stretching its existing resources, including logistics and technical training conducted by Department of Peacekeeping Operations at its main logistics base in Brindisi, Italy, as well as facilitating contacts with those that have the capability to assist.
However, since additional crucial technical and institutional support to African organizations is needed in order to develop common standards and operating procedures for all peacekeeping operations, attention is drawn to the recommendations made in my report on enhancement of African peacekeeping capacity of 30 November 2004 (A/59/591).
Careful consideration must be given to the options set forth therein, including the establishment of a revolving fund to enable African States to obtain strategic sea and airlift capabilities.
Close coordination among all partners involved in peacekeeping and peace support activities will be essential in order to optimize the comparative advantages of the various parties and maximize impact.
The United Nations must play an active part in such coordination and in providing peacekeeping training for African troops.
The United Nations continues to encourage consultations among key stakeholders to harmonize positions and avoid duplication of initiatives.
Given the increasing number of actors involved in these efforts, it is also important to improve coordination and cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations, particularly in respect of the division of responsibilities between regional, subregional and United Nations peacekeeping forces, and to ensure the harmonization of decisions of the Security Council and the African Union's Peace and Security Council.
Training programmes for United Nations and African peacekeepers should include clear information and guidelines in relation to HIV/AIDS and zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse, a policy which the United Nations has already adopted.
While virtually all United Nations organizations and many Member States are already contributing to enhancing peace and development in Africa, efforts must be dramatically strengthened to restore security, provide for the safe return of internally displaced persons and refugees, promote and monitor human rights and increase income-generating activities, especially for demobilized ex-combatants.
Notes
1 Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan; see “Africa, Conflict, Peace and Governance Monitor, 2005”, African Centre for Development and Strategic Studies, Dokun Publishing House, Ibadan, Nigeria 2005.
2 Declaration on the Framework for an OAU Response to Unconstitutional Changes of Government, adopted by the Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, Lomé, July 2000 (AHG/Decl.5(XXXVI)).
3 See Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, article 7.1.g.
4 “A more secure world: our shared responsibility”, Report of the Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Changes” (see A/59/565), Part two.
5 Mobilizing International Support to Unleash Africa's Potential: From Rhetoric to Action, Report of the Secretary-General's Advisory Panel on International Support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development (June 2005); Millennium Project report, Investing in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals (2005); Report of the United Kingdom Commission for Africa, Our Common Interest (2005); and “In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all”, Report of the Secretary-General (A/59/2005).
6 Additional information provided by United Nations system organizations and Governments will be made available on the website of the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa at http://www.un.org/africa/osaa.
7 “Progress report by the G8 Africa Personal Representatives on implementation of the Africa Action Plan”, G8 Gleneagles, 2005, pp. 2-6.