# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
Sixtieth session
Organization of the sixtieth regular session of the General Assembly, adoption of the agenda and allocation of items
First report of the General Committee
Contents
Introduction
At its 1st meeting, on 13 September 2005, the General Committee considered a memorandum by the Secretary-General relating to the organization of the sixtieth regular session and future sessions of the General Assembly, the adoption of the agenda and the allocation of items (A/BUR/60/1 and Add.1).
A summary of the discussions will appear in the summary record of the meeting (A/BUR/60/SR.1).
The General Committee took note of the provisions of the following resolutions which are reflected in the present document under the relevant sections:
(a) Annex I (Guidelines on the Rationalization of the Agenda of the General Assembly) to resolution 48/264 of 29 July 1994, entitled “Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”;
(b) The annex to resolution 51/241 of 31 July 1997, entitled “Strengthening of the United Nations system”;
(c) Paragraph 1 of resolution 52/163 of 15 December 1997, entitled “Amendment to rule 103 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly”;
(d) The annex to resolution 55/285 of 7 September 2001, entitled “Revitalization of the General Assembly: improving the efficiency of the General Assembly”;
(e) Resolution 56/509 of 8 July 2002, entitled “Amendments to rules 30, 31 and 99 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly”;
(f) Resolution 57/301 of 13 March 2003, entitled “Amendment to rule 1 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and opening date and duration of the general debate”;
(g) Resolution 58/126 of 19 December 2003, entitled “Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”;
(h) Resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004, entitled “Further measures for the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”;
(i) Resolution 59/313 of 12 September 2005, entitled “A strengthened and revitalized General Assembly”.
The General Committee also took note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the reform of the United Nations, entitled “Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for further change” (A/58/395 and Corr.1) and “In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all” (A/59/2005 and Add.1-3).
Organization of the session
General Committee
The General Committee took note of rule 40 of the rules of procedure and document A/56/1005 (paras.
9 and 10) pertaining to the functions of the Committee.
The General Committee also took note of paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 58/316 pertaining to the functions of the General Committee, in particular subparagraphs (d) to (h), according to which the General Committee shall conduct a review of the proposed programme of work for the forthcoming session of the General Assembly; continue to consider the further biennialization, triennialization, clustering and elimination of items of the customary agenda of the General Assembly; continue to schedule informal briefings on topical issues; recommend to the Assembly a programme of, and format for, interactive debates on the items of its agenda; and continue to consider ways and means to further improve its working methods to increase its efficiency and effectiveness in all aspects.
The General Committee also took note that, at the outset of each session, each Vice-President of the General Assembly should designate a liaison person for the duration of the session.
This designation may be made by means of a letter to the President (resolution 55/285, annex, para.
B. Rationalization of work
The General Committee took note of the following General Assembly resolutions and report of the Secretary-General in relation to the administrative and financial functioning of the Organization:
(a) Resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986, entitled “Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations”;
(b) Resolution 48/264 of 29 July 1994, entitled “Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”;
(c) Resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997, entitled “Renewing the United Nations: a programme for reform”;
(d) Resolution 58/126 of 19 December 2003, entitled “Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”;
(e) Resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004, entitled “Further measures for the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”;
(f) Resolution 59/313 of 12 September 2005, entitled “A strengthened and revitalized General Assembly”;
(g) Report of the Secretary-General on the review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations (A/56/82).
The General Committee also took note of paragraph 14 of the annex to resolution 55/285, which reads:
As regards implementation of paragraph 7 of the annex to resolution 51/241, the President of the General Assembly, after consideration by the Assembly of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization, shall inform the Assembly of his assessment of the debate on the report in order for the Assembly to determine the need for further action.
The General Committee draws to the attention of the General Assembly paragraph 3 of the annex to resolution 58/316 pertaining to the practices and working methods of the Main Committees.
The General Committee also draws to the attention of the General Assembly that the Main Committees shall meet in substantive session only after the end of the general debate and that the First Committee and the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) shall not meet simultaneously and may consider meeting in a sequential manner during the regular session of the General Assembly.
This arrangement shall not apply if it affects their respective identities, programmes of work and effective consideration of their agendas (resolution 51/241, annex, paras.
31 and 36).
C. High-level Plenary Meeting of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly
The General Committee took note of paragraph 1 of resolution 58/291 of 6 May 2004, on the follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit and integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields, which reads:
Decides to convene in New York in 2005, at the commencement of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, a high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly with the participation of Heads of State and Government …
The General Committee also took note of paragraphs 3 and 4 of resolution 59/145 of 17 December 2004, in which the General Assembly decided that the High-level Plenary Meeting would be composed of six plenary meetings, on the basis of two meetings a day, and four interactive round-table sessions to be held in concurrence with plenary meetings, and that a separate meeting on Financing for Development would be held within the framework of the High-level Plenary Meeting.
The General Committee recalled resolution 59/291 of 15 April 2005 on the preparation for and organization of the High-level Plenary Meeting, in which the General Assembly decided that the separate meeting on Financing for Development would be held on Wednesday, 14 September, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Closing date of the session
The General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that the sixtieth session of the Assembly recess on Tuesday, 13 December 2005 and close on Monday, 11 September 2006 (rule 2 of the rules of procedure and para.
4 of annex V to the rules of procedure).
The General Committee also recommends to the General Assembly that, during the main part of the session, the First Committee complete its work by Tuesday, 1 November, the Sixth Committee by Wednesday, 9 November, the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) by Thursday, 10 November, the Third Committee by Wednesday, 23 November, the Second Committee by Tuesday, 6 December and the Fifth Committee by Friday, 9 December 2005.
E. Schedule of meetings
The General Committee took note of the fact that, in view of financial constraints, meetings at Headquarters are no longer serviced beyond 6 p.m. or on weekends, with the exception of the plenary of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
Consequently, meetings of the Main Committees during the sixtieth session, including informal meetings, should start promptly at 10 a.m. and be adjourned by 6 p.m. on weekdays.
The General Committee recalled that, in accordance with Assembly resolution 59/291, the plenary meetings during the High-level Plenary Meeting will begin at 9 a.m. and end at 7 p.m.
The General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that, during the final week of Ramadan, from 31 October to 4 November 2005, when local time will be Eastern Standard Time, the hours of the plenary meetings and the meetings of the Main Committees will be from 9.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m. and from 2.30 p.m. to 5.30 p.m. at the latest.
The General Committee took note of paragraph 1 (b) of the annex to resolution 58/316, which reads:
(b) With effect from the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly, the meetings of the plenary Assembly shall normally be held on Mondays and Thursdays.
The General Committee also took note of resolution 59/313 of 12 September 2005, in which the General Assembly strongly urged all officers presiding over General Assembly meetings to start such meetings on time.
Furthermore, the General Committee took note of the fact that measures introduced to reduce costs relating to overtime will be strictly enforced.
The General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that, in accordance with past practice, it waive the requirement that at least one third of the members of the Assembly in the case of plenary meetings and one quarter of the members of a Main Committee in the case of Main Committee meetings be present in order to declare a meeting open and to permit the debate to proceed.
This recommendation is made on the understanding that such a waiver would not imply any permanent change in the provisions of rules 67 and 108 of the rules of procedure and that the requirement of the presence of a majority of the members for any decision to be taken would be maintained.
General debate
The General Committee draws to the attention of the General Assembly that, in accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution 59/145, the general debate at the sixtieth session shall be held from Saturday, 17 September, to Friday, 23 September, and from Monday, 26 September, to Wednesday, 28 September 2005, on the understanding that these arrangements shall in no way create a precedent for the general debate at future sessions.
The General Committee also brings to the attention of the General Assembly that the list of speakers for each day shall be completed and no speakers will be transferred to the next day, notwithstanding the implications for hours of work.
Furthermore, there shall be no time limits for the general debate but the General Assembly will indicate a voluntary guideline of up to 15 minutes for each statement.
The General Committee also brings to the attention of the General Assembly that, pursuant to paragraph 7 of the annex to resolution 58/126, the theme “For a stronger and more effective United Nations: follow-up to and implementation of the High-level Plenary Meeting in September 2005” has been proposed for the general debate at the sixtieth session.
Conduct of the meetings, length of statements, explanations of vote, right of reply, points of order and concluding statements
The General Committee draws the attention of the General Assembly to the relevant rules of procedure regarding the conduct of meetings, namely, rules 35, 68, 72, 73, 99 (b), 106, 109, 114 and 115.
The General Committee also draws to the attention of the General Assembly that explanations of vote should be limited to 10 minutes; that, when the same draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the Committee; and that delegations should exercise their right of reply at the end of the day whenever two meetings have been scheduled for that day and whenever such meetings are devoted to the consideration of the same item (decision 34/401, paras.
6-8 (A/520/Rev.15, annex VI)).
The General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that points of order be limited to five minutes.
With a view to streamlining the procedures of the General Assembly and as another cost-saving measure, the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that it review the recommendations contained in paragraph 22 of the annex to resolution 51/241 and paragraph 23 of document A/52/855, regarding the length of statements.
The General Committee also recommends to the General Assembly that, in order to save time at the end of the session, the practice of making concluding statements in the General Assembly and its Main Committees should be dispensed with except for statements by the presiding officers (decision 34/401, para.
17 (A/520/Rev.15, annex VI)).
The General Committee brings to the attention of the General Assembly resolution 59/313, in which the Assembly invited Member States that are aligned with statements already made by a chair of a group of Member States, where possible, to focus additional interventions that they make in their national capacity on points that have not already been adequately addressed in the statements of the groups in question, bearing in mind the sovereign right of each Member State to express its national position.
H. Records of meetings
The General Committee took note of the fact that, as at past sessions, during the sixtieth session verbatim records will continue to be provided for the plenary meetings of the General Assembly and the meetings of the First Committee, and summary records will be provided to the other Main Committees and the General Committee of the Assembly.
Furthermore, the General Committee draws to the attention of the General Assembly that the practice of reproducing statements in extenso as separate documents has been discontinued for all its subsidiary organs that are entitled to summary records and that any exceptions to this rule may be made by the body concerned only if the statements are to serve as bases for discussion and if, after hearing a statement of the relevant financial implications, the body decides that one or more statements in extenso may be included in the summary record, or reproduced as separate documents or as annexes to authorized documents (resolution 38/32 E, paras.
8 and 9).
The General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that the practice of not reproducing in extenso statements made in a Main Committee should be maintained for the sixtieth session.
Resolutions
The General Committee brings to the attention of the General Assembly that:
• Whenever possible, resolutions requesting the discussion of a question at a subsequent session should not call for the inclusion of a separate new item and such discussion should be held under the item under which the resolution was adopted (decision 34/401, para.
32 (A/520/Rev.15, annex VI)).
• Efforts should be made to reduce the number of resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
Resolutions should request reports of the Secretary-General only in cases where that would be indispensable for facilitating the implementation of these resolutions or the continued examination of the question.
• In order to ensure that resolutions have greater political impact, they should be short, in particular as regards the preambular parts, and should focus more on action-oriented operative paragraphs (resolution 57/270 B, para.
• Whenever possible, for the adoption by the General Assembly of agreed texts of resolutions and decisions, informal consultations should be carried out with the widest possible participation of Member States (resolution 45/45, annex, para.
1 (A/520/Rev.15/Amend.1, annex VIII, para.
The General Committee noted and decided to bring to the attention of the General Assembly that the Secretary-General encourages Member States to transmit all draft resolutions and decisions in electronic form as well as on paper; and that the Secretary-General wishes to inform the Member States that the submitters are responsible for ensuring that the electronic and paper versions of the draft resolutions and decisions are identical in content.
J. Documentation
The General Committee draws to the attention of the General Assembly that the Assembly, including its Main Committees, should merely take note of those reports of the Secretary-General or subsidiary organs which do not require a decision by the Assembly and should neither debate nor adopt resolutions on them, unless specifically requested to do so by the Secretary-General or the organ concerned (decision 34/401, para.
28 (A/520/Rev.15, annex VI)).
The General Committee also draws the attention of the General Assembly to section III of resolution 57/283 B regarding the timely issuance of documents in the six official languages of the General Assembly.
The General Committee further draws the attention of the General Assembly to resolution 59/313, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to ensure that documentation and reports are issued well in advance, in keeping the six-week rule for the issuance of official documentation simultaneously in all official languages.
The General Committee draws the attention of the General Assembly to resolutions 48/264 and 55/285, in which the Assembly emphasized that restraint should be exercised in making requests for new reports and requested more integrated reports, and to resolution 57/270 B, in which it recognized the need to avoid requesting duplicative reports from the Secretary-General.
The General Committee also draws to the attention of the General Assembly that:
• Resolutions should contain requests for observations from States or reports by the Secretary-General insofar as they are likely to facilitate the implementation of the resolutions or the continued examination of the question (resolution 45/45, annex, para.
10 (A/520/Rev.15/Amend.1, annex VIII, para.
• Member States and entities of the United Nations system should make a serious effort to submit their replies and inputs to requests for information or views pursuant to resolutions of the General Assembly within the prescribed deadlines (resolution 55/285, annex, para.
• Member States, when seeking additional information, are encouraged to request that they be provided with the information either orally or, if in writing, in the form of information sheets, annexes, tables and the like (resolution 59/313, para.
The General Committee further draws the attention of the General Assembly to paragraph 6 of the annex to resolution 58/316 concerning documentation.
Questions relating to the programme budget
The General Committee draws the attention of the General Assembly to rule 153 of the rules of procedure, which reads:
No resolution involving expenditure shall be recommended by a committee for approval by the General Assembly unless it is accompanied by an estimate of expenditures prepared by the Secretary-General.
No resolution in respect of which expenditures are anticipated by the Secretary-General shall be voted by the General Assembly until the Administrative and Budgetary Committee (Fifth Committee) has had an opportunity of stating the effect of the proposal upon the budget estimates of the United Nations.
The General Committee also draws the attention of the General Assembly to paragraphs 12 and 13 of decision 34/401 (A/520/Rev.15, annex VI), which read:
It is imperative that Main Committees should allow sufficient time for the preparation of the estimate of expenditures by the Secretariat and for its consideration by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee and that they should take this requirement into account when they adopt their programme of work.
Furthermore:
(a) A mandatory deadline, not later than 1 December, should be established for the submission to the Fifth Committee of all draft resolutions with financial implications;
(b) The Fifth Committee should, as a general practice, consider accepting without debate the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the financial implications of draft resolutions up to a prescribed limit, namely, $25,000 on any one item;
(c) Firm deadlines should be set for the early submission of the reports of subsidiary organs which require consideration by the Fifth Committee;
(d) A minimum period of forty-eight hours should be allowed between the submission and the voting of a proposal involving expenditure in order to allow the Secretary-General to prepare and present the related statement of administrative and financial implications.
The General Committee further draws the attention of the General Assembly to regulation 5.9 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation (ST/SGB/2000/8; first adopted in resolution 37/234, annex; most recently amended in section III of resolution 53/207), which reads:
Regulation 5.9.
No council, commission or other competent body shall take a decision involving either a change in the programme budget approved by the General Assembly or the possible requirement of expenditure unless it has received and taken account of a report from the Secretary-General on the programme budget implications of the proposal.
Furthermore, the General Committee draws the attention of the General Assembly to paragraph 6 of resolution 35/10 A, which reads:
Decides that all proposals affecting the schedule of conferences and meetings made at sessions of the General Assembly shall be reviewed by the Committee on Conferences when administrative implications are being considered under the requirements of rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly.
The General Committee also draws the attention of the General Assembly to section VI of resolution 45/248 B on procedures for administrative and budgetary matters, which states that the Assembly:
Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters;
Reaffirms also the role of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
Expresses its concern at the tendency of its substantive Committees and other intergovernmental bodies to involve themselves in administrative and budgetary matters;
Invites the Secretary-General to provide all intergovernmental bodies with the required information regarding procedures for administrative and budgetary matters.
(See also section III below.
L. Observances and commemorative meetings
Considering past practice, the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that it adopt a format for commemorative meetings that includes statements by the President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General, the chairmen of the five regional groups and the representative of the host country.
Special conferences
The General Committee draws the attention of the General Assembly to the following:
• The Committee on Conferences recommended that the General Assembly should instruct the Main Committees to review the number of special conferences of the United Nations already proposed and scheduled in their respective fields of activity prior to deciding upon the scheduling of new and additional special conferences, thus bearing in mind the relevant portions of resolution 33/55 (recommendation 6 of the Committee on Conferences, adopted by the Assembly in decision 34/405, para.
(b)).
• The decision of the General Assembly that no more than five special conferences should take place in a given year and that no more than one special conference should be convened at the same time should be strictly implemented.
• The existing principle that United Nations bodies should meet at their respective established headquarters, as provided for in resolution 40/243, should be strictly enforced.
Whenever the Assembly accepts an invitation from the Government of a Member State to hold a conference or meeting away from established headquarters, the additional cost should be borne in full by that Government.
The methods of budgeting these costs should be improved so as to ensure that all additional costs are accounted for.
Observations on the organization of the work of the General Assembly
With regard to rule 153 of the rules of procedure, on the financial implications of resolutions, and paragraph 13 (d) of decision 34/401, which requires a minimum period of forty-eight hours before action is taken on a proposal so as to allow the Secretary-General to prepare the programme budget implications of drafts before the Assembly, the General Committee draws the attention of the Assembly to the fact that, in most cases, more than forty-eight hours are required for the Secretary-General to review the programme budget implications of proposals before the Assembly.
The General Committee also draws the attention of the Assembly to the fact that, in accordance with rule 78 of the rules of procedure, proposals have to be submitted well in advance of their consideration, in order to ensure that copies have been circulated not later than the day preceding the meeting at which they will be considered.
Adoption of the agenda
The General Committee considered the draft agenda of the sixtieth session submitted by the Secretary-General in his memorandum (A/BUR/60/1 and Add.1).
All proposals for the inclusion of items in the agenda of the sixtieth session have been communicated to Member States in the following documents:
(a) Provisional agenda of the sixtieth regular session (A/60/150);
(b) Supplementary list of items proposed for inclusion in the agenda of the sixtieth session (A/60/200).
The items proposed for inclusion are listed in the agenda which appears in paragraph 61 below.
In paragraph 2 (a) of the annex to resolution 58/316, the General Assembly decided, inter alia, that the agenda of the General Assembly should be organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization, as contained in the medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 (or in the strategic framework, as appropriate), with an additional heading for “Organizational, administrative and other matters”, for the purpose of giving a sense of structure to the work of the Assembly.
For the period 2006-2007, the priorities are contained in paragraph 8 of resolution 59/278 of 23 December 2004.
The General Committee took note of the relevant resolutions pertaining to the review of the agenda, namely, annex I to resolution 48/264, the annex to resolution 51/241, the annex to resolution 55/285, paragraphs 2 and 4 of the annex to resolution 58/316, and paragraph 60 of resolution 57/270 B, in which the General Assembly stated that the General Committee should ensure better coordination of the agendas of the Second and Third Committees.
Bearing in mind the extremely heavy workload of the General Assembly and the need to make the most effective use of scarce resources, the General Committee took note of the suggestion by the Secretary-General to consider deferring to a later session items for which decisions or action are not required at the current session (resolution 51/241, annex, paras.
The General Committee took note of decision 49/426 of 9 December 1994, whereby the General Assembly decided that the granting of observer status in the General Assembly should in the future be confined to States and to those intergovernmental organizations whose activities covered matters of interest to the Assembly.
With regard to item 18 of the draft agenda (Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte), the General Committee decided to postpone to a later date its consideration of the inclusion of the item.
In connection with item 39 of the draft agenda (Question of the Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da India), the General Committee decided to recommend that the consideration of the item be deferred to the sixty-first session and that the item be included in the provisional agenda of that session.
With regard to item 42 of the draft agenda (A proactive role for the United Nations in maintaining peace in the Taiwan Strait), the General Committee decided not to recommend its inclusion in the agenda of the sixtieth session.
With regard to item 74 of the draft agenda (Holocaust remembrance), the General Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under heading D (Promotion of human rights).
In connection with item 156 of the draft agenda (Observer status for the Latin American Integration Association in the General Assembly), the General Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters).
With regard to item 157 of the draft agenda (Observer status for the Common Fund for Commodities in the General Assembly), the General Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters).
In connection with item 158 of the draft agenda (Question of the representation of the 23 million people of Taiwan in the United Nations), the General Committee decided not to recommend its inclusion in the agenda of the sixtieth session.
Taking into account paragraphs 48 to 60 above, the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following agenda:
Agenda organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization
Opening of the session by the President of the General Assembly.
Minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Credentials of representatives to the sixtieth session of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee.
Election of the President of the General Assembly.
Election of the officers of the Main Committees.8
Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly.8
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and allocation of items: reports of the General Committee.
General debate.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Report of the Security Council.
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored democracies.
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict.
Prevention of armed conflict.
The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development.
The situation in the Middle East.
Question of Palestine.
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic.
The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security.
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba.
Question of Cyprus.
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic of the Congo.9
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).9
The situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti.
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences for the established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and security.9
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and aggression against Kuwait.9
Declaration of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity on the aerial and naval military attack against the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by the present United States Administration in April 1986.9
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Assistance in mine action.
Effects of atomic radiation.
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories.
Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects.
Questions relating to information.
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations.
Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations.
Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources.
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian questions.
The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
Report of the Economic and Social Council.
Global Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations.
Culture of peace.
Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children.
Follow-up to the outcome of the twenty-sixth special session: implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS.
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields.
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa.
Sport for peace and development:
(a) Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal;
(b) International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
Information and communication technologies for development.
Macroeconomic policy questions:
(a) International trade and development;
(b) International financial system and development;
(c) External debt crisis and development.
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development.
Sustainable development:
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development;
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States;
(c) International Strategy for Disaster Reduction;
(d) Protection of global climate for present and future generations of mankind;
(e) Sustainable development in mountain regions;
(f) Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy, including the implementation of the World Solar Programme 1996-2005;
(g) Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa;
(h) Convention on Biological Diversity;
(i) Rendering assistance to poor mountain countries to overcome obstacles in socio-economic and ecological areas.
Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat).
Globalization and interdependence:
(a) Globalization and interdependence;
(b) Science and technology for development;
(c) International migration and development;
(d) Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such assets to the countries of origin.
Groups of countries in special situations:
(a) Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries;
(b) Specific actions related to the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing countries: outcome of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation.
Eradication of poverty and other development issues:
(a) Implementation of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006);
(b) Women in development;
(c) Human resources development.
Operational activities for development:
(a) Operational activities for development of the United Nations system;
(b) South-South cooperation: economic and technical cooperation among developing countries.
Training and research:
(a) United Nations Institute for Training and Research;
(b) United Nations System Staff College in Turin, Italy.
Towards global partnerships.
Global road safety crisis.
Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly.
Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family.
Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing.
Advancement of women.
Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”.
C. Development of Africa
New Partnership for Africa's Development: progress in implementation and international support:
(a) New Partnership for Africa's Development: progress in implementation and international support;
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
Promotion of human rights
Promotion and protection of the rights of children.
Indigenous issues.
Elimination of racism and racial discrimination:
(a) Elimination of racism and racial discrimination;
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.
Right of peoples to self-determination.
Human rights questions:
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments;
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives;
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;
(e) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Holocaust remembrance (see para.
E. Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance:
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations;
(b) Special economic assistance to individual countries or regions;
(c) Strengthening of international cooperation and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster;
(d) Assistance to the Palestinian people;
(e) Emergency international assistance for peace, normalcy and reconstruction of war-stricken Afghanistan.
Promotion of justice and international law
Report of the International Court of Justice.
Oceans and the law of the sea:
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea;
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments.
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
Report of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law.
Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its thirty-eighth session.
Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-seventh session.
Report of the International Criminal Court.
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization.
Scope of legal protection under the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
Disarmament
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Reduction of military budgets:
(a) Reduction of military budgets;
(b) Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures.
Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security.
Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons: report of the Conference on Disarmament.
Question of Antarctica.
Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace.
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty.
Consolidation of the regime established by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco).
Verification in all its aspects, including the role of the United Nations in the field of verification.
Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament.
Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East.
Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Prevention of an arms race in outer space.
General and complete disarmament:
(a) Notification of nuclear tests;
(b) Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes;
(c) Reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons;
(d) Transparency in armaments;
(e) National legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods and technology;
(f) Missiles;
(g) Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control;
(h) Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation;
(i) Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
(j) Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction;
(k) Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and collecting them;
(l) Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments;
(m) Nuclear disarmament;
(n) Relationship between disarmament and development;
(o) Reducing nuclear danger;
(p) Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction;
(q) Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons;
(r) Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction;
(s) Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas;
(t) The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects;
(u) Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context;
(v) Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels;
(w) Regional disarmament;
(x) Prevention of the illicit transfer and unauthorized access to and use of man-portable air defence systems;
(y) The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation;
(z) Information on confidence-building measures in the field of conventional arms;
(aa) Bilateral strategic nuclear arms reductions and the new strategic framework;
(bb) Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia;
(cc) United Nations conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers in the context of nuclear disarmament;
(dd) Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus.
Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly:
(a) Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa;
(b) United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament;
(c) United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean;
(d) United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific;
(e) United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa;
(f) Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons.
Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session:
(a) Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters;
(b) United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research;
(c) Report of the Conference on Disarmament;
(d) Report of the Disarmament Commission.
The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East.
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.
Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region.
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction.
Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security.
H. Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
Crime prevention and criminal justice.
International drug control.
Measures to eliminate international terrorism.
Organizational, administrative and other matters
Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations.
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization.
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs:
(a) Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council;
(b) Election of eighteen members of the Economic and Social Council;
(c) Election of five members of the International Court of Justice.
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections:
(a) Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination;
(b) Election of twenty-nine members of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme;
(c) Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme;
(d) Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme.
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions;
(c) Confirmation of the appointment of members of the Investments Committee;
(d) Appointment of a member of the Board of Auditors;
(e) Appointment of members of the International Civil Service Commission;
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences.
Admission of new Members to the United Nations.
Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations.
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and related matters.
United Nations reform: measures and proposals.
Strengthening of the United Nations system.
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit.
Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors:
(a) United Nations peacekeeping operations;
(b) Voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
(c) Capital master plan.
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005.
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007.
Programme planning.
Improving the financial situation of the United Nations.
Pattern of conferences.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations.
Human resources management.
Joint Inspection Unit.
United Nations common system.
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
Administration of justice at the United Nations.
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi.
Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire.
Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.
Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor.
Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor.
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia.
Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 687 (1991):
(a) United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission;
(b) Other activities.
Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East:
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force;
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone.
Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara.
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Observer status for the Latin American Integration Association in the General Assembly (see para.
Observer status for the Common Fund for Commodities in the General Assembly (see para.
Allocation of items
The allocation of items described in paragraph 71 below is based on the pattern adopted by the General Assembly for those items in previous years and organized under the headings of the agenda in paragraph 61 above.
The General Committee took note of the relevant resolutions and decisions dealing with guidelines for the allocation of items, namely, decision 34/401 (A/520/Rev.15, annex VI), resolution 39/88 B, resolution 45/45 (A/520/Rev.15 and Amend.
1, annexes VII and VIII), annex I to resolution 48/264 and the annex to resolution 51/241.
The General Committee also took note of subparagraphs 4 (c), (e), (f), (h), (i) and (j) of the annex to resolution 58/316, relevant to the allocation of items for the sixtieth session.
The General Committee further took note that any request by an organization for the granting of observer status in the General Assembly will be considered in plenary meeting after the consideration of the issue by the Sixth Committee of the Assembly (resolution 54/195).
Taking into account the recommendations in section IV above regarding the adoption of the agenda, the General Committee approved the allocation of items contained in paragraph 73 of the memorandum by the Secretary-General (A/BUR/60/1) and in paragraph 8 of the addendum to the memorandum by the Secretary-General (A/BUR/60/1/Add.1).
Plenary meetings
(a) Item 41 (Report of the Economic and Social Council).
The General Committee took note of paragraph 4 (c) of the annex to resolution 58/316 and decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item in its entirety should be considered in plenary meeting, on the understanding that the administrative, programme and budgetary aspects should be dealt with by the Fifth Committee.
The General Committee also took note of the clarification that, in implementing resolution 58/316, the relevant parts of chapter I of the report of the Economic and Social Council will be considered by the Main Committees concerned, under agenda items already allocated to them, for final action by the Assembly.
(b) Item 43 (Culture of peace).
The General Committee took note of paragraph 13 of resolution 55/47 of 29 November 2000, in which the General Assembly decided to devote one day of plenary meetings at its sixtieth session to consideration of the item, including a review of the progress made in the implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, as well as the observance of the Decade at its midpoint, with the participation of all relevant actors, as appropriate.
(c) Item 46 (Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields).
The General Committee took note of resolution 57/270 B, in which the Assembly decided to consider under this item the chapters of the annual report of the Economic and Social Council relevant to the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits, including through the participation in its discussions of the President of the Council.
(d) Item 46 (Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields) and item 120 (Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit).
The General Committee took note of resolution 58/291, in which the Assembly decided to convene in New York in 2005, at the commencement of the sixtieth session, a high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly with the participation of Heads of State and Government, and of resolution 59/145, by which the Assembly decided that the High-level Plenary Meeting would be held from 14 to 16 September 2005 and would be composed of six plenary meetings.
(e) Item 49 (Information and communication technologies for development).
The General Committee took note of decision 58/569 of 1 July 2004, by which the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President, decided to consider the report of the World Summit on the Information Society directly in a plenary meeting at its sixtieth session, notwithstanding the fact that the item would be allocated to the Second Committee pursuant to paragraph 4 (e) of the annex to resolution 58/316.
(f) Item 51 (Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development).
The General Committee took note of paragraph 4 of resolution 59/145, in which the General Assembly decided to hold a separate meeting on Financing for Development within the framework of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly.
(g) Item 60 (Global road safety crisis).
The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item be considered directly in plenary meeting.
(h) Item 62 (Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family).
The General Committee took note of paragraph 1 of resolution 59/148 of 20 December 2004, in which the General Assembly decided to convene, at its sixtieth session, two plenary meetings devoted to the evaluation of the progress made in the implementation of the World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond, to be held during the general debate of the Third Committee.
(i) Item 72 (Holocaust remembrance).
The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item be considered directly in plenary meeting.
(j) Item 81 (Report of the International Criminal Court).
The General Committee took note of resolution 59/43 of 2 December 2004, by which the International Criminal Court, in its capacity of observer in the General Assembly, will be invited to attend and to participate in the work of the Assembly, notably in the consideration of this item, and decided to recommend to the General Assembly that item 81 be considered directly in plenary meeting.
(k) Item 110 (Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization).
The Chairman recalled that the General Assembly had decided on 13 September 2005 that, pursuant to paragraph 10 of resolution 51/241, it would hear a brief presentation by the Secretary-General on his annual report as the first item in the morning prior to the opening of the general debate on Saturday, 17 September 2005.
(l) Item 116 (Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly).
The General Committee took note of resolution 58/316 and, in order to facilitate the work of the Main Committees, decided to recommend that the General Assembly also allocate item 116 to all the Main Committees for the sole purpose of considering and taking action on their respective tentative programme of work.
First Committee
Item 97 (General and complete disarmament).
The General Committee took note of the fact that some portions of the annual report of the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is to be considered directly in plenary meetings under item 84, deal with the subject matter of this item, and decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the relevant paragraphs of the report be drawn to the attention of the First Committee in connection with its consideration of item 97.
Third Committee
Item 64 (Advancement of women).
The General Committee took note of paragraph 16 of the annex to resolution 39/125 concerning the United Nations Development Fund for Women, which reads:
Taking into account the advice of the Consultative Committee, the Administrator shall submit to the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme an annual report on the operations, management and budget of the Fund.
He shall submit a similar report to the General Assembly, to be referred to the Second Committee for consideration of its technical cooperation aspects and also to the Third Committee.
The General Committee therefore decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the report be referred to the Second Committee for consideration under item 57 (Operational activities for development).
Fifth Committee
Item 125 (Programme planning).
In the light of resolutions 54/236, 57/282 and 58/269, by which the General Assembly reiterated its view that the relevant intergovernmental bodies, as well as the Economic and Social Council and the Main Committees of the General Assembly, should include in their programmes of work a review of recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination relevant to their work and take appropriate action, and in the light also of resolution 59/275, by which the Assembly requested the General Committee to take fully into account resolutions 57/282 and 58/269 in the allocation of items to the Main Committees, the General Committee decided to recommend that the General Assembly allocate item 125 to the Second Committee, for its consideration of and appropriate action on sections C.1 and C.2 of chapter III, concerning evaluation, of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on its forty-fifth session.
Sixth Committee
(a) Item 155 (Observer status for the Latin American Integration Association in the General Assembly).
The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item be allocated to the Sixth Committee.
(b) Item 156 (Observer status for the Common Fund for Commodities in the General Assembly).
The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item be allocated to the Sixth Committee.
Taking into account paragraphs 62 to 70 above, the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following allocation of items:
Plenary meetings
Opening of the session by the President of the General Assembly.
Minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Credentials of representatives to the sixtieth session of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee.
Election of the President of the General Assembly.
Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly.
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and allocation of items: reports of the General Committee.
General debate.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Report of the Security Council.
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored democracies.
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict.
Prevention of armed conflict.
The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development.
The situation in the Middle East.
Question of Palestine.
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic.
The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security.
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba.
Question of Cyprus.9
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic of the Congo.9
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).9
The situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti.9
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences for the established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and security.9
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and aggression against Kuwait.9
Declaration of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity on the aerial and naval military attack against the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by the present United States Administration in April 1986.9
The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
Report of the Economic and Social Council (see para.
Global Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations.
Culture of peace (see para.
66 (b)).
Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children.
Follow-up to the outcome of the twenty-sixth special session: implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS.
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields (see para.
66 (c) and (d)).
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa.
Sport for peace and development:
(a) Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal;
(b) International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
Information and communication technologies for development (see para.
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development (see para.
66 (f)).
Global road safety crisis (see para.
Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (see para.
66 (h)).
C. Development of Africa
New Partnership for Africa's Development: progress in implementation and international support:
(a) New Partnership for Africa's Development: progress in implementation and international support;
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
Promotion of human rights
Holocaust remembrance (see para.
66 (i)).
E. Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance:
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations;
(c) Strengthening of international cooperation and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster;
(d) Assistance to the Palestinian people;
(e) Emergency international assistance for peace, normalcy and reconstruction of war-stricken Afghanistan.
Promotion of justice and international law
Report of the International Court of Justice.
Oceans and the law of the sea:
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea;
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments.
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
Report of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
Report of the International Criminal Court (see para.
66 (j)).
Disarmament
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency (see para.
Organizational, administrative and other matters
Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations.
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization (see para.
66 (k)).
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs:
(a) Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council;
(b) Election of eighteen members of the Economic and Social Council;
(c) Election of five members of the International Court of Justice.
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections:
(a) Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination;
(b) Election of twenty-nine members of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme;
(c) Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme;
(d) Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme.
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences.
Admission of new Members to the United Nations.
Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations.
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly (see para.
66 (l)).
Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and related matters.
United Nations reform: measures and proposals.
Strengthening of the United Nations system.
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit (see para.
66 (d)).
Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
First Committee
Election of the officers of the Main Committees.
Disarmament
Reduction of military budgets:
(a) Reduction of military budgets;
(b) Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures.
Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security.
Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons: report of the Conference on Disarmament.
Question of Antarctica.
Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace.
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty.
Consolidation of the regime established by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco).
Verification in all its aspects, including the role of the United Nations in the field of verification.
Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament.
Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East.
Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Prevention of an arms race in outer space.
General and complete disarmament (see para.
(a) Notification of nuclear tests;
(b) Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes;
(c) Reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons;
(d) Transparency in armaments;
(e) National legislation on transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods and technology;
(f) Missiles;
(g) Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control;
(h) Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation;
(i) Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
(j) Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction;
(k) Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and collecting them;
(l) Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments;
(m) Nuclear disarmament;
(n) Relationship between disarmament and development;
(o) Reducing nuclear danger;
(p) Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction;
(q) Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons;
(r) Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction;
(s) Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas;
(t) The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects;
(u) Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context;
(v) Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels;
(w) Regional disarmament;
(x) Prevention of the illicit transfer and unauthorized access to and use of man-portable air defence systems;
(y) The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation;
(z) Information on confidence-building measures in the field of conventional arms;
(aa) Bilateral strategic nuclear arms reductions and the new strategic framework;
(bb) Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia;
(cc) United Nations conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers in the context of nuclear disarmament;
(dd) Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus.
Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly:
(a) Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa;
(b) United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament;
(c) United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean;
(d) United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific;
(e) United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa;
(f) Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons.
Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session:
(a) Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters;
(b) United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research;
(c) Report of the Conference on Disarmament;
(d) Report of the Disarmament Commission.
The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East.
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.
Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region.
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction.
Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security.
Organizational, administrative and other matters
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly (see para.
66 (l)).
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Election of the officers of the Main Committees.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Assistance in mine action.
Effects of atomic radiation.
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories.
Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects.
Questions relating to information.
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations.
Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations.
Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Organizational, administrative and other matters
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly (see para.
66 (l)).
Second Committee
Election of the officers of the Main Committees.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources.
Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
Information and communication technologies for development (see para.
Macroeconomic policy questions:
(a) International trade and development;
(b) International financial system and development;
(c) External debt crisis and development.
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development (see para.
66 (f)).
Sustainable development:
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development;
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States;
(c) International Strategy for Disaster Reduction;
(d) Protection of global climate for present and future generations of mankind;
(e) Sustainable development in mountain regions;
(f) Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy, including the implementation of the World Solar Programme 1996-2005;
(g) Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa;
(h) Convention on Biological Diversity;
(i) Rendering assistance to poor mountain countries to overcome obstacles in socio-economic and ecological areas.
Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat).
Globalization and interdependence:
(a) Globalization and interdependence;
(b) Science and technology for development;
(c) International migration and development;
(d) Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such assets to the countries of origin.
Groups of countries in special situations:
(a) Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries;
(b) Specific actions related to the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing countries: outcome of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation.
Eradication of poverty and other development issues:
(a) Implementation of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006);
(b) Women in development;
(c) Human resources development.
Operational activities for development (see para.
(a) Operational activities for development of the United Nations system;
(b) South-South cooperation: economic and technical cooperation among developing countries.
Training and research:
(a) United Nations Institute for Training and Research;
(b) United Nations System Staff College in Turin, Italy.
Towards global partnerships.
E. Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance:
(b) Special economic assistance to individual countries or regions.
Organizational, administrative and other matters
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly (see para.
66 (l)).
Programme planning (see para.
68 (b)).
Third Committee
Election of the officers of the Main Committees.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian questions.
Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly.
Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family (see para.
66 (h)).
Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly on Ageing.
Advancement of women (see para.
Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”.
Promotion of human rights
Promotion and protection of the rights of children.
Indigenous issues.
Elimination of racism and racial discrimination:
(a) Elimination of racism and racial discrimination;
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action.
Right of peoples to self-determination.
Human rights questions:
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments;
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives;
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;
(e) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
H. Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
Crime prevention and criminal justice.
International drug control.
Organizational, administrative and other matters
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly (see para.
66 (l)).
Fifth Committee
Election of the officers of the Main Committees.
Organizational, administrative and other matters
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions;
(c) Confirmation of the appointment of members of the Investments Committee;
(d) Appointment of a member of the Board of Auditors;
(e) Appointment of members of the International Civil Service Commission.
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly (see para.
66 (l)).
Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors:
(a) United Nations peacekeeping operations;
(b) Voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
(c) Capital master plan.
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005.
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007.
Programme planning (see para.
Improving the financial situation of the United Nations.
Pattern of conferences.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations.
Human resources management.
Joint Inspection Unit.
United Nations common system.
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
Administration of justice at the United Nations.
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi.
Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire.
Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.
Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor.
Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor.
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia.
Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 687 (1991):
(a) United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission;
(b) Other activities.
Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East:
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force;
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone.
Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara.
Sixth Committee
Election of the officers of the Main Committees.
Promotion of justice and international law
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law.
Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its thirty-eighth session.
Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-seventh session.
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization.
Scope of legal protection under the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
H. Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
Measures to eliminate international terrorism.
Organizational, administrative and other matters
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly (see para.
66 (l)).
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country.
Observer status for the Latin American Integration Association in the General Assembly (see para.
Observer status for the Common Fund for Commodities in the General Assembly (see para.
70 (b)).
A mandatory deadline, not later than 1 December, should be established for the submission to the Fifth Committee of all draft resolutions with financial implications (see para.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-first Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/41/49), para.
21, recommendation 3 (f).
Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/34/32 and Corr.1), chap.
Ibid., Forty-first Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/41/49), para.
21, recommendation 2 (d).
Ibid., recommendation 4.
The General Committee considered item 42 jointly with item 158.
The General Committee considered item 158 jointly with item 42.
In accordance with rule 30 of the rules of procedure, as amended by resolution 56/509, the General Assembly will hold these elections for its sixty-first session at least three months before the opening of that session.
In accordance with paragraph 4 (b) of the annex to resolution 58/316, the item should remain on the agenda for consideration upon notification by a Member State.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/60/1).
Ibid., Supplement No. 16 and corrigendum (A/60/16 and Corr.1).
The numbers are those of the items of the agenda in paragraph 61 above.
For sub-item (b), see Second Committee.
For sub-items (a) to (e), see Fifth Committee.
This item is allocated to the Fourth Committee in accordance with paragraph 4 (i) of the annex to resolution 58/316.
This item is allocated to the Fourth Committee in accordance with decision 59/516 of 10 December 2004.
This item is allocated to the Second Committee in accordance with paragraph 4 (e) of the annex to resolution 58/316.
The title of this sub-item in the agenda is worded as it appears in resolution 59/311 of 14 July 2005.
The General Assembly had earlier decided, in resolution 59/229 of 22 December 2004, to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, a sub-item entitled “Further implementation of the outcome of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States and follow-up to the outcomes of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action”.
The title of this sub-item in the agenda is worded as it appears in the provisional programme of work of the Second Committee for 2004 approved by the General Assembly in its decision 58/553 of 23 December 2003.
The Assembly had earlier decided, in resolution 58/220 of 23 December 2003, to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session, under the item entitled “Operational activities for development”, a sub-item entitled “South-South cooperation for development”.
This item is allocated to the Second Committee in accordance with paragraph 4 (f) of the annex to resolution 58/316.
For sub-items (a) and (c) to (e), see Plenary meetings.
This sub-item is allocated to the Second Committee in accordance with paragraph 4 (e) of the annex to resolution 58/316.
The title of this item in the agenda is worded as it appears in resolution 59/174 of 20 December 2004.
For sub-item (f), see Plenary meetings.