# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
United Nations
Report of the Economic and Social Council for 2003
General Assembly
Official Records Fifty-eighth Session Supplement No. 3 (A/58/3/Rev.1)
General Assembly Official Records Fifty-eighth Session Supplement No. 3 (A/58/3/Rev.1)
United Nations • New York, 2005
Report of the Economic and Social Council for 2003
A/58/3/Rev.1
Note
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures.
Contents
Chapter I Matters calling for action by or brought to the attention of the General Assembly
In 2003, the Economic and Social Council adopted resolutions and decisions that call for action by the General Assembly.
The relevant paragraphs of those resolutions and decisions are summarized below.
Adoption of the agenda and other organizational matters
Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
By decisions 2003/285 and 2003/286, the Council recommended that the General Assembly take a decision at its fifty-eighth session on the question of enlarging the membership of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees from 65 to 66 States.
Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation: follow-up to policy recommendations of the General Assembly and the Council
Progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/201 on the triennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system
By resolution 2003/3, the Council requested the Secretary-General to undertake further analytical work on the issue of funding of operational activities for development of the United Nations system and to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session in the context of the triennial comprehensive policy review.
Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation: reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme
Delegation of formal authority in matters of personnel of the United Nations Population Fund
By decision 2003/224, the Council recommended to the General Assembly that, as proposed in decision 2003/13 of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme and of the United Nations Population Fund adopted at its annual session of 2003, formal authority in matters of personnel of the United Nations Population Fund be delegated by the Secretary-General to the Executive Director of the Fund.
Humanitarian affairs segment
Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
By resolution 2003/5, the Council requested the Secretary-General to reflect the progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to its resolution in his next report to the Council and the General Assembly on the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations.
Implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits: follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development
International Conference on Financing for Development
By resolution 2003/47, the Council reaffirmed its commitment to contribute to the implementation of the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development, both in the context of its general mandate to follow-up and support the implementation of commitments adopted at all major United Nations conferences, including the Millennium Summit, and as an important process in its own right, and in that regard attached priority to four broad tasks related to follow-up activities: (a) to promote coherence and an integrated approach within the United Nations; (b) to intensify interactions with the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization, as well as other institutional stakeholders; (c) to continue involving other relevant stakeholders, including civil society organizations and the private sector; and (d) to prepare inputs for consideration by the General Assembly.
Implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits: review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
By resolution 2003/17, the Council requested the Secretary-General to make, in consultation with Member States, recommendations to facilitate the participation of the delegations of the least developed countries at the annual substantive sessions of the Council and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session.
Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli Occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan
Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan
By resolution 2003/59, the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, through the Council, a report on the implementation of the resolution and to continue to include, in the report of the United Nations Special Coordinator, an update on the living conditions of the Palestinian people, in collaboration with the relevant United Nations agencies.
Economic and environment questions: sustainable development
Preparations for an international meeting to review the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
By resolution 2003/55 and decision 2003/283, the Council, recalling General Assembly resolution 57/262 and reiterating the provisions of decision II adopted by the Commission on Sustainable Development eleventh session, in particular its paragraph 9, recommended to the Assembly that travel and subsistence allowance for participants from small island developing States to the preparatory meetings and the international meeting to undertake a comprehensive review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States be provided from the funds designated by donors for that purpose in the voluntary trust fund established by the Assembly in resolution 57/262.
Future programme, organization and methods of work of the Commission on Sustainable Development
By resolution 2003/61, the Council, having considered the report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its eleventh session, decided to invite the General Assembly to consider using the resources previously devoted to the former ad hoc intersessional working groups of the Commission on Sustainable Development to support the participation of representatives of member States of the Commission in one of their respective regional meetings in each implementation cycle.
The Council also recommended to the Assembly that resources released by the termination of the work of the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources for Development, whose work had been transferred to the Commission on Sustainable Development, could be used to support the work of the Commission.
Economic and environmental questions: United Nations Forum on Forests
Trust Fund for the United Nations Forum on Forests
By resolution 2003/63, the Council recommended that the General Assembly decide that support to participants from developing countries, with priority to the least developed countries, as well as from countries with economies in transition, may be provided from the Trust Fund for travel and daily subsistence allowance from funds designated for that purpose.
Economic and environmental questions: transport of dangerous goods
Work of the Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals
By resolution 2003/64, the Council took note of the programme of work of the Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals for the biennium 2003-2004 as well as noting the recommendations of the Committee regarding staff resources and invited the General Assembly to consider the issue in the context of its review of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005.
Social and human rights questions: advancement of women
Revitalization and strengthening of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
By resolution 2003/57, the Council requested the General Assembly, at its fifty-eighth session, to consider the final report of the Working Group on the Future Operation of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women and requested the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the resolution to the fifty-ninth session of the Assembly.
By the same resolution, the Council decided to amend article III of the statute of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women to replace the Board of Trustees with an Executive Board.
The Board shall report periodically to the Economic and Social Council and, where appropriate, to the General Assembly.
Article IV of the statute, which was also amended, stated that the Director of the Institute should submit to the Economic and Social Council or to the General Assembly, as appropriate, reports approved by the Board.
Social and human rights questions: social development
Preparations for the observance of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family in 2004
By resolution 2003/10, the Council recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution contained therein.
Policies and programmes involving youth
By resolution 2003/11, the Council invited the General Assembly to consider devoting, at its sixtieth session, in 2005, two plenary meetings to review the situation of youth and achievements produced in the implementation of the Programme of Action 10 years after its adoption.
The Council also invited the General Assembly to request the Secretary-General to provide the Assembly, at its sixtieth session, through the Commission for Social Development at its forty-third session, with a comprehensive report on the priority areas of youth identified in the Programme of Action, calling upon the experience of the Member States, organizations, programmes and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, as well as the regional commissions and youth organizations, in their multidisciplinary work for and with youth.
National and international cooperation for social development: implementation of the social objectives of the New Partnership for Africa's Development
The Council decided to bring its resolution 2003/13 to the attention of the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session during its consideration of the agenda item entitled “New Partnership for Africa's Development: progress in implementation and international support”.
Modalities for the review and appraisal of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002
The Council requested the Secretary-General to include in his report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session information on the implementation of its resolution 2003/14.
Agreed conclusions on national and international cooperation for social development
By resolution 2003/15, the Council endorsed the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission for Social Development with respect to its priority theme at its forty-first session and in which the Commission invited the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council to continue to include consideration of the integration of economic and social policies as one of the thematic areas to be addressed in future debates.
Social and human rights questions: crime prevention and criminal justice
Strengthening international cooperation in preventing and combating trafficking in persons and protecting victims of such trafficking
By resolution 2003/20, the Council recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution contained therein.
International cooperation in the fight against transnational organized crime: assistance to States in capacity-building with a view to facilitating the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto
By resolution 2003/21, the Council recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution contained therein.
Strengthening international cooperation and technical assistance in promoting the implementation of the universal conventions and protocols related to terrorism within the framework of the activities of the Centre for International Crime Prevention
By resolution 2003/22, the Council recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution contained therein.
Preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
By resolution 2003/23, the Council recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution contained therein.
Social and human rights questions: human rights
The right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health
By resolution 2003/45, the Council approved Commission Human Rights resolution 2003/28, in which the Commission highlighted the importance of enhancing the international community's response to violence by strengthening prevention efforts at the national level and through international cooperation, recommended that the General Assembly declare 2007 the United Nations Year for Violence Prevention and requested the Commission on Human Rights to submit to the Council a draft programme of action for the Year.
Human rights situation of the Lebanese detainees in Israel
By decision 2003/238, the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/8 to request the Secretary-General to bring the resolution to the attention of the Government of Israel and to call upon it to comply with the resolution's provisions.
The Council also endorsed the request of the Commission to the Secretary-General that he report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session and to the Commission at its sixtieth session on the results of his efforts in this regard.
Situation of human rights in Myanmar
By decision 2003/239, the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/12 to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, as contained in Commission resolution 1992/58 of 3 March 1992, for a further year, and requested the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session and to report to the Commission at its sixtieth session.
Situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
By decision 2003/240, the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/15 to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for a further year and to request the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session and to report to the Commission at its sixtieth session.
Situation of human rights in Burundi
By decision 2003/241, the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/16 to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur by one year and to request to the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report on the human rights situation in Burundi to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session and a report to the Commission at its sixtieth session, giving her work a gender-specific dimension.
The right to food
By decision 2003/244, the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/25 to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the right to food for a further three years and to request the Special Rapporteur to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session and to the Commission at its sixtieth session on the implementation of resolution 2003/25.
World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
By decision 2003/246, the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/30:
(a) To request the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action to prepare complementary international standards to strengthen and update international instruments against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in all their aspects, to convene its upcoming sessions for an initial period of three years, while encouraging it to work effectively to fulfil its mandate, to convene its second session of 10 working days, to focus on areas decided upon in its recommendations, namely, poverty, education and complementary standards, and to report on progress in this regard at the sixtieth session of the Commission;
(b) That the working group of experts on people of African descent should convene its future sessions for an initial period of three years, to encourage it to work effectively towards the fulfilment of its mandate and to request it to convene its second session of 10 working days and report to the Commission at its sixtieth session on progress towards the fulfilment of its mandate;
(c) To recommend that the General Assembly, after considering the analytical report of the Secretary-General on the extent of implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, to be submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 57/195, consider the closure of the Third Decade;
(d) To recommend that the General Assembly, in the coming decade of activities to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, place emphasis on the concrete implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action on the basis of a broad-based consensus on the importance of the anti-discrimination struggle worldwide;
(e) To request that the Secretary-General provide the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance with all the necessary human and financial assistance to carry out his mandate efficiently, effectively and expeditiously and to enable him to submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session.
Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance
By decision 2003/252, the Council endorsed the request of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/54 that the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief should submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session and report to the Commission at its sixtieth session.
Human rights defenders
By decision 2003/255, the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/64 to extend the mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights defenders for a further three years and also approved the Commission's request that the Special Representative continue to report on her activities to the General Assembly and the Commission.
Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
By decision 2003/256, the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/68 to request the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to submit a report on the implementation of resolution 2003/68 to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session and to the Commission at its sixtieth session.
Situation of human rights in Afghanistan
By decision 2003/257, the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/77 to request the Secretary-General to appoint an independent expert for a period of one year to develop, in strict collaboration with the Afghan Transitional Authority, including the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, as well as with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, a programme of advisory services to ensure the full respect and protection of human rights and the promotion of the rule of law and to seek and receive information about and report on the human rights situation in Afghanistan in an effort to prevent human rights violations.
The Council also approved the Commission's request that the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, continue to review the situation of women and girls in Afghanistan and submit a report to the General Assembly and the Commission.
Situation of human rights in Sierra Leone
By decision 2003/259, the Council endorsed the request of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/80 to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session and to the Commission at its sixtieth session on the human rights situation in Sierra Leone, including with reference to reports from the Human Rights Section of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone.
Situation of human rights in Iraq
By decision 2003/262, the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2003/84 to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, as contained in Commission resolution 1991/74 and subsequent resolutions, for a further year, and to request the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report on the situation of human rights in Iraq, focusing on newly available information about violations of human rights and international law by the Government of Iraq over many years, to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session and to report to the Commission at its sixtieth session.
Social and human rights questions: Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues
Proposal for a second international decade of the world's indigenous people
By decision 2003/306, the Council decided to transmit to the General Assembly the recommendation contained in draft decision VII, adopted by the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues at its second session, regarding a second International Decade of the World's Indigenous People, with a view to initiating consideration of such a decade, taking into account, inter alia, the forthcoming review by the Economic and Social Council in 2004, and further decided to initiate this review.
Consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defense Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system
Agreement between the United Nations and the World Tourism Organization
By resolution 2003/2, the Council, having considered the text of the draft agreement negotiated by its Committee on Negotiations with Intergovernmental Agencies and the World Tourism Organization Committee on the Negotiations for the conversion of the Organization into a specialized agency, in accordance with Article 57 and Article 63, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations, and aware that the text of the draft agreement was noted with satisfaction by the Executive Council of the World Tourism Organization on 4 June 2003, recommended that the General Assembly approve the text of the draft agreement at its fifty-eighth session.
Chapter II
Special high-level meeting of the Council with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization
In accordance with paragraph 88 of annex I to General Assembly resolution 50/227 and paragraph 69 (b) of the Monterrey Consensus, the Council held a special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization at its 7th and 8th plenary meetings, on 14 April 2003 (for the proceedings, see E/2003/SR.7 and 8).
It had before it a note by the Secretary-General on increased coherence, coordination and cooperation for the implementation of the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development at all levels one year after the Conference (E/2003/50).
At the 7th plenary meeting, on 14 April 2003, the President of the Council made an introductory statement.
At the same meeting, the Deputy Secretary-General addressed the meeting.
Also at the same meeting, the President of the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly addressed the meeting.
At the same meeting, the President of the Council introduced the following panellists who made presentations: Trevor Manuel, Minister of Finance of South Africa and Chairperson of the Development Committee; Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul, Minister for Economic Cooperation and Development of Germany; Mary Whelan, Chairperson of the Trade Policy Review Body of the World Trade Organization; and Fouad Siniora, Chairperson of the Group of 24, Minister of Finance of Lebanon.
The President of the Council also introduced the following panellists by institutional organizations who made presentations: Eduardo Aninat, Deputy Managing Director, International Monetary Fund (IMF); Shengman Zhang, Managing Director, World Bank; and Francisco Thompson-Flores, Deputy Director-General of the World Trade Organization.
After the presentations, the Council adjourned its plenary meeting and moved onto round tables 1, 2, 3 and 4.
Round table 1 was chaired by Trevor Manuel, Chairperson of the Development Committee and Minister of Finance of South Africa, and co-chaired by Louise Fréchette, Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Round table 2 was chaired by Hilde Frafjord Johnson, Minister of International Development of Norway, and co-chaired by Francisco Thompson-Flores, Deputy-Director General of the World Trade Organization.
Round table 3 was chaired by Mary Whelan, Chairperson of the Trade Policy Review Body of the World Trade Organization, and co-chaired by Shengman Zhang, Managing Director of the World Bank Group.
Round table 4 was chaired by Fathallah Oualalou, Minister of Finance of Morocco, and co-chaired by Eduardo Aninat, Deputy Managing-Director of IMF.
The four round tables addressed respectively the themes of: (a) systemic issues; (b) financial cooperation; (c) policy coherence in the area of trade and investment; and (d) domestic, economic and social policies.
At its 8th plenary meeting, on 14 April 2003, the Council resumed the special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization and heard oral reports from: the Chairperson of the Development Committee (round table 1), the Minister of International Development of Norway (round table 2), the Chairperson of the Trade Policy Review Body of the World Trade Organization (round table 3) and the Minister of Finance of Morocco (round table 4), on the outcome of the four round tables.
Exchange of views among the participants
At the same meeting, the Council held an exchange of views among the participants and the representatives of Morocco (on behalf of the Group of 77 and China), Greece (on behalf of the European Union, the acceding countries associated with the European Union (Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovak Republic, Slovenia) and the other associated countries (Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey)), Andorra, Mexico, Finland, Peru, Portugal, Brazil, the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Argentina made statements.
Also at the same meeting, the observer for the Holy See made a statement.
At the same meeting, the representative of the World Bank, the Dean of the Executive Board of the Bank, made a statement.
The Council heard statements by representatives of the Interim Facilitating Group for the Follow-up to Monterrey, a non-governmental organization, and the Business Council for the United Nations from the business sector.
The representatives of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and the International Labour Organization (ILO) made statements.
Closing of the meeting
At the 8th plenary meeting, on 14 April 2003, the Under-Secretary-General of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs made a statement.
The President of the Economic and Social Council made a statement and declared the special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization closed.
Chapter III
High-level segment
Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development
Opening of the session
The high-level segment of the substantive session of 2003 of the Council was held at its 13th to 18th plenary meetings, from 30 June to 2 July 2003 (for the proceedings, see E/2002/SR.13-18).
In accordance with Council decision 2002/309 of 19 December 2002, the theme for the high-level segment was “Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development” (agenda item 2).
The Council had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General on promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development (E/2003/51);
(b) World Economic and Social Survey, 2003 (E/2003/70, chap.
I);
(c) Relevant section of the report of the Committee for Development Policy on its fifth session (E/2003/33, Suppl.
13, chap.
II);
(d) Statement submitted by Franciscans International, a non-governmental organization in general consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/NGO/1);
(e) Statement submitted by Soroptomists International, a non-governmental organization in general consultative status with the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/NGO/2).
At the 13th meeting, on 30 July 2003, the President of the Economic and Social Council declared the substantive session of 2003 open.
At the same meeting, the Secretary-General of the United Nations addressed the Council.
Policy dialogue and discussion on important developments in the world economy and international economic cooperation with executive heads of international trade and finance institutions of the United Nations system, on key issues on the global economy
At its 13th meeting, on 30 June 2003, the Council held a high-level policy dialogue on important developments and key issues in the world economy and international economic cooperation with executive heads of international trade and finance institutions of the United Nations system.
At the same meeting, statements were made by the panellists, Rubens Ricupero, Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD); Mamphela Ramphele, Managing Director of the World Bank; Francisco Thompson Flores, Deputy Director-General of the World Trade Organization; and Reinhard H. Munzberg, Special Representative to the United Nations of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
At the same meeting, during the exchange of views, the representatives of Brazil, Pakistan, Benin, the Russian Federation, Uganda, Peru, Luxembourg and Nepal made statements.
Also, at the same meeting, the panellists responded to queries raised.
The representative of the European Community also made an intervention as well as the observer of the Third World Network, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council.
Opening of the high-level segment
At the 14th plenary meeting on 30 June 2003, the President of the Council opened the high-level segment and the Council began its consideration of agenda item 2.
At the same meeting, the Council heard introductory statements by the organizers of the four round tables, the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs, the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the Executive Coordinator of the Millennium Development Goals Campaign, the Executive Director, World Food Programme (WFP), the President of the International Fund for Agriculture and Development (IFAD), the Managing Director of the World Bank and the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat).
Also at the same meeting, statements were also made by the Director-General of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the Executive Director of the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime, and the Under-Secretary-General and Special Adviser to the United Nations Secretary-General on Africa and the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States.
The President of the Council suspended the meeting.
Ministerial round tables
Round table 1 Natural resources and rural development in developing countries
The round table was co-chaired by Valli Moosa, Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism of South Africa, and Jacques Diouf, Director-General of FAO.
Introductory presentations were made by: Valli Moosa, Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism of South Africa; Christina Amoako Nuama, Former Minister for Lands and Forestry, Education, Environment, Science and Technology of Ghana; Nitin Desai, Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs; William Jackson, Assistant Director-General and Director of the Global Programme, World Conservation Union (IUCN); and George McGovern, former Senator and former United States Ambassador to FAO and WFP in Rome.
The Director-General of FAO, who acted as co-chairperson of the round table, also made some remarks.
Statements were made by the representatives of Ethiopia, the United States of America, the Netherlands, Nepal, Switzerland, Norway, Germany, Botswana, Australia, Nigeria and Bhutan.
In addition, representatives of the Uganda Land Alliance (member of the International Land Coalition), the International Fertilizer Industry Association and the International Federation of Agriculture Producers also made statements.
The representative of the Ford Foundation made a statement.
The panellists responded to queries raised.
Round table 2 Integrated approach to the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals in the area of rural development
The round table was co-chaired by Jan O. Karlsson, Minister for Development Cooperation of Sweden, and Eveline Herfkens, Executive Coordinator of the Millennium Development Goals Campaign.
Goal 1
Carlos Magariños, Director-General of UNIDO, made an introductory statement.
Interventions were made by the representatives of Italy (on behalf of the European Union), Uganda, Zimbabwe, Nicaragua, Denmark, Malaysia, China, Ethiopia, Peru and Chile.
The representative of the Asian Non-Governmental Organizations Coalition for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development also made an intervention.
Goals 2-7
Presentations were made by Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Thoraya Obaid, Executive Director of UNFPA, and James T.
Morris, Executive Director of WFP.
Interventions were made by the representatives of the United States, Ethiopia and Uganda.
Interventions were also made by the representatives of the Conference of Non-Governmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations, Franciscans International, the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the Tebtebba Foundation (Indigenous People International Centre for Policy Research and Education).
Goal 8
Interventions were made by the representatives of Austria, Norway, Brazil, Ireland, Nigeria, Finland, Azerbaijan and Argentina.
The representative of the Organization for Industrial, Spiritual and Cultural Advancement-International (OISCA International) also made an intervention.
Round table 3 Global partnerships for rural development
The round table was co-chaired by Mamphela Ramphele, Managing Director of the World Bank, and Lennart Bage, President of IFAD.
Presentations were made by María Eugenia Brizuela de Ávila, Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador; Jim Harvey, Head of Profession, Rural Livelihoods, Department for International Development, London; Stewart Wallis, Livelihoods Director, Oxfam; and Keith Jones, Issue and Policy Manager, Stewardship and Sustainable Agriculture, CropLife International.
Interventions were made by the representatives of Uganda, Ethiopia and Chile, as well as by the observers for Mexico and the Holy See.
Interventions were also made by the representatives of the International Association of Economic and Social Councils and Similar Institutions, and the Common Fund for Commodities.
The Under-Secretary-General and Special Adviser to the United Nations Secretary-General on Africa made an intervention.
Interventions were also made by the representatives of the International Land Coalition and the International Federation of Agricultural Producers.
The Co-Chairpersons made concluding remarks.
Round table 4 Rural/urban interface and slums
The round table was co-chaired by Ivan Šimonović, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Croatia, and Anna Tibaijuka, Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (Habitat).
Presentations were made by Ralia Odinga, Minister of Roads, Public Works and Housing of Kenya, Husni-Abughaida, Minister of Housing and Public Works of Jordan, Edgar D. Maokola-Majogo, Minister of State, Poverty Eradication of the United Republic of Tanzania, Holger Magel, President of the International Federation of Surveyors, Mercedes Bresso, President of the World Association of Cities and Local Authorities Coordination, and Alejandro Mackinnon of Genève-Tiers-Monde.
Statements were made by the representatives of Malaysia and Nigeria, as well as by the observer for Tunisia.
The representative of the World Tourism Organization made a statement.
Representatives of the International Rainwater Harvesting Alliance and the Canton of Geneva also made statements.
The Co-Chairpersons and the lead discussants summarized the outcome of the round tables.
The Council resumed its 14th plenary meeting and the President invited the Co-Chairpersons of the round tables to report on the outcomes: Valli Moosa, Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism of South Africa, reported on round table 1, on “Natural resources and rural development in developing countries”; Jan O. Karlsson, Minister for Development Cooperation of Sweden, reported on round table 2, on “Integrated approach to the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals in the area of rural development”; María Eugenia Brizuela de Ávila, Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador, reported on round table 3, on “Global partnerships for rural development”; and Ivan Šimonović, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Croatia, reported on round table 4, on “Rural/urban interface and slums”.
The President of the Council made a concluding statement on the round tables.
At its 15th plenary meeting, on 1 July 2003, the Council heard introductory statements by the Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs and the Vice-Chairman of the Committee for Development Policy.
At the same meeting, statements were made by Mohamed Bennouna, Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United Nations (on behalf of the Group of 77 and China); Mario Baccini, Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Italy (on behalf of the European Union); Juli Minoves-Triquell, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Andorra; Paula Lehtomäki, Minister for Foreign Trade and Development of Finland; Yuri V. Fedotov, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation; Shinako Tsuchiya, Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Japan; Antonio Ruíz García, Vice-Minister of Rural Development of Mexico; Jan O. Karlsson, Minister for Development Cooperation, Migration and Asylum Policy of Sweden; Miguel von Hoegen, Secretary for Programming and Planning of the Presidency of Guatemala; Kashiram Rana, Minister for Rural Development of India; María Eugenia Brizuela de Ávila, Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador; Rosa Elena Simeón Negrín, Minister of Science, Technology and Environment of Cuba; Valli Moosa, Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism of South Africa; Ovidiu Ionescu, Secretary of State, Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Forests of Romania; Ivan Šimonović, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Croatia; and Tom Kitt, Minister of State for Overseas Development and Human Rights of Ireland.
At the 16th plenary meeting, on 1 July 2003, statements were made by Munir Akram, Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations; Addisu Legesse, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Rural Development of Ethiopia; Mauricio Gómez Lacayo, Vice-Minister, Secretary-General for Economic Cooperation of Nicaragua; Justas Vincas Paleckis, Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs of Lithuania; Sergiy Melnik, State Secretary, Ministry of Agrarian Policy of Ukraine; J. G. Moyo, Minister of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare of Zimbabwe; Bruce Montador, Canadian International Development Agency; Joab H. O. Omino, Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya; Ove Ullerup, Under-Secretary of State, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark; Caroline Millar, First Assistant Secretary, International Organizations and Legal Division of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of Australia; Serge Chappatte, Vice-Director of the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation; John D. Negroponte, Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United Nations; Ronaldo Motta Sardenberg, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations; Stafford O.
Neil, Permanent Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations; Chung Eui-Yong, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Archbishop Celestino Migliore, Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations; Arye Arazi, Deputy Director General, Head of the Center for International Cooperation of Israel; Michael O'Neill, Counsellor to the United Nations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; and Henri Djombo, Minister of Forests Economy and the Environment of the Republic of the Congo.
At the same meeting, statements were also made by the representatives of IFAD and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).
Also at the same meeting, representatives of the Commission of the European Community and the Common Fund for Commodities made statements.
Also at the same meeting, the representatives of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies also made a statement.
Representatives of the International Association of Economic and Social Councils and Similar Institutions, the Conference of Non-Governmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations and the Fondation pour la Promotion Sociale de la Culture also made statements.
At the 17th plenary meeting, on 2 July 2003, statements were made by Petko Draganov, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bulgaria; Séraphine Wakana, Minister for Development Planning and Reconstruction of Burundi; Immanuel Ngatjizeko, Director-General of the National Planning Commission of Namibia; Mohd.
Effendi Norwawi, Minister of Agriculture of Malaysia; G.
Ali Khoshroo, Deputy Foreign Minister for Legal and International Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran; Semaluka Kiwanuka, Minister of State for Luwero Triangle, Office of the Prime Minister of Uganda; João Carrilho, Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development of Mozambique; Maokola Majogo, Minister of State, Office of the Vice-President of the United Republic of Tanzania; Rosella Cominetti, Director-General of Production of the Instituto de Desarrollo Agropecuario, Ministry of Agriculture of Chile; Bjørn Skogmo, Deputy Secretary-General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Norway; Abdulwahab A. Attar, Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Bernard Kessedjian, Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Hernán Escudero, Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Jaynarain Meetoo, Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations; Sha Zukang, Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations Office at Geneva; and Toufiq Ali, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations Office at Geneva.
At the same meeting, the Secretary-General of the Institution for the Use of Micro-Algae Spirulina Against Malnutrition made a statement.
Also at the same meeting, the Assistant Director General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) made a statement.
At the same meeting, the representative of the World Federation of United Nations Associations made a statement.
At the 18th plenary meeting, on 2 July 2003, statements were made by Sani Abdallah, Permanent Secretary, Federal Ministry of Agriculture of Nigeria; Alfredo Chiaradia, Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Nugroho Wisnumurti, Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Murari Raj Sharma, Permanent Representative of Nepal to the United Nations; Alfred Dube, Permanent Representative of Botswana to the United Nations; Mohamed Ali Al-Malki, Chargé d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of Qatar to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Amgad Maher Abdel Ghaffar, Chargé d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Achim Steiner, Director-General of The World Conservation Union; Husniyya Mammadova, Adviser to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan; Yeshey Dorji, Chargé d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of Bhutan to the United Nations; Paul Essel, Minister Plenipotentiary of the Permanent Mission of Ghana to the United Nations; Murad Hamaima, Minister Plenipotentiary of the Permanent Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations Office at Geneva; Mohamed-Salah Dembri, Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations Office at Geneva; and Pablo Morán, Permanent Representative of Peru to FAO.
At the same meeting, the representatives of UNIDO and the ILO Office to the United Nations made statements.
Also, at the same meeting, the representative of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions made a statement.
Action taken by the Council
At the 18th plenary meeting, on 2 July 2003, the President of the Council introduced the draft ministerial declaration submitted by the President of the Council, entitled “Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development”, and orally corrected it.
The Council then adopted the draft ministerial declaration, as orally corrected (E/2003/L.9).
At the same meeting, the President of the Council made a concluding statement.
The Under-Secretary-General for the Department of Economic and Social Affairs also made a statement.
The text of the declaration read as follows:
Ministerial declaration Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development
“1.
We, the Ministers and Heads of Delegations participating in the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2003 of the Economic and Social Council, held from 30 June to 2 July 2003:
(a) Having considered the theme `Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development', the report of the Secretary-General on the subject1 and the contribution of all the participants, including civil society, in the preparatory process of the high-level segment, held on 24 March and 30 April 2003;
(b) Recalling the Millennium Declaration2 and the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences, summits and relevant special sessions of the United Nations General Assembly, including the Fourth World Conference on Women, held in Beijing in 1995, as well as the World Food Summit, held in Rome in 1996, and their five-year reviews, the International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, in 2002, and the World Summit on Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg, South Africa, in 2002;
(c) Taking note of the fact that rural areas of developing countries are home to three quarters of the world's poor and that insufficient progress has been made in recent years in addressing the issues of poverty, hunger and malnutrition;
(d) Recalling the commitment to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration;
(e) Recalling also General Assembly resolution 57/270 B of 20 December 2002, entitled `Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields';
Have adopted the following declaration.
“2.
We are convinced that eradication of rural poverty and hunger is crucial for the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration.
Rural development should be an integral part of national and international development policies, including bilateral donor response strategies and the activities and programmes of the United Nations system.
“3.
We express our serious concern regarding the famine facing millions of people, especially in Africa.
Recognizing that food security is a global concern, we are committed to respond to the internationally recognized emergency food aid needs and to improve famine prevention mechanisms and long-term food security.
“4.
Rural development should be pursued through an integrated approach, encompassing the economic, social and environmental dimensions, taking into account the gender perspective and consisting of mutually reinforcing policies and programmes.
This approach should be balanced, targeted, situation specific, locally owned, include local synergies and initiatives and be responsive to the needs of rural populations.
“5.
Rural development is the responsibility of each country and is predicated on an enabling national environment.
An enabling international economic environment is important to support effective national development efforts, including rural development efforts.
An enabling environment combines effective and coherent policies, good governance and accountable institutions at national and international levels as well as the promotion of gender equality and the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development.
Robust, broad-based and equitable economic growth as well as human resource development are needed to fight rural poverty.
“6.
In this regard, despite serious efforts to achieve progress, important issues in the implementation of the Doha Ministerial Declaration of the World Trade Organization, adopted at Doha on 20 November 2001,3 are still outstanding, in particular regarding the commitments under the said declaration for, inter alia, comprehensive negotiations aimed at substantial improvements in market access.
In the agricultural sector, without prejudging the outcome of negotiations, reductions of, with a view to phasing out, all forms of export subsidies, substantial reduction in trade-distorting domestic support and enhanced market access is needed.
We recall that special and differential treatment for developing countries shall be an integral part of all elements of the negotiations and shall be embodied in the schedules of concessions and commitments and as appropriate in the rules and disciplines to be negotiated, so as to be operationally effective and to enable developing countries to effectively take account of their development needs, including food security and rural development.
We take note of the non-trade concerns reflected in the negotiating proposals submitted by members and confirm that non-trade concerns will be taken into account in the negotiations, as provided for in the Agreement of Agriculture.
“7.
As for non-agricultural products, we call for reduction or, as appropriate, removal of non-tariff barriers, tariff peaks, high tariffs and tariff escalation to enhance market access, in particular for products of export interest to developing countries.
“8.
These matters must be urgently addressed by members of the World Trade Organization in order to ensure full implementation of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, including regarding implementation issues and special and differential treatment, and to make a success of the Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization to be held in Cancun, Mexico, in September 2003.
“9.
We invite members of the World Trade Organization to implement the commitments regarding trade-related technical assistance and capacity-building for developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, so that they can benefit from liberalized trade opportunities and adopt measures to reduce supply-side constraints, including by improving productivity and product diversification and enhancing competitiveness and community-based entrepreneurial capacity.
We urge them to facilitate the accession of developing countries to the Organization, in particular the least developed countries and countries with economies in transition, taking into account the individual level of development of each country that applies for membership.
In this regard, we welcome the recent agreement of the Organization to facilitate the accession of the least developed countries.
“10.
We recognize the vulnerability of the commodity-dependent developing countries, in particular the low-income countries, to market fluctuations and stress the need to support their efforts for the diversification of exports as a means of increasing export earnings and improving terms of trade and to address the impact of the instability of commodity prices.
In this context, it is very important to empower commodity producers in developing countries to insure themselves against risk.
We underscore the need for reforming the existing facilities to respond to the needs of the rural poor.
“11.
We urge developed countries that have not done so to make concrete efforts towards the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product as official development assistance to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national product of developed countries to least developed countries, as reconfirmed at the Third United Nations Conference on Least Developed Countries, and we encourage developing countries to build on progress achieved in ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively to help achieve development goals and targets.
We acknowledge the efforts of all donors, commend those donors whose official development assistance contributions exceed, reach or are increasing towards the targets, and underline the importance of undertaking to examine the means and time frames for achieving the targets and goals.
“12.
Food security, rural and agricultural development must be adequately addressed in the context of national development and poverty eradication as well as in multilateral and bilateral donor response strategies.
To that end, we deem it necessary to increase productive investment in rural and agricultural development to achieve lasting food security.
We take note with satisfaction of the undertakings made by the members of the Group of Eight, as contained in the Action Plan against Famine, especially in Africa, adopted in Evian, France, on 3 June 2003, to work towards reversing the decline of official development assistance to agriculture and increasing trade opportunities for developing countries.
“13.
External debt relief can play a key role in liberating resources that can then be directed towards activities consistent with attaining sustainable growth and development, and therefore, debt relief measures should, where appropriate, be pursued vigorously and expeditiously, including within the Paris and London Clubs and other relevant forums.
Noting the importance of re-establishing financial viability for those developing countries facing unsustainable debt burdens, we welcome initiatives that have been undertaken to reduce outstanding indebtedness and invite further national and international measures in that regard, including, as appropriate, debt cancellation and other arrangements.
“14.
We are committed to empowering poor women and men to play a full and effective role in their development by enabling them to have a larger voice in decision-making processes, including: resource allocation; promoting mechanisms, including the self-organization of poor people, to influence the market and public policies; and ensuring that poor rural people and their organizations have the opportunity to participate fully in the design, development and implementation of rural development strategies and programmes.
“15.
We are also committed to the empowerment of rural women at all levels and in all aspects of rural development, including agriculture, nutrition and food security, and to ensuring that the work of women is recognized and valued.
We will ensure women's equal access to land, property, adequate housing, economic opportunity, credit, education, skills training and health care, economic welfare, the right to inheritance and the right to contractual agreements, as well as empowerment through full participation in decision-making at all levels.
“16.
We call for greater access to financial services and labour markets for the rural poor, in particular women, indigenous people and vulnerable groups, and to this end we undertake to simplify existing mechanisms and to facilitate the establishment and strengthening of rural financial institutions, including micro-credit, savings and insurance facilities and cooperative ventures for rural development, as well as the development of professional associations and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.
“17.
We resolve to promote broad-based economic growth in developing countries and countries with economies in transition by strengthening sustainable agricultural and food policies, improving agricultural productivity, including for basic food commodities, and fostering non-farm rural economic activities.
“18.
We further resolve to enhance the livelihood of the rural poor by aiming to ensure that they have access to adequate quantities of safe and nutritious food and by creating productive and remunerative on- and off-farm employment opportunities, including through the diversification of the rural economy and employment-generating strategies.
In this regard, we will encourage South-South cooperation, including the sharing of experiences and best practices.
“19.
We reaffirm that sustainable agriculture and rural development are essential to the implementation of an integrated approach to food security and safety in an environmentally sustainable way.
We recognize the important role of rural populations in sustainably managing natural resources, including biodiversity, and in combating desertification and land degradation.
We pledge to promote environmentally sound and sustainable natural resources management, including the implementation of integrated land management, sustainable forest management programmes and water-use plans and the use of traditional and indigenous knowledge and practices as well as modern technologies of sustainable resource use and management.
We also acknowledge the need, subject to national legislation, to implement actions at all levels to recognize the rights of local and indigenous communities that are holders of traditional knowledge, innovations and practices and, with the approval and involvement of the holders of such knowledge, innovations and practices, to develop and implement benefit-sharing mechanisms on mutually agreed terms for their use.
“20.
We commit ourselves to strengthening the implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa and to addressing the causes of desertification and land degradation, in order to maintain and restore land, as well as poverty resulting from land degradation.
“21.
We recognize the key role of alternative development strategies for sustainable development of the rural areas affected by the illicit cultivation of narcotic plants and call for the promotion of such strategies.
“22.
We call for concrete steps at both the national and international levels to mobilize public and private investment as well as to enhance access to credit for the development of the physical rural infrastructure in order to enhance productivity and improve access to markets and information.
“23.
We recognize that research and its effective application are crucial for the development and implementation of appropriate new technologies that are pro-poor and raise on- and off-farm productivity.
To that end, we underline the need for measures to increase investment in agricultural research, including modern technologies, natural resources management and capacity-building.
We also call for measures to enhance and expand access to information and communication technologies in the rural areas of developing countries and countries with economies in transition.
“24.
We recognize the crucial importance of enhanced access of the rural poor, women and men, to productive assets, in particular land and water, and stress that priority attention should be given to the adoption of policies and the implementation of laws that guarantee well-defined and enforceable land- and water-use rights and promote legal security of tenure, recognizing the existence of different national laws and/or systems of land access and tenure.
“25.
We also call for enhanced access to social services for poor people in rural and remote areas.
We are committed to improving access to quality education for the rural poor, especially the girl child, through increased investment and full utilization of modern techniques and technologies, including the establishment of remote education systems.
“26.
We recognize the critical link between HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, cholera, typhus and other serious diseases and rural development, as well as their negative impact on the agricultural sector.
We also recognize the importance of health, including reproductive health, to: rural development and the eradication of poverty; reducing infant, child and maternal mortality; combating HIV/AIDS; and promoting equality and empowerment among the rural poor, especially women.
“27.
We emphasize that full implementation of the Doha Declaration on the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights and public health, adopted by the World Trade Organization at Doha on 20 November 2001,4 including its paragraph 6, is important for tackling public health problems, especially those resulting from HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other epidemics.
“28.
We are deeply concerned about the devastating impact of the global HIV/AIDS epidemic, which undermines efforts to eradicate poverty.
We recognize that HIV/AIDS has serious debilitating consequences for societies, particularly in Africa.
We are therefore committed to the mainstreaming of HIV/AIDS concerns into rural development planning, including poverty eradication and food security strategies and multisectoral development activities covering economic and social aspects, taking into account the particular situation of rural women.
“29.
Bearing in mind that the majority of indigenous people live in rural areas, we recognize the need to implement policies and programmes to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development that are focused on them, taking into account their traditional knowledge and their special relationship with the land.
“30.
We reaffirm the goal of expanding access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation, particularly in the rural areas of developing countries and countries with economies in transition, and express our resolve to the expeditious realization of that goal, in accordance with the commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development.5
“31.
We also reaffirm the need to improve access to reliable, affordable, economically viable, socially acceptable and environmentally sound energy services and resources, taking into account national specificities and circumstances, through various means, such as enhanced rural electrification and decentralized energy systems, increased use of renewables, cleaner liquid and gaseous fuels and enhanced energy efficiency, as well as by intensifying regional and international cooperation in support of national efforts, including through capacity-building, financial and technological assistance and innovative financing mechanisms, including at the micro- and meso-levels, recognizing the specific factors for providing access to the poor.
“32.
We undertake to promote rural-urban linkages by developing and strengthening a system of intermediate-size secondary and tertiary towns to stimulate rural development, as well as to minimize the negative impacts of rural-urban migration.
At the same time, we will encourage programmes and policies designed to strengthen rural service centre and small town systems, including strengthening institutions and mechanisms for local or regional planning.
“33.
We are committed to responding effectively to Africa's special needs for achieving sustainable development and to lending our full support to the development and implementation of national policies and programmes for rural development in Africa.
To this end, we reiterate our support for the priorities of the New Partnership for Africa's Development and the call to channel financial, technical and other types of resources towards the priorities of the New Partnership, in particular infrastructural development, health services, education, water and agriculture.
We underline the importance of implementing the initiatives contained in the New Partnership, in particular those designed to enhance market access and the diversification of production in African economies, which are vulnerable because of their dependence on primary production and natural resources-based sectors.
“34.
We recognize the special needs of the least developed countries and reaffirm our commitment to the implementation of outcomes of the Third United Nations Conference on Least Developed Countries, in particular the elements related to rural development, enhanced market access and provision for enhanced technical assistance and support for capacity-building.
“35.
Recognizing also the special challenges in rural development faced by small island developing States, we reaffirm our commitment to the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States and emphasize in this regard the importance of the international meeting to be held in Mauritius in 2004.
Noting also that the geographical situation of the landlocked developing countries is an added constraint on their efforts to promote rural development, we call for the implementation of specific actions related to the particular needs of those countries.
“36.
We underline the importance of partnerships at the national and international levels to foster collaboration among actors in different sectors.
At the national and local levels, we will encourage local authorities, civil society, the private sector and local communities to launch partnerships that support and promote rural development.
At the international level, we will facilitate and nurture alliances of Governments, donors, non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector for the promotion of integrated rural development.
“37.
We welcome the work of the organizations of the United Nations system in eradicating rural poverty and promoting rural development and urge them to ensure that measures are implemented to simplify, harmonize and integrate assessment procedures and programming so as to reduce transaction costs and avoid additional procedural requirements for programme countries and enhance support for their efforts to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, especially those contained in the Millennium Declaration.
We emphasize that national and international poverty reduction strategies should target rural areas and households more systematically by integrating poverty eradication and food security as well as environmental objectives more firmly in poverty reduction strategy papers, where they exist, as well as in common country assessments and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework.
We urge the international and regional financial institutions to enhance their support for rural poverty eradication and rural development in developing countries and countries with economies in transition.
“38.
We commit ourselves to the implementation of the present declaration and call upon civil society, the organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant actors and organizations to lend their full support to the realization of the objectives of integrated rural development for poverty eradication and sustainable development.
We agree to review progress or lack thereof in the implementation of the present declaration at the substantive session of the Economic and Social Council in 2005.”
Notes
2 General Assembly resolution 55/2.
5 Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap.
I, resolution 2, annex.
Chapter IV
Operational activities segment
Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation
The Council considered the question of operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation (agenda item 3) at its 19th to 24th and at its 29th to 31st meetings, on 3, 4, 7, 10 and 11 July 2003 (for the proceedings, see E/2003/SR.19-24 and 29-31).
Follow-up to policy recommendations of the General Assembly and the Council
The Council held a discussion on the follow-up to policy recommendations of the General Assembly and the Council (agenda item 3 (a)) at its 23rd, 24th, 29th, 30th and 31st meetings, on 7, 10 and 11 July (see E/2003/SR.23, 24 and 29-31).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Extension of water-related technical cooperation projects to end-beneficiaries: bridging the gap between the normative and the operational in the United Nations system (case studies in two African countries)” (A/57/497);
(b) Comments by the Secretary-General and the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit (A/57/497/Add.1);
(c) Report of the Secretary-General on comprehensive statistical data on operational activities for development for the year 2001 (E/2003/57);
(d) Report of the Secretary-General on progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/201 (E/2003/61);
(e) Report of the Secretary-General on assessment of the lessons learned by United Nations organizations from evaluation activities at the field level (E/2003/64);
(f) Report of the Secretary-General on funding of development cooperation activities of the United Nations system (E/2003/89).
Reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme
The Council held a discussion on the reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme at its 23rd, 24th and 30th meetings, on 7 and 11 July (see E/2003/SR.23, 24 and 30).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Annual reports of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund to the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/13);
(b) Annual report of the Executive Director of the World Food Programme, 2002 (E/2003/14);
(c) Report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund on the work of its first regular session of 2003 (E/2003/34 (Part I));1
(d) Annual report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund to the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/48);
(e) Report of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme on its first, second and third regular sessions and annual session of 2002 (E/2003/36);
(f) Report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund on its second regular session of 2002 (DP/2003/1);
(g) Report of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund on its first regular session of 2003 (DP/2003/9);
(h) Report of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme on strengthening consultations with the Member States on the Human Development Report, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 57/264 (DP/2003/17);
(i) Decisions adopted by the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund at its annual session of 2003 (DP/2003/26);
(j) Decisions adopted by the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund at its annual session of 2003 (E/2003/L.8).
C. Economic and technical cooperation among developing countries
The Council held a discussion on economic and technical cooperation among developing countries at its 23rd and 24th meetings on 7 July (see E/2003/SR.23 and 24).
It had before it the report of the High-level Committee on the Review of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC/13/4).
At its 19th meeting, on 3 July, the Council held a high-level panel discussion on resources for operational activities for development, reviewing the progress made on the issue of funding on development cooperation activities of the United Nations.
The moderator of the panel, Nitin Desai, Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs, made introductory remarks and introduced the panellists.
The following panellists made presentations, which were followed by an interactive debate: Walter Fust, Director-General for Development Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland; Marco Cesar Naslausky, Director-General for Development Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Brazil; Ruth Jacoby, Director-General for Development Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Sweden; Ariel Buira, Chairman of the Group of 24; Ron Keller, Director-General for International Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands; Muchkund Dubey, President of the Council for Social Development, India; Jean-Claude Faure, former Chairman of the Development Assistance Committee/Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD/DAC); Bruce Jenks, Associate Administrator and Director of the Bureau for Resources and Strategic Partnerships of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
At its 20th meeting, on 3 July, the Council held a dialogue with executive heads of United Nations funds and programmes.
Presentations were made by the Administrator of UNDP, the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Executive Director of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Deputy Executive Director of the World Food Programme (WFP).
An interactive debate was held following the presentations.
At its 21st meeting, on 4 July, the Council held a high-level panel discussion on an impartial and independent assessment of the extent to which the United Nations funds, programmes and agencies at the field level learn lessons from their evaluations as well as to formulate proposals on how to improve the feedback mechanisms at the field level.
The moderator of the panel, Patrizio Civili, Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs, made introductory remarks and introduced the panellists.
The following panellists made presentations, which were followed by an interactive dialogue: Colin Kirk, Head of the Evaluation Department, Department for International Development, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; Hans Lundgren, Adviser on Aid Effectiveness, OECD/DAC secretariat; Luciano Lavizzari, Director, Evaluation Office, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD); Alan Nurul, Deputy Director, Evaluation Office, UNDP; Mahesh Patel, Director, Evaluation Office, UNICEF; Eduardo Wiesner, Senior partner, Wiesner and Associates, Colombia; Dharam Ghai, evaluator, consultant, Kenya.
The presentations were followed by an interactive dialogue.
At its 22nd meeting, on 4 July, the Council held a dialogue with the United Nations country team for Senegal.
Presentations were made by Niane Thierno Seydou, Coordinator, Cellule de Suivi, Projet de Lutte contre la Pauvreté dans l'Aftout (PLCP), Ministère de l'économie et des finances, Senegal; Cheikh Mouhamady Cissoko, Président d'honneur Conseil national de concertation et de coopération des ruraux (CNCR), Senegal; and Wore Gana Seck, Vice-President of Conseil des organisations non gouvernementales d'appui au développement (CONGAD), Senegal.
Presentations were then made by the following representatives of the country team: Ahmed Rhazaoui, Resident Coordinator and Resident Representative, UNDP; Alain Nickels, Representative, United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO); Ian Hopwood, Resident Representative, UNICEF.
After the presentations, an interactive dialogue was held.
At its 23rd meeting, on 7 July, the Council held a general discussion of the item and heard introductory statements by the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs and an inspector from the Joint Inspection Unit.
At its 24th meeting, on 7 July, the Council continued its general discussion of the item and heard an introductory statement by the policy adviser for the Special Unit for Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries of UNDP.
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 3 (a), the Council adopted resolutions 2003/3 and 2003/4.
Progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/201 on the triennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system
At the 30th meeting, on 11 July, the Vice-President of the Council, Abdul Mejid Hussein (Ethiopia), introduced a draft resolution (E/2003/L.20) entitled “Progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/201 on the triennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system”, which he submitted on the basis of informal consultations.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/3.
World Solidarity Fund
At the 29th meeting, on 10 July, the observer for Morocco, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft resolution (E/2003/L.18) entitled “World Solidarity Fund”, which read as follows:
“The Economic and Social Council,
“Recalling General Assembly resolutions 55/210 of 20 December 2000, 56/207 of 21 December 2001 and 57/265 of 20 December 2002,
“Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by heads of State and Government,
“Recalling further the Monterrey Consensus, of the International Conference on Financing for Development, held at Monterrey, Mexico, from 18 to 22 March 2002, as well as the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, held at Johannesburg, South Africa, from 26 August to 4 September 2002,
“Taking note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme on the establishment of the World Solidarity Fund,
“1.
Recognizes the important potential contribution of the World Solidarity Fund to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, in particular the objective of reducing by half the proportion of people living on less than one dollar a day and the proportion of the people who suffer from hunger;
“2.
Welcomes the setting up, in February 2003, of the World Solidarity Fund as a trust fund of the United Nations Development Programme, subject to the financial rules and regulations as adopted by the Executive Board of United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund;
“3.
Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to take further measures to operationalize the World Solidarity Fund by establishing, on an urgent basis, the high-level committee whose task it is to define the strategy of the Fund and to mobilize the financial resources to enable it to start its activities in the field of poverty alleviation;
“4.
Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to take all necessary measures to publicize the World Solidarity Fund and to raise awareness of its existence among the public and the private sectors as well as civil society;
“5.
Encourages Member States, international organizations, the private sector, relevant institutions, foundations and individuals to contribute to the World Solidarity Fund;
“6.
Invites developing countries to identify projects to be submitted for financing by the World Solidarity Fund, and requests the United Nations Development Programme to cooperate with national authorities in this regard;
“7.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a progress report on the operationalization of the World Solidarity Fund to the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session in 2004.”
At the 31st meeting, on 11 July, the Vice-President of the Council, Abdul Mejid Hussein (Ethiopia), introduced draft resolution E/2003/L.21, which he submitted on the basis of informal consultations held on draft resolution E/2003/L.18.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted draft resolution E/2003/L.21.
See Council resolution 2003/4.
In the light of the adoption of draft resolution E/2003/L.21, draft resolution E/2003/L.18 was withdrawn by its sponsors.
Under agenda item 3 (b), the Council adopted draft decision 2003/224.
Delegation of formal authority in matters of personnel of the United Nations Population Fund
At the 30th meeting, on 11 July, the Vice-President of the Council, Abdul Mejid Hussein (Ethiopia), introduced a draft decision (E/2003/L.13) entitled “Delegation of formal authority in matters of personnel of the United Nations Population Fund”, which he submitted on the basis of informal consultations.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision.
See Council decision 2003/224.
Documents considered by the Council in connection with item 3
Under the agenda item as a whole, the Council adopted decision 2003/225.
At its 31st meeting, on 11 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President, the Council took note of the documents submitted under agenda item 3.
See Council decision 2003/225.
Notes
1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 14 (E/2003/34/Rev.1).
Chapter V
Coordination segment
The role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits
The Council considered the question of the role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits (agenda item 4) at its 25th to 28th meetings on 8 and 9 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.25-28).
For the consideration of the item, the Council had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General on the role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits (E/2003/67);
(b) Comprehensive report of the Statistical Commission on the work related to chapter VI, section E, of its report on its thirty-third session and on basic indicators for the integrated and coordinated follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits at all levels, including the report on indicators on means of implementation (E/2003/83);
(c) Note by the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) transmitting a report by the Committee on World Food Security of FAO on the progress in the implementation of the World Food Summit Plan of Action (E/2003/87).
At the 25th meeting on 8 July, statements were made by the Vice-Presidents of the ad hoc working group of the General Assembly on the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields, Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana) and Jean de Ruyt (Belgium).
Also at its 25th meeting, the Council held a general discussion of the agenda item and heard an introductory statement by the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs.
At its 26th meeting, on 8 July, the Council held a panel discussion on “Conference implementation: common goals and common challenges”.
The following panellists made presentations: Rubens Ricupero, Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD); Jan Pronk, Professor, International Development Institute of Social Studies, the Netherlands; Brunson McKinley, Director-General, International Organization for Migration (IOM); and David Heymann, Executive Director, Communicable Diseases, World Health Organization (WHO).
The Council then heard a statement by the lead discussant, Jeffrey McNeely of the World Conservation Union (WCU), whereupon an interactive debate with the panellists ensued.
At its 27th meeting, on 9 July, the Council concluded its general discussion of the agenda item.
At its 28th meeting, on 9 July, the Council held a panel discussion on working together for rural development to help realize internationally agreed development goals.
The Director of the Division for ECOSOC Support and Coordination made a statement.
The following panellists made presentations: Abhimanyu Singh, Lead Manager, Dakar Follow-up Unit, Education Sector, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO); Jean Majeres, Chief, Employment Intensive Investment Branch, International Labour Organization (ILO); and Eduardo Doryan, Special Representative to the United Nations, World Bank.
The Council then heard statements by the lead discussants, Lev Komlev, Officer-in-Charge, Special Programme for Least Developed, Landlocked and Island Developing Countries, UNCTAD; Themba Masuku, Director, FAO Liaison Office in Geneva; and Maria Elena Chavez, Deputy Director-General of the International Cooperative Alliance.
Upon completion of the presentations, an interactive dialogue with the panellists ensued.
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 4, the Council adopted resolution 2003/6 and decision 2003/227.
The role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits
At its 36th meeting, on 16 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution entitled “The role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields” (E/2003/L.27), submitted by the Vice-President of the Council.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/6.
Before the adoption of the draft resolution, the representative of France made a statement.
After the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the representative of the United States of America.
Documents considered by the Council in connection with item 4
At its 36th meeting, on 16 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President, the Council took note of a document submitted under item 4.
See Council decision 2003/227.
Chapter VI
Humanitarian affairs segment
Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
The Council considered the question of strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations (agenda item 5) at its 31st, 32nd, 33rd, 34th and 35th meetings, held on 11, 14 and 15 July 2003 (see E/2003/SR.31-35).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations (A/58/89-E/2003/85);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Evaluation of United Nation system response in East Timor: coordination and effectiveness” (A/58/85-E/2003/80);
(c) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on the above report (A/58/85/Add.1-E/2003/80/Add.1);
(d) Letter dated 28 May 2003 from the Permanent Representative of Chile to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting the outcome of the seventeenth Inter-American Conference (A/57/821-E/2003/86);
(e) Letter dated 1 July 2003 from the Permanent Representative of Sweden to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting the conclusions, principles and implementation plan adopted at the International Meeting on Good Humanitarian Donorship (A/58/99-E/2003/94).
At its 31st meeting, on 11 July, the Council held a panel discussion on humanitarian financing and effectiveness of humanitarian assistance in which the following panellists participated: Jan Berteling, Director for Human Rights, Humanitarian Assistance, Good Governance and Peace-building, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Netherlands; Magnus Lennartsson, Deputy Director, Head of Humanitarian Section, Department of Global Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sweden; the Deputy Executive Director, World Food Programme (WFP); Simon Mechale, Commissioner, Disaster Prevention and Preparedness Commission, Ethiopia; and the United Nations Assistant High Commissioner for Refugees.
At its 32nd meeting, on 14 July, the Council held a panel discussion on the transition from relief to development in which the following panellists participated: the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; Jacques Forster, Vice-President of the International Committee of the Red Cross; the Assistant Emergency Relief Coordinator, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat; a representative of the Bureau for Conflict Prevention and Recovery, United Nations Development Programme; and the United Nations resident coordinator and humanitarian coordinator in Angola.
At its 33rd meeting, the Council held a panel discussion on responding to the effects of HIV/AIDS and other widespread diseases on humanitarian relief operations in which the following panellists participated: the Executive Director, Sustainable Development and Healthy Environments, World Health Organization; the Director, Country and Regional Support Department, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS); Massimo Barra, President of the European Red Cross Network on AIDS; and the Deputy Executive Director, WFP.
Action taken by the Council
Under item 5, the Council adopted resolution 2003/5 and decision 2003/226.
Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
At its 35th meeting, on 15 July, the Council had before it, in English only, a draft resolution entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations” (subsequently issued as E/2003/L.28), which was submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Valery Kuchinsky (Ukraine), on the basis of informal consultations.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/5.
Before the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the representatives of France, Cuba and the Russian Federation.
Documentation considered by the Council in connection with item 5
At its 35th meeting, on 15 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President, the Council decided to take note of a document submitted under item 5.
See Council decision 2003/226.
Chapter VII
General segment
Implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits
Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development
The Council held a discussion on the follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development (agenda item 6 (a)) at its 36th, 37th and 47th meetings, on 16 and 24 July (for the discussion see E/2003/SR.36, 37 and 47).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Summary by the President of the Economic and Social Council of the special high-level meeting of the Council with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization (A/58/77-E/2003/62);
(b) Summary of the hearings and dialogue of the Economic and Social Council with members of civil society (A/58/77/Add.1-E/2003/62/Add.1);
(c) Summary of the hearings and dialogue of the Economic and Social Council with business interlocutors (A/58/77/Add.2-E/2003/62/Add.2);
(d) Report of the Secretary-General on follow-up efforts to the International Conference on Financing for Development (A/57/319-E/2002/85).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 6 (a), the Council adopted resolution 2003/47.
International Conference on Financing for Development
At the 36th meeting, on 16 July, the representative of Morocco, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft resolution entitled “International Conference on Financing for Development” (E/2003/L.10), which read as follows:
“The Economic and Social Council,
“Recalling General Assembly resolution 56/210 B of 9 July 2002, in which the Assembly endorsed the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development, adopted on 22 March 2002,
“Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/34 of 26 July 2002, in which the Council identified its four broad tasks related to follow-up activities, which included promoting coherence, cooperation and coordination within the United Nations; intensifying interactions with other multilateral stakeholders; involving other relevant stakeholders; and preparing inputs for consideration by the General Assembly,
“Recalling further the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the General Assembly on the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields,
“Recognizing the crucial importance of proper follow-up to the implementation of agreements and commitments reached at the Conference,
“Stressing the importance of staying fully engaged, nationally, regionally and internationally, of ensuring proper follow-up to the implementation of agreements and commitments reached at the Conference and of continuing to build bridges among development, finance, monetary and trade organizations and initiatives, within the framework of the holistic agenda of the Conference,
“Recognizing the link between financing for development and attaining internationally agreed development goals and objectives, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, in measuring development progress and helping to guide development priorities, as well as achieving sustained economic growth and sustainable development, bearing in mind the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),
“Welcoming the establishment of the Financing for Development Office in the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 52/273 of 20 December 2002,
“1.
Takes note with appreciation of the summary by the President of the Economic and Social Council of the special high-level meeting of the Council with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization (New York, 14 April 2003), which constitutes an important input provided by the Council to the high-level dialogue on the financing for development to be held by the General Assembly in October 2003;
“2.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the follow-up efforts to the International Conference on Financing for Development;
“3.
Expresses its satisfaction with the interactive dialogue of the special high-level meeting, which constituted an important successful first step in the follow-up process provided for in paragraph 69 of the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development;
“4.
Decides to build on the experience accumulated during the 2003 special high-level meeting, in convening and organizing the next special high-level meeting, which should examine further specific steps to be taken by each of the stakeholders to move the Monterrey process forward;
“5.
Also decides to invite representatives of the Trade and Development Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to participate in the special high-level meeting;
“6.
Further decides that the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, in cooperation with the secretariats of the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, will prepare the necessary documentation for the special high-level meeting;
“7.
Welcomes the continued participation of non-governmental organizations and the business sector in the Monterrey process, in accordance with the rules of procedure and established practices of the Economic and Social Council.”
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), entitled “International Conference on Financing for Development” (E/2003/L.39), on the basis of informal consultations held on draft resolution E/2003/L.10.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/47.
Review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010
The Council held a discussion on the review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 (agenda item 6 (b)) at its 36th, 37th, 38th, 41st and 44th meetings, on 16, 17, 18 and 22 July (for the discussion see E/2003/SR.36, 37, 38, 41 and 44).
It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 (A/58/86-E/2003/81).
At the 36th meeting, on 16 July, the High Representative and Under-Secretary-General for Least Developed Countries, Land-locked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States made an introductory statement.
Action taken by the Council
Under item 6 (b), the Council adopted resolution 2003/17.
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
At the 41st meeting on 18 July, the representative of Morocco, also on behalf of France and Spain, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries” (E/2003/L.15), which read as follows:
“The Economic and Social Council,
“Recalling the Brussels Declaration and the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010,
“Recalling also its decision 2001/320 of 24 October 2001 establishing, under the regular agenda item entitled `Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the major United Nations conferences and summits', a regular sub-item entitled `Review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010',
“Recalling further its resolution 2002/33 of 26 July 2002 on the oral report of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Land-locked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010,
“1.
Takes note of the progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010;
“2.
Expresses its deep concern over the weak implementation of the Programme of Action;
“3.
Calls on the Secretary-General, while stressing the central role of the Council in the coordination of actions in the United Nations system for the implementation of the Programme of Action, to take appropriate measures to strengthen the advocacy, monitoring and coordination actions of the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Land-locked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States as well as its management and staffing;
“4.
Stresses the need for the effective implementation of the Programme of Action and its annual assessment at the substantive session of the Economic and Social Council, recognizes in this regard the critical importance of the participation of the least developed countries in the assessment process of the Programme of Action, and calls on the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to facilitate the participation of the delegations of the least developed countries in the annual substantive sessions of the Economic and Social Council;
“5.
Calls on all development partners of the least developed countries, including multilateral financial institutions, to honour their commitments regarding the effective and expeditious implementation of the Programme of Action and to effect their support in terms of official development assistance, foreign direct investment, debt relief, capacity-building, market access and supply-side support to reforms;
“6.
Urges the developed countries that have not yet done so to make concrete efforts to effectively implement their commitments on official development assistance to the least developed countries as contained in paragraph 83 of the Programme of Action;
“7.
Invites the United Nations system, including the Bretton Woods institutions and all other international organizations, to support, as a priority, the implementation of the Programme of Action, including all programmes of financial and technical cooperation devoted to least developed countries;
“8.
Welcomes the initiatives of the United Nations and the Group of Eight to bridge the digital divide that has further marginalized the least developed countries, particularly in the area of information technology, calls on the international community to address the special needs of the least developed countries therein, and in this regard recommends that the forthcoming World Summit on the Information Society adopt concrete actions to bridge the digital divide in the least developed countries;
“9.
Calls on the forthcoming Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization, to be held in Cancun, Mexico, in September 2003, to adopt further measures to effectively address the marginalization of the least developed countries in the multilateral trading system and to ensure expeditious accession to the organization for those least developed countries that are candidates;
“10.
Calls on the members of the World Trade Organization to expeditiously implement the guidelines to facilitate and accelerate the accession of the least developed countries to the World Trade Organization, which were adopted by the General Council of the World Trade Organization on 10 December 2002;
“11.
Recognizes that countries graduating from least developed countries status need a smooth transition period so that their developmental programmes and projects may be sustained at a level not lower than before graduation, and in this regard decides that the question of the least developed countries graduation will be considered only at the final evaluation of the Programme of Action;
“12.
Calls on the Secretary-General to submit his annual progress report on the implementation of the Programme of Action in such a way as to put greater emphasis on concrete results and indicate the progress achieved in its implementation.”
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council had before it a revised draft resolution entitled “Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries” (E/2003/L.15/Rev.1), submitted by the sponsor of draft resolution E/2003/L.15.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the revised draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/17.
Coordination, programme and other questions
The Council held a discussion on coordination, programme and other questions (agenda item 7) at its 39th, 40th, 42nd, 44th, 46th, 47th and 48th meetings, on 17, 18, 21, 22, 23 and 24 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.39, 40, 42, 44 and 46-48).
It had before it the following documents:
Reports of coordination bodies (agenda item 7 (a))
(a) Annual overview report of the United Nation System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2002 (E/2003/55);
(b) Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on its forty-third session (A/58/16 (Supplement No. 16));1
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005 (agenda item 7 (b))
(c) Relevant sections of the proposed biennial programme budget for 2003-2005 (A/58/6);
Calendar of conferences and meetings in the economic, social and related fields (agenda item 7 (c))
(d) Letter dated 26 June 2003 from the Chairman of the Committee on Conferences addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/102);
International cooperation in the field of informatics (agenda item 7 (d))
(e) Report of the Secretary-General on international cooperation in the field of informatics (E/2003/75);
Long-term programme of support for Haiti (agenda item 7 (e))
(f) Report of the Secretary-General on the long-term programme of support for Haiti (E/2003/54);
Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes of the United Nations system (agenda item 7 (f))
(g) Report of the Secretary-General on follow-up to and progress in the implementation of, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly (E/2003/69);
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) (agenda item 7 (g))
(h) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Executive Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (E/2003/66);
Ad hoc advisory group on African countries emerging from conflict (agenda item 7 (h))
(i) Report of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau (E/2003/8);
(j) Letter dated 26 September 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Burundi to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2002/86);
(k) Letter dated 1 July 2003 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/95);
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) Task Force (agenda item 7 (i))
(l) First annual report of the Secretary-General on the Information and Communication Technologies Task Force (E/2003/56 and Corr.1).
At the 39th meeting, on 17 July, introductory statements were made by the Assistant Secretary-General for Policy Coordination and Inter-Agency Affairs (under agenda item 7 (a)); the Executive Director, Joint United Nations Programme on Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (UNAIDS) (under agenda item 7 (g)); the Chairman of the Committee for Programme and Coordination (under agenda items 7 (d) and (i)); and the Director, Division for ECOSOC Support and Coordination, Department of Economic and Social Affairs (under agenda items 7 (b) and (e)).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 7, the Council adopted resolutions 2003/16, 2003/18, 2003/46, 2003/48, 2003/49, 2003/50, 2003/53 and 2003/54 and decisions 2003/272 and 2003/288.
Reports of coordination bodies
No proposals were submitted under agenda item 7 (a).
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005
No proposals were submitted under agenda item 7 (b).
Calendar of conferences and meetings in the economic, social and related fields
Calendar of conferences and meetings for 2004 and 2005 in the economic, social and related fields
At the 39th meeting, on 17 July, the Chief, Central Planning and Coordination, Conference Services Division, United Nations Office at Geneva, introduced and orally revised the provisional calendar of conferences and meetings for 2004 and 2005 in the economic, social and related fields (E/2003/L.7 and Corr.1).
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the provisional calendar of conferences and meetings, as orally revised.
See Council decision 2003/272.
International cooperation in the field of informatics
The need to harmonize and improve United Nations informatics systems for optimal utilization and accessibility by all States
At the 39th meeting, on 17 July, the observer for Morocco, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft resolution entitled “The need to harmonize and improve United Nations informatics systems for optimal utilization and accessibility by all States” (E/2003/L.11).
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a revised draft resolution submitted by the observer for Morocco, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China (E/2003/L.11/Rev.1).
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the revised draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/48.
Long-term programme of support for Haiti
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution entitled “Long-term programme of support for Haiti” submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland) on the basis of informal consultations (E/2003/L.35).
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/46.
Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system
At the 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the representative of Australia introduced a draft resolution entitled “Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system” (E/2003/L.24).
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a revised draft resolution submitted by Australia (E/2003/L.24/Rev.1).
At the same meeting, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America joined in sponsoring the revised draft resolution.
Also at the same meeting, the representative of Australia orally revised paragraph 12 by inserting the word “all” before the words “gender analysis budgets”.
At the same meeting the Council adopted the revised draft resolution, as orally revised.
See Council resolution 2003/49.
Before the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the representative of Argentina.
Joint United Nations Programme on Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (UNAIDS)
At the 43rd meeting, on 21 July, the representative of Senegal, on behalf of Algeria, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Botswana, Canada, Cape Verde, Congo, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, India, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Monaco, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Poland, Portugal, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, the United Republic of Tanzania, the United States, Zambia and Zimbabwe, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Joint United Nations Programme on Human Immunodeficiency Virus/ Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (UNAIDS) (E/2003/L.25/Rev.1).
Subsequently, Cuba, Cameroon, Ireland, Nepal, Nicaragua, Romania and Rwanda joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/18.
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/18.
After the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the representative of Senegal.
Ad hoc advisory group on African countries emerging from conflict
At the 40th meeting, on 18 July, the observer for Morocco, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Ad hoc advisory groups on African countries emerging from conflict” (E/2003/L.22).
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/50.
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau
At the 40th meeting, on 18 July, the observer for Morocco, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau” (E/2003/L.23).
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution E/2003/L.23.
See Council resolution 2003/53.
After the draft resolution was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States and Italy (on behalf of States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union, the acceding countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia and the countries associated with the European Union, Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade Association country Norway), and by the observer for Morocco (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Burundi
At the 40th meeting, on 18 July, the President of the Economic and Social Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), introduced a draft resolution entitled “Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Burundi” (E/2003/L.34) and orally revised the sixth preambular paragraph by inserting the words “the Government of Burundi in collaboration with” between the words “organized by” and “the United Nations Development Programme”.
At its 43rd meeting, on 21 July, the Council had before it a revised draft resolution submitted by the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/L.34/Rev.1).
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the revised draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/16.
The Council resumed consideration of agenda item 7 at its 50th and 52nd plenary meetings, on 22 August and 19 December 2003 (see E/2003/SR.50 and 52).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 7, the Council adopted decision 2003/311.
Ad hoc advisory group on African countries emerging from conflict: Burundi
At its 50th meeting, on 22 August, the Council had before it a draft decision (E/2003/L.48) entitled “Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Burundi”, submitted by the President of the Council.
At the same meeting, the President informed the Council of a statement of programme budget implications on draft decision E/2003/L.48, contained in document E/2003/L.49.
Also at the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision, as orally amended.
See Council decision 2003/311.
After the adoption of the decision, the representatives of Burundi and South Africa made statements.
At the 52nd meeting, on 19 December, the representative of South Africa, in his capacity as Chairman of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Burundi, briefed the Council on the activities of the Group.
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) Task Force
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution entitled “Information and communication technologies for development” (E/2003/L.46), submitted by the Vice-President of the Economic and Social Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), on the basis of informal consultations.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/54.
C. Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B
The Council held a discussion on the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B (agenda item 8) at its 38th and 49th meetings, on 17 and 25 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.38 and 49).
The Council had before it the report of the Secretary-General on progress in implementing the Council's agreed conclusions 2002/1 and related provisions of General Assembly resolution 50/227 (E/2003/74).
Action taken by the Council
Under this item the Council adopted decision 2003/308.
Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council decided to defer consideration of the item to its resumed session.
See Council decision 2003/308.
The Council resumed consideration of agenda item 8 at its 52nd meeting, on 19 December (see E/2003/SR.52).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 8, the Council adopted decision 2003/314.
Report of the Secretary-General on the consolidated report on the work of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council in 2003
At its 52nd meeting, on 19 December, on the proposal of its President, the Council decided to defer consideration of the item “Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B: Consolidated report on the work of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council in 2003” to the organizational session of the Economic and Social Council in 2004.
See Council decision 2003/314.
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
The Council held a discussion on the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations (agenda item 9) at its 41st and 47th meetings, on 18 and 24 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.41 and 47).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General on assistance to the Palestinian people (A/58/88-E/2003/84);
(b) Report of the President of the Economic and Social Council on consultations held with the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration (E/2003/47);
(c) Report of the Secretary General on the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations (A/58/66).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 9, the Council adopted resolution 2003/51 and decision 2003/273.
Implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
At the 41st meeting, on 18 July, the representative of Cuba, on behalf of Algeria,2 Antigua and Barbuda,2 Bolivia,2 Burundi, Côte d'Ivoire,2 Chile, China, Cuba, Fiji,2 Ghana, Grenada,2 Indonesia,2 Jamaica, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Namibia,2 Nigeria, Saint Lucia,2 Sierra Leone,2 South Africa, the Sudan,2 the United Republic of Tanzania,2 Zambia2 and Zimbabwe, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations” (E/2003/L.33).
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution by a recorded vote of 32 to none, with 20 abstentions.
See Council resolution 2003/51.
The voting was as follows:3
In favour:
Argentina, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Azerbaijan, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
After the adoption of the resolution, statements were made by the representatives of the United States, Australia, Italy (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union and Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey), Japan and the Russian Federation (see E/2003/SR.47).
Document considered by the Council in connection with item 9
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), the Council took note of the report of the Secretary-General on assistance to the Palestinian people (A/58/88-E/2003/84).
See Council decision 2003/273.
E. Regional cooperation
The Council held a general discussion on regional cooperation (agenda item 10) on the theme “Development dimensions of trade negotiations: a regional perspective” at its 40th, 41st and 47th meetings, on 18 and 24 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.40, 41 and 47).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields (E/2003/15);
(b) Addendum to the report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields: matters calling for action by the Economic and Social Council or brought to its attention (E/2003/15/Add.1);
(c) Summary of the economic survey of Europe, 2002 (E/2003/16);
(d) Summary of the economic and social situation in Africa, 2002 (E/2003/17);
(e) Summary of the economic and social survey of Asia and the Pacific, 2003 (E/2003/18);
(f) Summary of the economic survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2002 (E/2003/19);
(g) Summary of the survey of economic and social developments in the region of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, 2002-2003 (E/2003/20);
(h) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the executive secretaries of the Economic Commission for Africa and the Economic Commission for Europe in connection with the Europe-Africa permanent link through the Strait of Gibraltar (E/2003/45).
Action taken by the Council
Under item 10, the Council adopted resolutions 2003/7, 2003/8, 2003/9 and 2003/52 and decisions 2003/228 and 2003/274.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation
Admission of Timor-Leste as a full member of the Commission: amendment of the terms of reference of the Commission
At its 41st meeting, on 18 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution recommended by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, entitled “Admission of Timor-Leste as a full member of the Commission: amendment of the terms of reference of the Commission” (E/2003/15/Add.1).
See Council resolution 2003/7.
Venue of the sixtieth session of the Commission
At its 41st meeting, on 18 July, the Council adopted the draft decision recommended by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, entitled “Venue of the sixtieth session of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific” (E/2003/15/Add.1).
See Council decision 2003/228.
Consideration of the establishment within the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia of a United Nations Arabic language centre
At its 41st meeting, on 18 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution recommended by the Economic Commission for Western Asia, entitled “Consideration of the establishment within the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia of a United Nations Arabic language centre” (E/2003/15/Add.1).
See Council resolution 2003/8.
Establishment within the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia of a committee on women
At its 41st meeting, on 18 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution recommended by the Economic Commission for Western Asia, entitled “Establishment within the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia of a committee on women” (E/2003/15/Add.1).
See Council resolution 2003/9.
Europe-Africa permanent link through the Strait of Gibraltar
At the 41st meeting, on 18 July, the representative of Morocco, also on behalf of Spain and France, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Europe-Africa permanent link through the Strait of Gibraltar” (E/2003/L.16).
At the 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement regarding programme budget implications in connection with the draft resolution.
At the same meeting, following a statement by the representative of the United States, the Council decided to postpone taking action on the draft resolution.
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/52.
Documents considered by the Council in connection with regional cooperation
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), the Council took note of the documents submitted in connection with regional cooperation (item 10).
See Council decision 2003/274.
The Council resumed consideration of agenda item 10 at its 51st meeting, on 31 October.
The President of the Council brought to the attention of the Council the report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields (E/2003/15/Add.2) (see E/2003/SR.51).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 10, no action was required.
Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan
The Council held a discussion on the economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan (agenda item 11) at its 41st and 48th meetings, on 18 and 24 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.41 and 48).
It had before it the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report prepared by the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia on the economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan (A/58/75-E/2003/21).
At the 41st meeting, on 18 July, the Executive Secretary of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia made an introductory statement (see E/2003/SR.41).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 11, the Council adopted resolution 2003/59 and decision 2003/292.
Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan
At the 41st meeting, on 18 July, the representative of Egypt, on behalf of Algeria,2 Saudi Arabia, Bahrain,2 Bangladesh,2 Cuba, Egypt, Kuwait,2 Lebanon,2 Morocco,2 Oman,2 Pakistan, Qatar, the Syrian Arab Republic,2 the Sudan, the United Arab Emirates2 and Palestine2 introduced a draft resolution entitled “Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan” (E/2003/L.26).
Subsequently, Jordan, Malaysia, Namibia and Yemen joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
The draft resolution read as follows:
“The Economic and Social Council,
“Recalling General Assembly resolution 57/269 of 20 December 2002,
“Also recalling its resolution 2002/31 of 25 July 2002,
“Guided by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations affirming the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, and recalling relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, 465 (1980) of 1 March 1980 and 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981,
“Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
“Stressing the importance of the revival of the Middle East peace process on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973 and 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978, and the principle of land for peace as well as the compliance with the agreements reached between the Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people,
“Reaffirming the principle of the permanent sovereignty of peoples under foreign occupation over their natural resources,
“Convinced that the Israeli occupation impedes efforts to achieve sustainable development and a sound economic environment in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan,
“Gravely concerned about the deterioration of economic and living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and of the Arab population of the occupied Syrian Golan and the exploitation by Israel, the occupying Power, of their natural resources,
“Expressing grave concern over the continuation of the recent tragic and violent events since September 2000 that have led to many deaths and injuries and the continuous deterioration of the situation,
“Aware of the important work being done by the United Nations and the specialized agencies in support of the economic and social development of the Palestinian people,
“Conscious of the urgent need for the reconstruction and development of the economic and social infrastructure of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and for addressing the humanitarian crisis facing the Palestinian people,
“1.
Stresses the need to preserve the territorial integrity of all of the Occupied Palestinian Territory and to guarantee the freedom of movement of persons and goods in the Territory, including the removal of restrictions on going into and from East Jerusalem, and the freedom of movement to and from the outside world;
“2.
Also stresses the vital importance of the construction and operation of the seaport in Gaza and safe passage to the economic and social development of the Palestinian people;
“3.
Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to end its occupation of Palestinian cities and other populated centres, to end all kinds of closures and to cease destruction of homes and economic facilities and agricultural fields;
“4.
Reaffirms the inalienable right of the Palestinian people and the Arab population of the occupied Syrian Golan to all their natural and economic resources, and calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, not to exploit, endanger or cause loss or depletion of these resources;
“5.
Also reaffirms that Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan, are illegal and an obstacle to economic and social development;
“6.
Stresses the importance of the work of the organizations and agencies of the United Nations and of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority;
“7.
Urges Member States to encourage private foreign investment in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, in infrastructure, job-creation projects and social development in order to alleviate the hardship of the Palestinian people and improve living conditions;
“8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session, through the Economic and Social Council, a report on the implementation of the present resolution and to continue to include, in the report of the United Nations Special Coordinator, an update on the living conditions of the Palestinian people, in collaboration with relevant United Nations agencies;
“9.
Decides to include the item entitled `Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan' in the agenda of its substantive session of 2004.”
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it an informal paper containing the text of the draft resolution as agreed upon at informal consultations.
At the same meeting, the observer for Lebanon withdrew its sponsorship of the draft resolution.
At the same meeting, following a statement by the representative of the United States, the representative of Egypt put forward a motion to take action immediately on the draft resolution.
Also at the 48th meeting, the representatives of Pakistan and Cuba made statements in favour of the motion.
At the same meeting, the representatives of the United States and Australia made statements against the motion.
Also at its 48th meeting, the Council proceeded to a recorded vote, which was carried by a vote of 36 to 3, with 14 abstentions, to take action immediately on the draft resolution.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Burundi, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Georgia, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Brazil, Chile, Germany, Guatemala, Jamaica, Japan, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Peru, Republic of Korea, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
At its 48th meeting, the Council adopted the agreed text by a recorded vote of 48 to 2, with 3 abstentions.
See Council resolution 2003/59.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Andorra, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Georgia, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia, Guatemala, Nicaragua.
Before the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the representatives of the United States and Australia.
After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the representatives of Japan, Peru, the Russian Federation and China.
A statement was made by the observer for Israel.
The observer for Palestine also made a statement.
Document considered by the Council in connection with item 11
At its 48th meeting, on 25 July, on the proposal of the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), the Council took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan (A/58/75-E/2003/21).
See Council decision 2003/292.
Non-governmental organizations
The Council held a discussion on non-governmental organizations (agenda item 12) at its 44th meeting, on 22 July (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.44).
It had before it the report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on the first part of its 2003 session (E/2003/32 (Part I)).
Part II of the report was presented to the Council in English only.
Action taken by the Council
Under item 12, the Council adopted decisions 2003/275, 2003/276, 2003/277, 2003/278 and 2003/279.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations
Applications for consultative status and requests for reclassification received from non-governmental organizations
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision I, recommended by the Committee,4 entitled “Applications for consultative status and requests for reclassification received from non-governmental organizations”.
See Council decision 2003/275.
Suspension of consultative status
At the 46th meeting, on 23 July, the representative of France, on behalf of Andorra, Austria,2 Belgium,2 Denmark,2 Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland,2 Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland,2 the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, introduced a draft decision entitled “Suspension of consultative status” (E/2003/L.38).
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it draft decision II recommended by the Committee,4 entitled “Suspension of consultative status”.
At the same meeting, the representative of France moved that action be taken on draft decision E/2003/L.38 before draft decision II.
Voting process on the motion to take action on draft decision E/2003/L.38 before draft decision II
At the same meeting, the Council proceeded to a roll-call vote on the motion of priority which was not carried by a vote of 24 to 26, with 4 abstentions.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Andorra, Australia, Chile, El Salvador, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Peru, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Against:
Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, China, Congo, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Ecuador, India, Senegal.
Before the vote on the motion of priority, statements were made by the representatives of Cuba, China, Benin, France and Ghana.
Voting process on draft decision II
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision II by a roll-call vote of 27 to 23, with 4 abstentions.
See Council decision 2003/276.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, China, Congo, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Chile, El Salvador, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Peru, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Ecuador, Japan, Senegal.
Before the vote, a statement was made by the representative of France.
Statements in explanation of vote before the vote were made by the representatives of South Africa, China, Senegal, Italy (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and Cuba.
Statements in explanation of vote after the vote were made by the representatives of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Benin, Brazil and Burundi.
Also at the same meeting, in the light of the adoption of draft decision II, the Council decided to take no action with regard to draft decision E/2003/L.38.
Implementation of the electronic meeting system (“Paperless Committee”)
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it draft decision III recommended by the Committee,4 entitled “Implementation of the electronic meeting system (`Paperless Committee')”.
At the same meeting, upon request of the representative of Japan, the Council decided to defer action on draft decision III.
See Council decision 2003/277.
Resumed 2003 session of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision IV recommended by the Committee, entitled “Resumed 2003 session of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations”.
See Council decision 2003/278.
Report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision V recommended by the Committee,4 entitled “Report of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations on its 2003 regular session”.
See Council decision 2003/279.
H. Economic and environmental questions
The Council held a discussion on economic and environmental questions at its substantive session (under item 13) at its 29th, 39th, 42nd, 43rd, and 46th to 49th meetings, on 10, 17, 21 and from 23 to 25 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.29, 39, 42, 43 and 46-49).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Consolidated report on the work of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council in 2003 (E/2003/90 and Add.1);
(b) Letter dated 28 May 2003 from the Permanent Representative of Chile to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting the outcome of the seventeenth Inter-American Conference (A/57/821-E/2003/86);
(c) Proposals of subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council requiring action by or the attention of the Council (E/2003/MISC.1).
Action taken by the Council
Documents considered by the Council under item 13
At its 29th and 46th to 49th meetings, on 10 and 23 to 25 July, the Council took note of a number of documents submitted under item 13.
See Council decision 2003/309.
Sustainable development
The Council held a discussion on sustainable development (agenda item 13 (a)) at its 43rd, and 46th to 49th meetings, on 21 and from 23 to 25 July.
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its eleventh session (E/2003/29);5
(b) Report of the Committee for Development Policy on its fifth session (including its final recommendations regarding the theme chosen for the high-level segment of 2003 of the Council) (E/2003/33);6
(c) Note verbale dated 1 July 2003 from the Permanent Mission of Maldives to the United Nations transmitting a letter from the President of Maldives addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/97);
(d) Letter dated 2 July 2003 from the Permanent Representative of Maldives to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/98);
(e) Letter dated 16 July 2003 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cape Verde to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/103).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 13 (a), the Council adopted resolutions 2003/55 and 2003/61 and decisions 2003/280, 2003/281 2003/282, 2003/283, 2003/289, 2003/296 and 2003/309.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its eleventh session
Preparations for an international meeting to review the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
At its 48th meeting on 24 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,7 entitled “Preparations for an international meeting to review the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States”.
See Council resolution 2003/55.
Future programme, organization and methods of work of the Commission on Sustainable Development
At its 48th meeting on 24 July, the Council considered draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,7 entitled “Future programme, organization and methods of work of the Commission on Sustainable Development”.
Following a statement by the representative of Morocco, the Council decided to revert to the draft resolution at a later stage.
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council was informed that a statement regarding the programme budget implications of the draft resolution was contained in document E/2003/L.32.
Also at the 49th meeting, the Secretary read out an oral revision to paragraph 4, replacing the word “Decide” with the words “Recommends to the General Assembly”.
Also at its 49th meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution, as orally revised.
See Council resolution 2003/61.
Report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its eleventh session and provisional agenda for the twelfth session of the Commission
At its 48th meeting on 24 July, the Council adopted the draft decision recommended by the Commission,7 entitled “Report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its eleventh session and provisional agenda for the twelfth session of the Commission”.
See Council decision 2003/289.
Status of non-governmental organizations and other major groups accredited to the World Summit on Sustainable Development
At its 49th meeting on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft text submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), as agreed upon during informal consultations held in connection with the draft decision 11/1, adopted by the Commission,8 entitled “Status of non-governmental organizations and other major groups accredited to the World Summit on Sustainable Development”.
At the same meeting, the representative of Morocco orally corrected the text.
Before the adoption of the draft text, a statement was made by the representative of Switzerland.
Also at the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft text, as orally corrected.
See Council decision 2003/295.
Bureau of the Commission on Sustainable Development
At its 49th meeting on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft text submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), as agreed upon during informal consultations held in connection with the draft decision 11/2, adopted by the Commission,8 entitled “Bureau of the Commission on Sustainable Development”.
At the same meeting, the representative of Morocco orally corrected the text.
Also at the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft text, as orally corrected.
See Council decision 2003/296.
Support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development
At the 45th meeting, on 23 July, the representative of Morocco, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft decision entitled “Support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development” (E/2003/L.40), which read as follows:
“The Economic and Social Council, recalling General Assembly resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002, entitled `Final review and appraisal of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s and support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development', decides to address, at its resumed session in 2003, the implementation of Assembly resolution 57/7 on support for the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's Development.”
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a revised draft decision entitled “Support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development” (E/2003/L.40/Rev.1), submitted by the sponsor of draft resolution E/2003/L.40.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the revised draft decision.
See Council decision 2003/282.
Preparations for an international meeting to review the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
At the 45th meeting, on 23 July, the representative of Morocco, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft decision entitled “Preparations for an international meeting to review the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States” (E/2003/L.41).
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the draft decision.
See Council decision 2003/283.
Report of the Committee for Development Policy on its fifth session: Timor-Leste
At the 43rd meeting, on 21 July, the representative of Brazil, on behalf of Portugal, Australia, Italy (on behalf of States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and Morocco (on behalf of States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), introduced a draft decision, entitled “Report of the Committee for Development Policy on its fifth session” (E/2003/L.29).
At the 47th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of Brazil orally amended the draft decision by deleting at the end of the paragraph, the words “subject to the concurrence of the Government of Timor-Leste”.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision.
See Council decision 2003/280.
Report of the Committee for Development Policy on its fifth session: Cape Verde and Maldives
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a draft decision entitled “Report of the Committee for Development Policy on its fifth session”, submitted by the President of the Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala) (E/2003/L.43).
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision.
See Council decision 2003/281.
The Council resumed consideration of agenda item 13 (a) at its 52nd meeting, on 19 December (see E/2003/SR.52).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 13 (a), the Council adopted decision 2003/316.
Report of the Committee for Development Policy on its fifth session and report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on the eleventh session
At its 52nd meeting, on 19 December, on the proposal of its President, the Council decided to defer consideration of chapter IV of the report of the Committee for Development Policy in its fifth session (E/2003/33) and chapter I.B of the report of the Commission on Sustainable Development on its eleventh session (E/2003/29) to the organizational session of the Economic and Social Council in 2004.
See Council decision 2003/316.
At the same meeting, the representative of the United States of America made a statement (E/2003/SR.52).
Science and technology for development
The Council held a discussion on science and technology for development (agenda item 13 (b)) at its 39th, 43rd, 44th and 48th meetings, on 17, 21, 22 and 24 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.39, 43, 44 and 48).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development9 on its sixth session (E/2003/31);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union on the preparations for the World Summit on the Information Society (A/58/74-E/2003/58).
Action by the Council
Under agenda item 13 (b), the Council adopted resolutions 2003/19 and 2003/56 and decisions 2003/290, 2003/291 and 2003/293.
World Summit on the Information Society
At the 43rd meeting, on 21 July, the representative of Japan, on behalf of Tunisia2 and Switzerland,2 introduced a draft resolution entitled “World Summit on the Information Society” (E/2003/L.30).
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council had before it a revised draft resolution submitted by Japan on behalf of Andorra, Canada,2 Chile, China, Italy,10 Japan, Morocco,2 Nepal, Nicaragua, Pakistan, South Africa, Switzerland2 and Tunisia2 (E/2003/L.30/Rev.1).
Subsequently, India, Mexico and Romania joined in sponsoring the revised draft resolution.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/19.
After the draft resolution was adopted, a statement was made by the representative of Japan.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development
Science and technology for development
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it the draft resolution recommended by the Commission,11 entitled “Science and technology for development” and amendments to the draft resolution submitted by the Vice-President Marjatta Rasi (Finland), on the basis of informal consultations (E/2003/L.42).
At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Council read out a statement on the programme budget implications of the draft resolution and orally corrected amendments to paragraph 3 (d) contained in document E/2003/L.42 by deleting “and” from the beginning of the amendment.
Also at the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution as amended and orally corrected.
See Council resolution 2003/56.
Contribution of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development to the high-level segment of the Economic and Social Council on rural development
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Commission,11 entitled “Contribution of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development to the high-level segment of the Economic and Social Council on rural development”.
See Council decision 2003/290.
Duration of future sessions of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Commission,11 entitled “Duration of future sessions of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development”.
See Council decision 2003/291.
Report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its sixth session and provisional agenda and documentation for the seventh session of the Commission
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted draft decision III recommended by the Commission entitled,11 “Report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its sixth session and provisional agenda and documentation for the seventh session of the Commission”.
See Council decision 2003/292.
Statistics
The Council held a discussion on statistics (agenda item 13 (c)) at its 43rd and 47th meetings, on 21 and 24 July (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.43 and 47).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-fourth session (E/2003/24);12
(b) Comprehensive report of the Statistical Commission on the work related to chapter VI, section E, of its report on its thirty-third session and on basic indicators for the integrated and coordinated follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits at all levels, including the report on indicators on means of implementation (E/2003/83).
Action taken by the Council
Under this item, the Council adopted decision 2003/284.
Consideration of the report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-fourth session
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council decided to defer consideration of this item to its resumed session of 2003.
See Council decision 2003/284.
The Council resumed consideration of agenda item 13 (c), at its 52nd meeting, on 19 December (see E/2003/SR.52).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 13 (c), the Council adopted decision 2003/317.
Report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-fourth session
At its 52nd meeting, on 19 December, on the proposal of its President, the Council decided to defer consideration of the report of the Statistical Commission on its thirty-fourth session (E/2003/24) to the organizational session of the Economic and Social Council in 2004.
See Council decision 2003/317.
Human settlements
The Council held a discussion on human settlements (agenda item 13 (d)) at its 43rd and 49th meetings, on 21 and 25 July (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.43 and 49).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) on its nineteenth session (A/58/8);13
(b) Report of the Secretary-General on the coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda (E/2003/76).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 13 (d), the Council adopted resolution 2003/62 and decision 2003/309.
Coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda
At the 43rd meeting, on 21 July, the representative of Morocco, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda” (E/2003/L.12), which read as follows:
“The Economic and Social Council,
“Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/38 of 26 July 2002 and General Assembly resolutions 3327 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974, 32/162 of 19 December 1977 and 56/206 of 26 December 2001,
“Recalling also the Istanbul Declaration on Human Settlements, the Habitat Agenda and the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium,
“Recalling further the goal contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration of achieving a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers by 2020, and the relevant decisions contained in the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, on access to clean water, sanitation and adequate shelter,
“Reaffirming the importance of means of implementation for achieving the goal contained in the Millennium Declaration on adequate shelter, and recalling in this context the commitments made regarding the financial resources at the International Conference for Financing for Development,
“Welcoming the progress made in the revitalization of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) and the United Nations Human Settlements Foundation,
“Expressing concern at the limited amount of non-earmarked contributions to the UN-Habitat and the United Nations Human Settlements Foundation,
“Recognizing the urgent need for increased financial contributions in a predictable manner to the UN-Habitat and the United Nations Human Settlements Foundation to ensure timely and effective implementation of the Habitat Agenda, the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium and the relevant Millennium Development Goal, particularly in developing countries,
“Taking note of efforts by UN-Habitat to implement the Habitat Agenda and the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium,
“Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General on the coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda,
“1.
Underlines the commitments made by Governments to implement the Habitat Agenda, the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium, and the Millennium Development Goal of achieving a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers by 2020;
“2.
Encourages Governments that are in a position to do so and their Habitat Agenda partners to increase their financial contributions to the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation to enable UN-Habitat to plan its activities in a predictable manner, with contributions preferably being made on the basis of multi-year non-earmarked pledges;
“3.
Welcomes decision 19/18 of 9 May 2003 of the Governing Council of UN-Habitat, which endorsed the establishment of the Special Human Settlements Programme for the Palestinian people and the Technical Cooperation Trust Fund of 5 million United States dollars for an initial period of two years, and urges the international donor community and all financial institutions to support UN-Habitat in the immediate mobilization of financial resources for the establishment and operation of the programme and the fund;
“4.
Invites Governments to facilitate furthering of partnerships at the national and local levels, as appropriate, with civil society organizations, local authorities, women's groups, the business sector and other Habitat Agenda partners in implementing the Habitat Agenda and the relevant targets of the Millennium Declaration;
“5.
Encourages Governments to support and enable the participation of youth in the implementation of the Habitat Agenda, through social, cultural and economic activities at the city level and in other national and local activities;
“6.
Encourages also UN-Habitat to continue to implement the Habitat Agenda and the Declaration on Cities and other Human Settlements in the New Millennium, including through promoting partnerships with local authorities, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and other Habitat Agenda partners;
“7.
Requests the Executive Director of UN-Habitat to strengthen the implementation of the Habitat Agenda Task Manager System to allow better monitoring and mutual enforcement of action in the implementation of the Habitat Agenda;
“8.
Notes the increasing cooperation between UN-Habitat and other members of the United Nations Development Group, including through other coordination mechanisms, and calls upon Governments to include issues pertaining to shelter and sustainable human settlements and urban poverty in their national development strategies, including through the use of the common country assessment and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework;
“9.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the Council at its substantive session of 2004 on the implementation of the present resolution.”
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution entitled “Coordinated implementation of the Habitat Agenda”, as agreed upon at informal consultations, submitted by the sponsors of draft resolution E/2003/L.12.
Before the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the representatives of Argentina and Italy.
At its 49th meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/62.
Document considered in connection with agenda item 13 (d)
At its 29th meeting, on 10 July, the Council took note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (A/58/8).13 See Council decision 2003/309.
Environment
The Council held a discussion on environment (agenda item 13 (e)) at its 29th meeting, on 10 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.29).
It had before it the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its twenty-second session (A/58/25).14
Action taken by the Council
Under this item, the Council adopted decision 2003/309.
Document considered in connection with agenda item 13 (e)
At its 29th meeting, on 10 July, the Council took note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme (A/58/25).14 See Council decision 2003/309.
Population and development
The Council held a discussion on population and development (agenda item 13 (f)) at its 42nd meeting, on 21 July (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.42).
It had before it the report of the Commission on Population and Development on its thirty-sixth session (E/2003/25).15
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 13 (f), the Council adopted decision 2003/229.
Recommendation contained in the report of the Commission on Population and Development at its thirty-sixth session
Report of the Commission on its thirty-sixth session and provisional agenda for its thirty-seventh session
At its 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted the draft decision recommended by the Commission,16 entitled “Report of the Commission on Population and Development on its thirty-sixth session and provisional agenda for its thirty-seventh session”.
See Council decision 2003/229.
Public administration and development
The Council held a discussion on public administration and development (agenda item 13 (g)), at its 43rd and 49th meetings, on 21 and 25 July (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.43 and 49).
It had before it the report of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration on its second session (E/2003/44).17
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 13 (g), the Council adopted resolution E/2003/60.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration
At the 43rd meeting, on 21 July, the representative of Morocco (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) introduced a draft resolution entitled “Public administration and development” (E/2003/L.17), which read as follows:
“The Economic and Social Council,
“Recalling its resolution 2002/40 of 19 December 2002,
“1.
Takes note of the report of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration on its second session;
“2.
Reiterates that efficient, accountable, effective and transparent public administration, at both the national and international levels, has a key role to play in the implementation of the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, and in that context stresses the need to strengthen national public sector administrative and managerial capacity-building, in particular in developing countries and countries with economies in transition;
“3.
Reiterates also that strengthening public administration and the State are at the forefront of the development agenda to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration, and that revitalizing public administration is considered to be one of the essential components of economic and social development, and in this context decides to explore the possibility of considering this theme at a future high-level segment;
“4.
Decides that the Committee shall meet annually, instead of biennially, for one week to ensure that its input to the work of the Council and its advice to Member States are timely and up to date, taking into account the fact that revitalizing public administration is a continuous process in all countries, in particular given the need to adapt to an ever-changing environment and owing to the fact that rapidly emerging issues need to be addressed in a timely manner;
“5.
Decides also that the Committee of Experts on Public Administration, within the framework decided by General Assembly resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, should contribute to the integrated and coordinated follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields;
“6.
Approves the following agenda for the next meeting of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration, to be held at United Nations Headquarters from 29 March to 2 April 2004:
Revitalizing public administration.
Public sector institutional capacity for African renewal.
Basic data on the public sector.
Review of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance.”
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution entitled “Public administration and development” (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.49), submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), on the basis of informal consultations held on E/2003/L.17 (E/2003/L.45).
At the same meeting, the Secretary read out a statement on the programme budget implications of the draft resolution (see E/2003/SR.49).
Also at the same meeting, the Secretary read out an oral revision to operative paragraph 1, replacing the words “Takes note of” with the word “Notes”.
At its 49th meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution, as orally revised.
See Council resolution 2003/60.
In the light of the adoption of draft resolution E/2003/L.45, as orally revised, draft resolution E/2003/L.17 was withdrawn by its sponsors.
International cooperation in tax matters
The Council held a discussion on international cooperation in tax matters (agenda item 13 (h)) at its 29th meeting, on 10 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.29).
Action taken by the Council
Under this agenda item, no action was taken by the Council at the substantive session of 2003.
Report of the Secretary-General on the eleventh meeting of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters
At its 29th meeting, on 10 July, the Council was informed that as the meeting of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters had been rescheduled, and that the report would therefore be before the Council at a later date.
The Council resumed consideration of agenda item 13 (h) at its 51st meeting, on 31 October (see E/2003/SR.51).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 13 (h), the Council adopted decision 2003/313.
Change of date of the eleventh meeting of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters
At its 51st meeting, on 31 October, on the proposal of its President, the Council decided to endorse the decision to change the date of the eleventh meeting of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts from 10 to 14 November 2003 to 15 to 19 December 2003.
See Council decision 2003/313.
United Nations Forum on Forests
The Council held a discussion on the United Nations Forum on Forests (agenda item 13 (i)) at its 49th meeting, on 25 July (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.49).
It had before it the report of the United Nations Forum on Forests on its third session (E/2003/42).18
Action taken by the Council
Under this agenda item, the Council adopted resolution 2003/63 and decisions 2003/297, 2003/298 and 2003/299.
Trust Fund for the United Nations Forum on Forests
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council considered the draft resolution entitled “Trust Fund for the United Nations Forum on Forests”, recommended for action by the United Nations Forum on Forests.19
At the same meeting, the Vice-President read out amendments to the draft resolution as follows:
(a) In the fifth preambular paragraph, the words “country-led initiatives” were replaced by the words “and other meetings aimed at supporting the work of United Nations Forum on Forests”;
(b) In operative paragraph 2, the following words were inserted at the beginning of the paragraph: “Recommends that the General Assembly”.
At its 49th meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution, as orally amended.
See Council resolution 2003/63.
Date and venue of the fourth session of the United Nations Forum on Forests
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision I, entitled “Date and venue of the fourth session of the United Nations Forum on Forests”, as recommended by the Forum.20 See Council decision 2003/297.
Report of the United Nations Forum on Forests on its third session and provisional agenda for its fourth session
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision II, entitled “Report of the United Nations Forum on Forests on its third session and provisional agenda for its fourth session” as recommended by the Forum.20 See Council decision 2003/298.
Intersessional work by ad hoc expert groups
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council considered draft decision III, entitled “Intersessional work by ad hoc expert groups”, as recommended by the Forum.20
At the same meeting, the Vice-President read out amendments to the draft decision, as follows:
(a) A new preambular paragraph (a) bis was inserted as follows: “Decides that the meetings of the ad hoc expert groups on approaches and mechanisms for monitoring, assessment and reporting, and on finance and transfer of environmentally sound technologies, shall be convened in Geneva from 8 to 19 December 2003.
The Council also decided that the date of the meeting in New York of the ad hoc expert group on `consideration, with a view to recommending the parameters of a mandate for developing a legal framework on all types of forests' shall be decided at the resumed session of the Economic and Social Council of 2003.”;
(b) In all instances, the words “government designated experts” were replaced by the word “experts”;
(c) In the first paragraphs of the subsections, entitled “composition and participation”, after what is now the word “expert”, the words “in accordance with the decision to which this annex is attached” were added.
At its 49th meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision, as orally amended.
See Council decision 2003/299.
The Council resumed consideration of agenda item 13 (i) at its 52nd meeting, on 19 December (see E/2003/SR.52).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 13 (i), the Council adopted decision 2003/315.
Date and venue of the meeting of the ad hoc expert group of the United Nations Forum on Forests on consideration, with a view to recommending the parameters of a mandate for developing a legal framework on all types of forests
At its 52nd meeting, on 19 December, on the proposal of its President, the Council decided that the ad hoc expert group of the United Nations Forum on Forests would meet in New York from 6 to 10 September 2004.
Assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions
The Council had a discussion on assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions (agenda item 13 (j)) at its 43rd and 47th meetings, on 21 and 24 July (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.43 and 47).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations related to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions (A/57/165 and Add.1);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General on assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions (E/2003/63).
Action taken by the Council
Under this item, the Council adopted decision 2003/309.
Document considered in connection with agenda item 13 (j)
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations related to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions (A/57/165 and Add.1).
See Council decision 2003/309.
Cartography
The Council had a discussion on cartography (agenda item 13 (k)) at its 48th meeting, on 24 July (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.48).
It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the Eighth United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names (E/2003/4).
Action taken by the Council
Under this item, the Council adopted decisions 2003/294 and 2003/309.
Recommendations by the United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the recommendations contained in the report of the Eighth United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names.
See Council resolution 2003/294.
Following the adoption of the recommendations, a statement was made by the representative of Cuba (see E/2003/SR.48).
Document considered in connection with agenda item 13 (k)
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the Eighth United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names (E/2003/4).
See Council decision 2003/309.
Transport of dangerous goods
The Council held a discussion on the transport of dangerous goods (agenda item 13 (l)) at its 49th meeting, on 25 July (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.49).
It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (E/2003/46).
Action taken by the Council
Under this item, the Council adopted resolution 2003/64 and decision 2003/309.
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it amendments, agreed upon during informal consultations, submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), to the draft resolution,21 entitled “Work of the Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals”, recommended for adoption by the Committee.
The amendments read as follows:
Part A: Paragraph 5:
Replace the words “carry out a survey of” with “submit a report on”.
Part B: Fourth preambular paragraph:
Replace “22 (c)” with “23 (c)”.
Fifth preambular paragraph:
Replace “2003” with “2002”.
Paragraph 3 should read:
“Invites all Governments to take the necessary steps, through appropriate national procedures and/or legislation, to implement the Globally Harmonized System, as soon as possible and no later than 2008;”
Insert a new paragraph 4 to read as follows:
“4.
Reiterates the call for support to developing countries in strengthening their capacity for the sound management of chemicals by providing technical and financial assistance;”
Renumber paragraphs 4 to 7 as paragraphs 5 to 8.
Paragraph 6 (renumbered paragraph 7):
Replace the word “monitor” with “submit a report on”
Part C: Preamble:
Delete the second preambular paragraph and footnotes 7 and 8.
Add a new paragraph to read as follows:
“Noting the relatively poor representation of experts from developing countries and countries with economies in transition in the work of the Committee and the need to ensure their wider participation in its work;”
Insert the following paragraph 2:
“2.
Stresses the importance of the participation of experts from developing countries as well as countries with economies in transition in the work of the Committee and, in this regard, calls for voluntary contributions to facilitate their participation, including through support for travel and daily subsistence allowance, and invites Member States and international organizations in a position to do so to contribute;”
Renumber paragraphs 2 and 3 as paragraphs 3 and 4.
Amend paragraph 2 (renumbered paragraph 3) to read as follows:
“3.
Notes the recommendations of the Committee regarding staff resources7 and invites the General Assembly to consider this issue in the context of its review of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005;”
Add the following new footnote 7:
“7As contained in E/2003/46, para.
33; refer also to E/1999/L.48, para.
9 and A/54/443/Add.1, para.
7.”
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution, as amended.
See Council resolution 2003/64.
Document considered in connection with agenda item 13 (l)
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (E/2003/46).
See Council decision 2003/309.
Women and development
At its 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the Council held a discussion on agenda item 13 (m) (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.42).
It had before it the report of the Commission on the Status of Women (E/2003/27).22
Action taken by the Council
No proposals were submitted under agenda item 13 (m).
Social and human rights questions
The Council held a discussion on social and human rights questions (under agenda item 14) at its 42nd and 44th to 49th meetings, on 21 to 25 July 2003 (for the discussion see E/2003/SR.42 and 44-49).
Action taken by the Council
Documents considered by the Council under agenda item 14
At its 48th and 49th meetings, on 24 and 25 July, the Council took note of a number of documents submitted under item 14 and agenda items (b), (c), (e), (f), (g) and (h).
See Council decision 2003/310.
Advancement of women
Under agenda item 14 (a), the Council held a discussion at its 42nd, 44th and 48th meetings, on 21, 22 and 24 July.
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its forty-seventh session (E/2003/27);22
(b) Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (A/58/38 (Part I));
(c) Report of the Secretary-General on follow-up to, and progress in the implementation of, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly (E/2003/69);
(d) Report of the Board of Trustees of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (E/2003/59);
(e) Report of the Working Group on the future operation of the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (A/AC.266/1);
(f) Report of the Working Group on the future operation of the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (A/57/330 and Add.1);
(g) Letter dated 20 June 2003 from the Permanent Representative of Spain to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/93);
(h) Note by the Secretary-General on the revitalization and strengthening of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (E/2003/101).
At the 42nd meeting, on 21 July, an introductory statement was made by the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women.
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 14 (a), the Council adopted resolutions 2003/42, 2003/43, 2003/44 and 2003/57 and decision 2003/237.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on the Status of Women
Situation of and assistance to Palestinian women
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,23 entitled “Situation of and assistance to Palestinian women” by a recorded vote of 42 to 2, with 4 abstentions.
See Council resolution 2003/42.
The voting was as follows:24
In favour:
Andorra, Argentina, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iceland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Against:
Georgia, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia, Germany,25 Nicaragua, Peru.
Before the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the representatives of the United States and Australia, as well as by the observer for Morocco (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the observers for Morocco (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Israel.
Situation of women and girls in Afghanistan
At the same meeting, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,23 entitled “Situation of women and girls in Afghanistan”.
See Council resolution 2003/43.
Agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women on participation in and access of women to the media, and information and communication technologies and their impact on and use as an instrument for the advancement and empowerment of women
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution III recommended by the Commission,23 entitled “Agreed conclusions of the Commissions on the Status of Women on participation in and access of women to the media, and information and communication technologies and their impact on and use as an instrument for the advancement and empowerment of women”.
See Council resolution 2003/44.
Report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its forty-seventh session and the provisional agenda for the forty-eighth session of the Commission
Also at its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted the draft decision recommended by the Commission,26 entitled “Report of the Commission on the Status of Women on its forty-seventh session and the provisional agenda for the forty-eighth session of the Commission”.
See Council decision 2003/237.
Revitalization and strengthening of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the President of the Economic and Social Council, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala) on the basis of informal consultations, entitled “Revitalization and strengthening of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women” (E/2003/L.44).
At the same meeting, the Council had before it an oral statement regarding the draft resolution from the Programme Planning and Budget Division of the Secretariat, which read as follows:
“1.
Under paragraphs 4 and 5 of the draft resolution, the Economic and Social Council would:
(a) Decide to amend paragraphs 1, 2 (a) and (b), 3 (c), new 3 (e) and 4 of article III of the statute of International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women in order to replace the Board of Trustees with an Executive Board;
(b) Decide to amend paragraphs 1, 2 (e) and (h) and 5 of article IV of the statute of International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women with regard to the Director and the Staff.
“2.
In this connection, it is necessary to reiterate comments, contained in the note of the Secretary-General on the revitalization and strengthening of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (E/2003/101), as these comments also apply to the provisions of the draft resolution as follows:
(a) The amendment proposed to article III (Board of Trustees), paragraph 1, refers to an Executive Board.
It should refer instead to an Advisory Board, as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/175; accordingly other functions of the Board are advisory by nature;
(b) The amendment proposed to article III (b), paragraph 2 (a), refers to members of the Executive Board in their national capacities.
The General Assembly, in its resolution 57/175, endorsed the Working Group's recommendation that the Advisory Board be composed of Member States.
As such, the Economic and Social Council would elect Member States not individual representatives of Member States;
(c) The amendment proposed to article IV (Director and the staff), paragraph 1, provides that the Director shall be appointed by the Secretary-General from a pool of three candidates proposed by the Executive Board.
The latter provision interferes with the Secretary-General's prerogative as chief administrative officer of the Organization;
(d) The same reasoning applies to the amendments proposed in respect of article IV, paragraph 5, dealing with the authority vested in the Secretary-General to retain, confirm or replace the Director of the Institute;
(e) With regard to the appointment of a Director, an understanding can be reached when the Secretary-General would present the Board with a list of candidates, from which the Board would select up to three, one of whom shall be appointed by the Secretary-General.
Moreover, the appointment procedure should be in accordance with General Assembly resolution 57/305, on human resources management, as well as with other relevant resolutions and decisions.
“3.
Should the draft resolution be adopted, it should be noted that the revision to article III, paragraph 4, regarding location of the Board meetings in New York, would imply an exception to the general principle set out in paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 40/243 of 18 December 1985.
In that paragraph, the General Assembly reaffirmed that the United Nations bodies shall plan to meet at their respective established headquarters.
In accordance with this principle, the meeting of the Board should be held in Santo Domingo, in accordance with article IX, which was not proposed for amendment.
“4.
Amendment to article III, paragraph 2 (a), by changing the nature of the Board from serving in their individual capacity to representatives of Member States, would imply that the cost of attendance of members at the Board's sessions (travel and daily subsistence allowance) would not be paid from the funds of the Institute.
It is recalled, in this connection, that, in accordance with the provisions of numerous General Assembly resolutions in this regard (1798 (XVII), 2245 (XXI), 2489 (XXIII), 42/214, 45/248) neither travel nor subsistence expenses shall be paid in respect of members of organs or subsidiary organs who serve as representatives of Governments, unless the resolution establishing the organ or subsidiary organ provides otherwise.
“5.
As regards the amendment to article III, paragraph 2 (a), of the statute that the Board should meet at least once a year for up to 10 days at United Nations Headquarters in New York, this decision would entail the provision of two meetings per day (one session in the morning and one session in the afternoon) for up to 20 meetings each year.
There would be interpretation provided in three languages, English, French and Spanish.
Documentation requirement is estimated at 50 pages pre-session, 15 pages in-session and 20 pages post-session, to be processed also in the above three languages.
“6.
The dates of the meetings of the Executive Board would be determined subject to availability of conference facilities and services in New York.
The conference servicing requirements for the meetings of the Executive Board are estimated at full cost of $86,700.
Conference servicing would be provided on reimbursable basis in accordance with the provisions of article VII of the statute, stating that appropriate administrative and other support should be provided to the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women in accordance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and on conditions determined after consultations between the Secretary-General and the Director of the Institute, it being understood that no extra costs to the regular budget of the United Nations are incurred.
“7.
In summary, the adoption of the draft resolution on the revitalization and strengthening of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women would entail the additional conference servicing requirements of $86,700 arising from these new meetings of the Executive Board in New York, which would have to be covered from the available resources of the Trust Fund for the Institute.”
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution as orally corrected by the representative of El Salvador.
See resolution 2003/57.
Before the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the observers for Spain and Morocco.
After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the representatives of Nicaragua and Brazil (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States) and by the observers for Spain, Morocco (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, and Mexico) and the Dominican Republic.
Social development
The Council held a discussion on social development (item 14 (b)), at its 42nd meeting, on 21 July.
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Commission for Social Development on its forty-first session (E/2003/26);27
(b) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report on preparations for and observance of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family in 2004 (E/CN.5/2003/6; A/58/67-E/2003/49);
(c) Report of the Secretary-General on review and appraisal of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons (A/58/61-E/2003/5).
Action taken by the Council
Under this item, the Council adopted resolutions 2003/10 through 2003/15 and decisions 2003/230 and 2003/310.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission for Social Development on its forty-first session
Preparation for and observance of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family in 2004
At its 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the Council approved the draft resolution recommended by the Commission,28 entitled “Preparation for and observance of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family in 2004”, for adoption by the General Assembly.
See Council resolution 2003/10.
Policies and programmes involving youth
At its 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,29 entitled “Policies and programmes involving youth”.
See Council resolution 2003/11.
Comprehensive and integral international convention to promote and protect the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities
At its 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,29 entitled “Comprehensive and integral international convention to promote and protect the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities”.
See Council resolution 2003/12.
National and international cooperation for social development: implementation of the social objectives of the New Partnership for Africa's Development
At its 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted draft resolution III recommended by the Commission,29 entitled “National and international cooperation for social development: implementation of the social objectives of the New Partnership for Africa's Development”.
See Council resolution 2003/13.
Modalities for the review and appraisal of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002
At its 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted draft resolution IV recommended by the Commission,29 entitled “Modalities for the review and appraisal of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002.
See Council resolution 2003/14.
Agreed conclusions on national and international cooperation for social development
At its 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted draft resolution V recommended by the Commision,29 entitled “Agreed conclusions on national and international cooperation for social development”.
See Council resolution 2003/15.
Report of the Commission for Social Development on its forty-first session and provisional agenda and documentation for the forty-second session of the Commission
At its 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the Council adopted a draft decision recommended by the Commission,30 entitled “Report of the Commission for Social Development on its forty-first session and provisional agenda and documentation for the forty-second session of the Commission”.
See Council decision 2003/230.
Confirmation of members of the Board of the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development
At its 42nd meeting, on 21 July, the Council decided to confirm the candidates listed in Commission decision 41/10131 for membership in the Board of the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development.
See Council decision 2003/231.
Documents considered under item 14 (b)
At its 49th plenary meeting, on 25 July 2003, the Council took note of the following documents:
(a) Report on preparations for and observance of the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Family in 2004 (A/58/67-E/2003/49);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General on the review and appraisal of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons (A/58/61-E/2003/5).
See Council decision 2003/310.
Crime prevention and criminal justice
The Council held a discussion on crime prevention and criminal justice (agenda item 14 (c)), at its 44th meeting, on 22 July.
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its twelfth session (E/2003/30);32
(b) Report of the Secretary-General on preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (A/58/87-E/2003/82).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 14 (c), the Council adopted resolutions 2003/20 through 31 and decisions 2003/232, 2003/233 and 2003/310.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its twelfth session
Strengthening international cooperation in preventing and combating trafficking in persons and protecting victims of such trafficking
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council approved draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,33 entitled “Strengthening international cooperation in preventing and combating trafficking in persons and protecting victims of such trafficking”, for adoption by the General Assembly.
See Council resolution 2003/20.
International cooperation in the fight against transnational organized crime: assistance to States in capacity-building with a view to facilitating the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council approved draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,33 entitled “International cooperation in the fight against transnational organized crime: assistance to States in capacity-building with a view to facilitating the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto”, for adoption by the General Assembly.
See Council resolution 2003/21.
Strengthening international cooperation and technical assistance in promoting the implementation of the universal conventions and protocols related to terrorism within the framework of the activities of the Centre for International Crime Prevention
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council approved draft resolution III recommended by the Commission,33 entitled “Strengthening international cooperation and technical assistance in promoting the implementation of the universal conventions and protocols related to terrorism within the framework of the activities of the Centre for International Crime Prevention”, for adoption by the General Assembly.
See Council resolution 2003/22.
Preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council approved draft resolution IV recommended by the Commission,33 entitled “Preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice”, for adoption by the General Assembly.
See Council resolution 2003/23.
Work of the Centre for International Crime Prevention, including the management of the United Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,34 entitled “Work of the Centre for International Crime Prevention, including the management of the United Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund”.
See Council resolution 2003/24.
International cooperation, technical assistance and advisory services in crime prevention and criminal justice
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,34 entitled “International cooperation, technical assistance and advisory services in crime prevention and criminal justice”.
See Council resolution 2003/25.
Prevention of urban crime
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution III recommended by the Commission,34 entitled “Prevention of urban crime”.
See Council resolution 2003/26.
Illicit trafficking in protected species of wild flora and fauna
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution IV recommended by the Commission,34 entitled “Illicit trafficking in protected species of wild flora and fauna”.
See Council resolution 2003/27.
International cooperation in the prevention, combating and elimination of kidnapping and in providing assistance to victims
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution V recommended by the Commission,34 entitled “International cooperation in the prevention, combating and elimination of kidnapping and in providing assistance to victims”.
See Council resolution 2003/28.
Prevention of crimes that infringe on the cultural heritage of peoples in the form of movable property
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution VI recommended by the Commission,34 entitled “Prevention of crimes that infringe on the cultural heritage of peoples in the form of movable property”.
See Council resolution 2003/29.
United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution VII recommended by the Commission,34 entitled “United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice”.
See Council resolution 2003/30.
Functioning of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution VIII recommended by the Commission,34 entitled “Functioning of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice”.
See Council resolution 2003/31.
Report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its twelfth session and provisional agenda and documentation for its thirteenth session
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Commission,35 entitled “Report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its twelfth session and provisional agenda and documentation for its thirteenth session”.
See Council decision 2003/233.
Appointment of members of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Commission,35 entitled “Appointment of members of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute”.
See Council decision 2003/234.
Document considered under agenda item 14 (c)
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the preparations for the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (document A/58/87-E/2003/82).
See Council decision 2003/310.
Narcotic drugs
The Council held a discussion on narcotic drugs (agenda item 14 (d)), at its 44th meeting, on 22 July (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.44).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its forty-sixth session (E/2003/28);36
(b) Report of the International Narcotics Control Board, 2002 (E/INCB/2002/1);37
(c) Note by the Secretariat on honorariums payable to members of the International Narcotics Control Board (E/2003/96).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 14 (d), the Council adopted resolutions 2003/32 through 41 and decisions 2003/235 and 2003/236.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its forty-sixth session
Training in precursor control, countering money-laundering and drug abuse prevention
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution I recommended by the Commission,38 entitled “Training in precursor control, countering money-laundering and drug abuse prevention”.
See Council resolution 2003/32.
Reduction of illicit drug demand
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution II recommended by the Commission,38 entitled “Reduction of illicit drug demand”.
See Council resolution 2003/33.
International assistance to the States affected by the transit of illicit drugs
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution III recommended by the Commission,38 entitled “International assistance to the States affected by the transit of illicit drugs”.
See Council resolution 2003/34.
Strengthening the prevention and suppression of illicit drug trafficking
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution IV recommended by the Commission,38 entitled “Strengthening the prevention and suppression of illicit drug trafficking”.
See Council resolution 2003/35.
Establishment of national networks to counter money-laundering in the framework of national and international drug control plans
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution V recommended by the Commission,38 entitled “ Establishment of national networks to counter money-laundering in the framework of national and international drug control plans”.
See Council resolution 2003/36.
Strengthening alternative development through trade and socio-environmental preservation
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution VI recommended by the Commission,38 entitled “Strengthening alternative development through trade and socio-environmental preservation”.
See Council resolution 2003/37.
Funding of travel for participants in meetings of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution VII recommended by the Commission,38 entitled “Funding of travel for participants in meetings of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies”.
See Council resolution 2003/38.
Strengthening systems of control over chemical precursors and preventing their diversion and trafficking
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution VIII recommended by the Commission,38 entitled “Strengthening systems of control over chemical precursors and preventing their diversion and trafficking”.
See Council resolution 2003/39.
Demand for and supply of opiates for medical and scientific purposes
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution IX recommended by the Commission,38 entitled “Demand for and supply of opiates for medical and scientific purposes”.
See Council resolution 2003/40.
Efforts to counter the trend towards the legalization of drugs for non-medical use
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft resolution X recommended by the Commission,38 entitled “Efforts to counter the trend towards the legalization of drugs for non-medical use”.
See Council resolution 2003/41.
Report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its forty-sixth session and provisional agenda and documentation for the forty-seventh session of the Commission
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Commission,39 entitled “Report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its forty-sixth session and provisional agenda and documentation for the forty-seventh session of the Commission”.
See Council decision 2003/235.
Report of the International Narcotics Control Board
At its 44th meeting, on 22 July, the Council adopted draft decision II recommended by the Commission,39 entitled “Report of the International Narcotics Control Board”.
See Council decision 2003/236.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Under agenda item 14 (e), the Council held a discussion at its 44th and 47th meetings, on 22 and 24 July (for the discussion see E/2003/SR.44 and 47).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (E/2003/68);
(b) Note verbale dated 25 April 2003 from the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Zambia to the United Nations Office at Geneva addressed to the Secretary-General (E/2003/77).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 14 (e), the Council adopted decisions 2003/285, 2003/286 and 2003/310.
Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
At the 44th meeting, on 22 July, the representative of Egypt introduced a draft decision entitled “Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees” (E/2003/L.4).
At its 47th meeting, on 24 July, the Council adopted the draft decision and recommended it to the General Assembly for action.
See Council decision 2003/285.
At the 44th meeting, the representative of Zambia introduced a draft decision entitled “Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees” (E/2003/L.14).
Subsequently, Egypt joined as a sponsor of the draft decision.
At the 47th meeting, the Secretary orally corrected subparagraph (b) by replacing the words “from sixty-four to sixty-five States” with the words “from sixty-five to sixty-six States”.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision as orally corrected, and recommended it to the General Assembly for action.
See Council decision 2003/286.
Documents considered under agenda item 14 (e)
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council took note of the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (E/2003/68).
See Council decision 2003/310.
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
The Council held a discussion on agenda item 14 (f) at its 44th meeting, on 22 July.
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 57/195 (A/58/80-E/2003/71);
(b) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination (1993-2003) (E/CN.4/2003/19);
(c) Report of the joint Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights/United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) workshop to develop a publication to combat racism and foster tolerance (E/CN.4/2003/19/Add.1).
Action taken by the Council
No proposals were submitted under agenda item 14 (f).
Documents considered under agenda item 14 (f)
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council took note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 57/195 (A/58/80-E/2003/71).
See Council decision 2003/310.
Human rights
The Council held a discussion on human rights (agenda item 14 (g)) at its 45th, 46th and 48th meetings, on 23 and 24 July.
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Commission on Human Rights on its fifty-ninth session (E/2003/23 (Part I));40
(b) Report of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on its twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth sessions (E/2003/22);41
(c) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (E/2003/73).
At its 45th meeting, on 23 July, the Deputy United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights made an introductory statement (see E/2003/SR.45).
Also at its 45th meeting, the Council was informed that the programme budget implications of the draft resolutions and decisions contained in the report of the Commission on Human Rights were in document E/2003/L.31/Rev.1.
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 14 (g), the Council adopted resolutions 2003/45 and 2003/58 and decisions 2003/238 through 2003/271 and 2003/310.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Commission on Human Rights
The right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health
At its 45th meeting, on 23 July, the Council considered the draft resolution recommended by the Commission,42 entitled “The right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health”.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution by a recorded vote of 33 to 1, with 17 abstentions.
See Council resolution 2003/45.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Argentina, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Enhancement of the functioning of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in regard to the operation of the mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights
At the 45th meeting, on 23 July, the representative of Italy (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union and Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia) introduced a draft resolution entitled “Enhancement of the functioning of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in regard to the operation of the mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights” (E/2003/L.37).
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the representative of Cuba orally amended the draft resolution by inserting the words “mandate holders” at the end of paragraph 2.
Also at its 48th meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution, as orally amended, by a recorded vote of 27 to 26, with 1 abstention.
See Council resolution 2003/58.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Peru, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Against:
Azerbaijan, Bhutan, Burundi, China, Congo, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Benin.
Before the resolution was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Pakistan, the Russian Federation, Cuba, China, Italy, South Africa, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom, France and Malaysia.
Human rights situation of the Lebanese detainees in Israel
At its 45th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 1 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Human rights situation of the Lebanese detainees in Israel”, by a recorded vote of 26 to 2, with 24 abstentions.
See Council decision 2003/238.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Argentina, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Georgia, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Peru, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States and Australia, as well as by the observers for Israel and Lebanon (see E/2003/SR.45).
Situation of human rights in Myanmar
At its 45th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 2 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Situation of human rights in Myanmar”.
See Council decision 2003/239.
After the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Italy (on behalf of States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union and Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Turkey), the United States, Japan and Australia, as well as by the observer for Myanmar (see E/2003/SR.45).
Situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 3 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”.
See Council decision E/2003/240.
Situation of human rights in Burundi
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 4 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Situation of human rights in Burundi”.
See Council decision E/2003/241.
Question of the realization in all countries of the economic, social and cultural rights contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and study of special problems which the developing countries face in their efforts to achieve these human rights
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 5 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Question of the realization in all countries of the economic, social and cultural rights contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and study of special problems which the developing countries face in their efforts to achieve these human rights”, by a recorded vote of 51 to 2, with 1 abstention.
See Council decision 2003/242.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Andorra, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Senegal, South Africa, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Saudi Arabia, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia.
Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Cuba, the United States, Chile, Portugal and Sweden, as well as the representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; after the decision was adopted, a statement was made by the representative of Saudi Arabia (see E/2003/SR.46).
Effects of structural adjustment policies and foreign debt on the full enjoyment of all human rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 6 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Effects of structural adjustment policies and foreign debt on the full enjoyment of all human rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights”, by a recorded vote of 31 to 17, with 5 abstentions.
See Council decision 2003/243.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Georgia, Peru, Saudi Arabia, Ukraine.
Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of Italy (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) and Cuba (see E/2003/SR.46).
The right to food
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 7 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “The right to food”, by a recorded vote of 52 to 1, with 1 abstention.
See Council decision 2003/244.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Andorra, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia.
Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States and Cuba (see E/2003/SR.46).
Adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 8 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living”.
See Council decision 2003/245.
World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council considered draft decision 9 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”.
At the same meeting, the representative of South Africa made an oral amendment to the draft decision, by inserting a new paragraph after the third subparagraph, as follows:
“The Council also endorses the Commission's recommendation that the General Assembly, in the coming decade of activities to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, place emphasis on the concrete implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action on the basis of a broad-based consensus on the importance of the anti-discrimination struggle worldwide;”
Also at the 46th meeting, statements were made by the representatives of the United States, Cuba, Chile, Egypt, Zimbabwe and Pakistan, as well as the observer for Georgia (see E/2003/SR.46).
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision, as orally amended, by a recorded vote of 37 to 1, with 16 abstentions.
See Council decision 2003/246.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Question of arbitrary detention
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 10 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Question of arbitrary detention”.
See Council decision 2003/247.
Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 11 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment”.
See Council decision 2003/248.
Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 12 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances”.
See Council decision 2003/249.
Independence and impartiality of the judiciary, jurors and assessors and the independence of lawyers
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 13 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Independence and impartiality of the judiciary, jurors and assessors and the independence of lawyers”.
See Council decision 2003/250.
Elimination of violence against women
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 14 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Elimination of violence against women”.
See Council decision 2003/251.
Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 15 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance”.
See Council decision 2003/252.
Working Group of the Commission on Human Rights to elaborate a draft declaration in accordance with paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 49/214 of 23 December 1994
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 16 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Working Group of the Commission on Human Rights to elaborate a draft declaration in accordance with paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 49/214 of 23 December 1994”.
See Council decision 2003/253.
Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and the International Decade of the World's Indigenous People
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 17 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and the International Decade of the World's Indigenous People”, by a recorded vote of 52 to 1, with 1 abstention.
See Council decision 2003/254.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Andorra, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia.
Before the decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States, Cuba, the Russian Federation and China (see E/2003/SR.46).
Human rights defenders
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 18 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Human rights defenders”.
See Council decision 2003/255.
Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 19 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism”.
See Council decision 2003/256.
Situation of human rights in Afghanistan
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 20 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Situation of human rights in Afghanistan”.
See Council decision 2003/257.
Assistance to Somalia in the field of human rights
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 21 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Assistance to Somalia in the field of human rights”.
See Council decision 2003/258.
Situation of human rights in Sierra Leone
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 22 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Situation of human rights in Sierra Leone”.
See Council decision 2003/259.
Technical cooperation and advisory services in Liberia
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 23 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Technical cooperation and advisory services in Liberia”.
See Council decision 2003/260.
The right to development
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 24 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “The right to development”, by a recorded vote of 51 to 3, with no abstentions.
See Council decision 2003/261.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Andorra, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Japan, United States of America.
Before the draft decision was adopted, a statement was made by the representative of the United States (see E/2003/SR.46).
Situation of human rights in Iraq
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 25 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Situation of human rights in Iraq”.
See Council decision 2003/262.
Before the adoption of the draft decision, statements were made by the representatives of Malaysia, Cuba, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and South Africa (see E/2003/SR.46).
Decision relating to Liberia under the procedure established in accordance with Economic and Social Council resolution 1503 (XLVIII)
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 26 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Decision relating to Liberia under the procedure established in accordance with Economic and Social Council resolution 1503 (XLVIII)”.
See Council decision 2003/263.
The Social Forum
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 27 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “The Social Forum”, by a recorded vote of 34 to 2, with 18 abstentions.
See Council decision 2003/264.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Before the draft decision was adopted, statements were made by the representative of Cuba and the representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (see E/2003/SR.46).
Discrimination in the criminal justice system
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 28 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Discrimination in the criminal justice system”.
See Council decision 2003/265.
Housing and property restitution in the context of refugees and other displaced persons
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 29 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Housing and property restitution in the context of refugees and other displaced persons”.
See Council decision 2003/266.
Indigenous people's permanent sovereignty over natural resources
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 30 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Indigenous people's permanent sovereignty over natural resources”, by a recorded vote of 36 to 12, with 6 abstentions.
See Council decision 2003/267.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Netherlands, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Brazil, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Romania.
The prevention of human rights violations caused by the availability and misuse of small arms and light weapons
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 31 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “The prevention of human rights violations caused by the availability and misuse of small arms and light weapons”.
See Council decision 2003/268.
Organization of work of the sixtieth session of the Commission on Human Rights
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 32 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Organization of work of the sixtieth session of the Commission on Human Rights”, by a recorded vote of 43 to 3, with 8 abstentions.
See Council decision 2003/269.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Andorra, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sweden, Ukraine, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
China, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kenya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Pakistan, Uganda.
Before the draft decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States, Brazil, the United Kingdom, Cuba and China; after the draft decision was adopted a statement was made by the representative of Uganda (see E/2003/SR.46).
Dates of the sixtieth session of the Commission on Human Rights
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 33 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “Dates of the sixtieth session of the Commission on Human Rights”.
See Council decision 2003/270.
International Decade of the World's Indigenous People
At its 46th meeting, on 23 July, the Council adopted draft decision 34 recommended by the Commission,43 entitled “International Decade of the World's Indigenous People”, by a recorded vote of 50 to 1, with 3 abstentions.
See Council decision 2003/271.
The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Andorra, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, China, Congo, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Senegal, South Africa, Sweden, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia, Qatar, Saudi Arabia.
Before the draft decision was adopted, statements were made by the representatives of the United States and Cuba (see E/2003/SR.46).
Document considered under agenda item 14 (g)
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council took note of part I of the report of the Commission on Human Rights (E/2003/23 (Part I)).
See Council decision 2003/310.
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues
The Council held a discussion on the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (agenda item 14 (h)) at its 49th meeting, on 25 July.
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues on its second session (E/2003/43);44
(b) Report of the Secretary-General on information concerning indigenous issues requested by the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/72).
Action taken by the Council
Under this item, the Council adopted decisions 2003/300, 2003/301, 2003/302, 2003/303, 2003/304, 2003/305, 2003/306, 2003/307 and 2003/310.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Peoples
Workshop on the collection of data concerning indigenous peoples
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision I recommended by the Permanent Forum,45 entitled “Workshop on the collection of data concerning indigenous peoples”.
See Council decision 2003/300.
High-level segment of the substantive session of 2006 of the Economic and Social Council
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it the text of a draft decision entitled “High-level segment of the substantive session of 2006 of the Economic and Social Council” submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), on the basis of informal consultations.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the text of the draft decision.
See Council decision 2003/301.
Participation of members of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues in meetings of subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Vice-President amended the text of draft decision III recommended by the Permanent Forum,45 entitled “Participation of members of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues in meetings of subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council” by deleting the word “open” before the word “invitations” in the penultimate line.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision, as orally amended.
See Council decision 2003/302.
Bureau of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision IV recommended by the Permanent Forum,45 entitled “Bureau of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues”.
See Council decision 2003/303.
Venue and dates for the third session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision V recommended by the Permanent Forum,45 entitled “Venue of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues”.
See Council decision 2003/304.
Provisional agenda and documentation for the third session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council adopted draft decision VI recommended by the Permanent Forum,45 entitled “Provisional agenda and documentation for the third session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues”.
See Council decision 2003/305.
Proposal for a second international decade of the world's indigenous people
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft decision entitled “Proposal for a second international decade of the world's indigenous people”, submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), on the basis of informal consultations.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision.
See Council decision 2003/306.
Review of indigenous issues within the United Nations system
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council had before it a draft decision entitled “Review of indigenous issues within the United Nations system” (E/2003/L.47), submitted by the Vice-President of the Council, Marjatta Rasi (Finland), on the basis of informal consultations.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision.
See Council decision 2003/307.
Statements were made by the representatives of Denmark, Malaysia and Sweden (see E/2003/SR.49).
Document considered under agenda item 14 (h)
At its 49th meeting, on 25 July, the Council took note of the report of the Secretary-General on information concerning indigenous issues requested by the Economic and Social Council (E/2003/72).
See Council decision 2003/310.
Genetic privacy and non-discrimination
The Council held a discussion on agenda item 14 (i) at its 44th meeting, on 22 July.
It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on information and comments received from Governments and relevant international organizations and functional commissions pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 2001/39 (E/2003/91) and the information and comments thereon provided by Argentina (E/2003/91/Add.1).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 14 (i), the Council adopted decision 2003/232.
Genetic privacy and non-discrimination
At the 44th meeting, on 22 July, the representative of Argentina introduced a draft decision entitled “Genetic privacy and non-discrimination”.
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the draft decision.
See Council decision 2003/232.
J. Consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defense Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system
The Council held a discussion on the consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system (agenda item 15) at its 29th meeting, on 10 July 2003 (for the discussion, see E/2003/SR.29).
It had before it a letter dated 19 July 2001 from the Secretary-General of the International Defence Organization addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council (E/2002/4).
Action taken by the Council
At its 29th meeting, on 10 July, the Council was reminded that, at its resumed organizational session on 24 June 2003, it had decided to defer taking action on the item to a later date (see Council decision 2003/222).
Subsequently, a letter was received, dated 6 June 2003, from the Secretary-General of the International Defence Organization addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council, requesting further postponement of the item.
Negotiation of an agreement between the United Nations and the World Tourism Organization to constitute it as a specialized agency of the United Nations system
The Council held a discussion on the consideration of negotiation of an agreement between the United Nations and the World Tourism Organization to constitute it as a specialized agency of the United Nations system (agenda item 16) at its 29th meeting on 10 July 2003 (for the discussion see E/2003/SR.29).
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Report of the Committee on Negotiations with Intergovernmental Agencies (E/2003/60);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General transmitting a communication received from the Secretary-General of the World Tourism Organization (E/C.1/2003/2);
(c) Proposals of subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council requiring action by or the attention of the Council (E/2003/MISC.1).
Action taken by the Council
Under item 16, the Council adopted resolution 2003/2.
Negotiation of an agreement between the United Nations and the World Tourism Organization to constitute it as a specialized agency of the United Nations system
At its 29th meeting, on 10 July, the Council had before it a draft resolution submitted by the Bureau, entitled “Agreement between the United Nations and the World Tourism Organization” (E/2003/L.19).
At the same meeting, the Chairman of the Committee on Negotiations with Intergovernmental Agencies made a statement (see E/2003/SR.29).
Also at the 29th meeting, the Council adopted the draft resolution.
See Council resolution 2003/2.
After the adoption of the resolution, statements were made by the representatives of the United States, Andorra, Italy (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union, as well as Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia and Turkey), Ethiopia and Guatemala, as well as by the observers for Morocco (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Turkey (see E/2003/SR.29).
A statement was also made by the Secretary-General of the World Tourism Organization (see E/2003/SR.29).
Notes
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/58/16).
2 In accordance with rule 72 of the rules of procedure of the Economic and Social Council.
3 The representative of Qatar stated that had he been present he would have voted in favour of the resolution.
4 See E/2003/32 (Part I), chap.
I, sect.
5 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29).
6 Ibid., Supplement No. 13 (E/2003/33).
7 See ibid., Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap.
I, sect.
8 See ibid., chap.
I, sect.
9 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No 11.
10 On behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union.
11 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 11 (E/2003/31), chap.
I, sect.
12 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 4 (E/2003/24).
13 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/58/8).
14 Ibid., Supplement No. 25 (A/58/25).
15 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 5 (E/2003/25).
16 See ibid., chap.
I, sect.
17 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 44 (E/2003/44).
18 Ibid., Supplement No. 22 (E/2003/42).
19 See ibid., chap.
I, sect.
20 See ibid., chap.
I, sect.
21 E/2003/46, chap.
22 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 7 (E/2003/27).
23 See ibid., chap.
I, sect.
24 The representatives of Ecuador and Kenya subsequently indicated that had their delegations been present, they would have voted in favour of the draft resolution.
25 The representative of Germany subsequently indicated that its delegation's vote should have been registered as being in favour of the draft resolution.
26 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 7 (E/2003/27), chap.
I, sect.
27 Ibid., Supplement No. 6 (E/2003/26).
28 Ibid., chap.
I, sect.
29 Ibid., sect.
30 Ibid., sect.
31 Ibid., sect.
32 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 10 (E/2003/30).
33 See ibid., chap.
I, sect.
34 See ibid., sect.
35 See ibid., sect.
36 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 8 (E/2003/28).
37 United Nations publications, Sales No.
38 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 8 (E/2003/28), chap.
I, sect.
39 See ibid., sect.
40 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23).
41 Ibid., Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22).
42 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap.
I, sect.
43 See ibid., chap.
I, sect.
44 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 23 (E/2003/43).
45 See ibid., chap.
I, sect.
Chapter VIII Elections, nominations, confirmations and appointments
The Council considered the question of elections, nominations, confirmations and appointments at its organizational session (agenda item 2) and resumed organizational sessions (agenda item 4).
The question was considered at its 3rd, 9th, 11th and 12th meetings, on 30 January, 29 April, 27 May and 24 June 2003.
An account of the proceedings is contained in the relevant summary records (E/2003/SR.3, 9, 11 and 12).
The Council had before it the following documents:
(a) Annotated provisional agenda for the resumed organizational session for 2003 (E/2003/2/Add.1);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of members of the functional commissions of the Council (E/2003/L.3);
(c) Note by the Secretary-General on the nomination of seven members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination (E/2003/L.3/Add.1);
(d) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 13 members of the Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting (E/2003/L.3/Add.2);
(e) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 14 members of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund (E/2003/L.3/Add.3);
(f) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 14 members of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund (E/2003/L.3/Add.4);
(g) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of six members of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme (E/2003/L.3/Add.5);
(h) Note by the Secretary-General on the Board of Trustees of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (E/2003/L.3/Add.6);
(i) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of ten members of the Committee for the United Nations Population Award (E/2003/L.3/Add.7);
(j) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of nine members of the Programme Coordination Board of the Joint United Nations Programme on Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (UNAIDS) (E/2003/L.3/Add.8);
(k) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 19 members of the Governing Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) (E/2003/L.3/Add.9);
(l) Note by the Secretary-General on the appointment of 24 members of the Committee for Development Policy (E/2003/L.3/Add.10);
(m) Note by the Secretary-General on an application for membership in the Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals of the Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (E/2003/L.3/Add.11).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 4, the Council adopted decisions 2003/201 B, C and D.
For action taken by the Council under agenda item 2, see chapter III of the present report.
The Council resumed consideration of agenda item 1 at its 51st meeting, on 31 October (see E/2003/SR.51).
The Council had before it the following documents:
(a) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of one member of the International Narcotics Control Board from among candidates nominated by Governments, pursuant to article 9, paragraph 1 (b), of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol (E/2003/L.3/Add.12, 14, 15 and 16);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General on the election of 10 members of the Executive Board of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (E/2003/L.3/Add.13).
Action taken by the Council
Under agenda item 1, the Council adopted decision 2003/201 E.
Chapter IX
Organizational matters
The Council held its organizational session for 2003 at United Nations Headquarters on 15, 28, 30 and 31 January 2003 (1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th meetings); a resumed organizational session at United Nations Headquarters on 5 and 25 March, 29 April, 1 and 27 May and 24 June 2003 (5th, 6th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th meetings); a special high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization at United Nations Headquarters on 14 April 2003 (7th and 8th meetings); its substantive session at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 30 June to 25 July 2003 (13th to 49th meetings); and a resumed substantive session at United Nations Headquarters on 22 August, 31 October and 19 December 2003 (50th to 52nd meetings).
Organizational session
Opening of the Council
The 1st meeting, on 15 January, was opened by the President of the Council for 2002, Ivan Simonović (Croatia).
Upon election, the President of the Council for 2003, Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala), made a statement.
Election of the Bureau
At its 1st meeting, on 15 January, pursuant to paragraph 2(k) of its resolution 1988/77, the Council elected by acclamation the following persons as Vice-Presidents of the Council for 2003: Marjatta Rasi (Finland), Murari Raj Sharma (Nepal), Abdul Mejid Hussein (Ethiopia) and Valery P. Kuchinsky (Ukraine).
Agenda
At its 1st meeting, on 15 January, the Council considered the agenda of its organizational session.
It had before it the annotated provisional agenda (E/2003/2).
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the agenda of the organizational session (see annex I).
Action taken by the Council
At its organizational session for 2003, the Council adopted one resolution and eight decisions concerning organizational matters.
See Council resolution 2003/1 and decisions 2003/202 to 2003/209.
Basic programme of work of the Council
At its 2nd meeting, on 28 January, the Council considered its basic programme of work for 2003 and 2004.
It had before it a note by the Secretary-General containing the proposed basic programme of work for the Council for 2003 and 2004 (E/2003/1) and the draft proposals thereon submitted by the President of the Council and members of the Bureau on the basis of informal consultations held pursuant to paragraph 2(1) of Council decision 1988/77 (E/2003/L.1).
At the same meeting, the Council adopted draft decisions I, II, III, V, VI and VII.
See Council decisions 2003/202 to 2003/206.
Second session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration and its provisional agenda
At its 2nd meeting, on 28 January, the Council decided to approve the holding of the second session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration in New York from 7 to 11 April 2003, as well as its provisional agenda.
See Council decision 2003/207.
Participation of intergovernmental organizations in the work of the Economic and Social Council
At its 2nd meeting, on 28 January, the Council decided to include in the agenda of its substantive session of 2003 the applications for observer status of two intergovernmental organizations: the Islamic Development Bank and the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organizations.
See Council decision 2003/208.
Subsequently, at its resumed organizational session, the Council approved the applications from the Islamic Development Bank and the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to participate in the work of the Council in accordance with rule 79 of its rules of procedure.
See Council decision 2003/221 adopted thereafter at the resumed organizational session.
General parameters and theme for the spring 2003 meeting of the Economic and Social Council with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization
At its 3rd meeting, on 30 January, the Council took note of a memorandum dated 24 January 2003 from the Bureau of the Council to the members of the Council, concerning the general parameters of the spring 2003 meeting of the Council with the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization, as well as the theme of the meeting, “Increased coherence, coordination and cooperation for the implementation of the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development at all levels one year after the Conference”.
See Council decision 2003/209.
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau
At its 4th meeting, on 31 January, the Council, recalling its decision 2002/304 of 25 October 2002, in which it decided to establish an Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau, decided to extend the mandate of the Advisory Group until the substantive session of the Council of 2003.
See Council resolution 2003/1.
Subsequently, at its substantive session of 2003, the Council decided, by its resolution 2003/53, to extend the mandate of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group until the organizational session of the Council in January 2004 (see chap.
VII, sect.
8 of the report of the Council to the General Assembly, A/58/3, (Part II)).
Resumed organizational session
Agenda
At its 9th meeting, on 29 April, the Council had before it the agenda of its resumed organizational session (E/2002/2 and Add.1).
Action taken by the Council
At its resumed organizational session for 2003, the Council adopted decisions concerning organizations matters.
See Council decisions 2003/210 to 2003/215 A and 2003/215 B, 2003/217 to 2003/222.
Theme for the humanitarian affairs segment of the substantive session of 2003 of the Council
At its 5th meeting, on 5 March, the Council had before it a non-paper containing the theme for the humanitarian affairs segment of its substantive session of 2003.
At the same meeting, the Council decided to adopt the theme.
See Council decision 2003/210.
Programme of work for the operational activities segment of the substantive session of 2003 of the Council
At its 5th meeting, on 5 March, the Council adopted the programme of work of the operational activities segment for the substantive session of 2003.
See Council decision 2003/211.
Participation of intergovernmental organizations in the work of the Economic and Social Council
At its 5th meeting, on 5 March, the Council decided to grant observer status with the Council to the Intergovernmental Institution for the Use of Micro-alga Spirulina against Malnutrition.
See Council decision 2003/212.
At its 12th meeting, on 24 June, the Council approved the applications from the following intergovernmental organizations to participate in the work of the Council in accordance with rule 79 of its rules of procedure: Islamic Development Bank; Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; Common Fund for Commodities.
See Council decisions 2003/213 and 2003/221.
Change of date and venue of the eleventh session of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters
At its 5th meeting, on 5 March, the Council decided to endorse the decision of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters to change the dates and venue of its eleventh session from 7 to 11 April 2003 in New York, to 10 to 14 November 2003, in Geneva.
See Council decision 2003/214.
Subsequently, during the substantive session, the Economic and Social Council was informed that the meeting had been scheduled to take place from 15 to 19 December 2003 and it deferred its decision on the matter to the resumed substantive session of 2003.
Appointment of the members of the Committee on Negotiations with Intergovernmental Agencies
At its 6th meeting, on 25 March, the Council took note of a letter dated 28 February 2003 from the President of the Council addressed to the Secretary-General (E/2003/12), informing him of the appointment by the President of the members of the Committee on Negotiations with Intergovernmental Agencies.
See Council decision 2003/215 A.
At its 10th meeting, on 1 May, the Council noted that the President had informed the Council that additional countries had joined as members of the Committee on Negotiations with Intergovernmental Agencies.
See Council decision 2003/215 B.
Draft provisional agenda and documentation for the 2003 session of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations and report of the Committee on its 2002 resumed session
At its 10th meeting, on 1 May, the Council approved the draft provisional agenda and documentation for the 2003 session of the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations and decided that the 2003 session of the Committee would be held from 5 to 23 May 2003.
See Council decision 2003/217.
Applications from indigenous organizations not in consultative status with the Council to participate in the open-ended intersessional working group of the Commission on Human Rights
At its 10th meeting, on 1 May, the Council decided to authorize, in accordance with its resolution 1995/32 of 3 March 1995, the participation of the following three indigenous organizations in the work of the open-ended intersessional working group of the Commission on Human Rights to elaborate draft declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples: Chickaloon Village Traditional Council; Indigenous Peoples and Nations Coalition; and United Native Nations.
See Council decision 2003/218.
Provisional agenda and documentation for the second session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues
At its 10th meeting, on 1 May, the Council approved the provisional agenda and documentation for the second session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
See Council decision 2003/219.
Honorariums payable to members of the International Narcotic Control Board
At its 10th meeting, on 1 May, the Council decided to include the issue of honorariums payable to members of the International Narcotics Control Board on the agenda of its substantive session of 2003.
See Council decision 2003/220.
Consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council
At its 12th meeting, on 24 June, the Council decided to further defer consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, to a specialized agency to a later date.
See Council decision 2003/222.
C. Substantive session
Action taken by the Council
At its substantive session of 2003, the Council adopted two decisions concerning organizational matters.
See Council decisions 2003/223 and 2003/287.
Agenda
At its 13th meeting, on 30 June 2003, the Council considered the agenda and organization of work of its substantive session of 2003.
It had before it the following documents:
(a) Annotated provisional agenda for the substantive session of 2003 (E/2003/100);
(b) Proposed programme of work for the substantive session of 2003 (E/2003/L.5);
(c) Status of documentation for the session (E/2003/L.6).
At the same meeting, the Council adopted the agenda for its substantive session of 2003 (see annex I) and approved the programme of work of the session.
See Council decision 2003/223.
Themes for the high-level and coordination segments of the 2004 substantive session of the Council
At its 48th meeting, on 24 July, the Council decided to adopt the following themes for the high-level and coordination segments of its substantive session of 2004:
High-level segment
“Resources mobilization and enabling environment for poverty eradication in the context of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010”
Coordination segment
“1.
Review and appraisal of the system-wide implementation of the Council's agreed conclusions 1997/2 on mainstreaming the gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system.
“2.
Coordinated and integrated United Nations system approach to promote rural development in developing countries with due consideration to least developed countries, for poverty eradication and sustainable development.”
See Council decision 2003/287.
Resumed substantive session
The Council held its resumed substantive session of 2003 at United Nations Headquarters on 22 August, 31 October and 19 December 2003 (50th to 52nd meetings) (see E/2003/SR.50-52).
Action taken by the Council
The Council resumed consideration of agenda item 1 at its 51st meeting, on 31 October (see E/2003/SR.51).
See Council decision 2003/312.
Participation of an intergovernmental organization in the work of the Economic and Social Council
At its 51st meeting on 31 October, the Council decided to grant observer status with the Council to the Helsinki Commission, an intergovernmental organization.
See Council decision 2003/312.
Annex I
Agendas of the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2003 and the substantive session of 2003
Agenda of the organizational and resumed organizational sessions for 2003
Adopted by the Council at its 1st meeting, on 15 January 2003
Election of the Bureau.
Adoption of the agenda and other organizational matters.
Basic programme of work of the Council.
Elections, nominations, confirmations and appointments.
Agenda of the substantive session of 2003
Adopted by the Council at its 13th meeting, on 30 June 2003
Adoption of the agenda and other organizational matters.
High-level segment
Promoting an integrated approach to rural development in developing countries for poverty eradication and sustainable development.
Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation segment
Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation:
(a) Follow-up to policy recommendations of the General Assembly and the Council;
(b) Reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme;
(c) Economic and technical cooperation among developing countries.
Coordination segment
The role of the Economic and Social Council in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the outcomes of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits.
Humanitarian affairs segment
Special economic, humanitarian and disaster relief assistance.
General segment
Implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits:
(a) Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development;
(b) Review and coordination of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010.
Coordination, programme and other questions:
(a) Reports of coordination bodies;
(b) Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005;
(c) Calendar of conferences and meetings in the economic, social and related fields;
(d) International cooperation in the field of informatics;
(e) Long-term programme of support for Haiti;
(f) Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system;
(g) Joint United Nations Programme on Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (UNAIDS);
(h) Ad hoc advisory group on African countries emerging from conflict;
(i) Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) Task Force.
Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 52/12 B.
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations.
Regional cooperation.
Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan.
Non-governmental organizations.
Economic and environmental questions:
(a) Sustainable development;
(b) Science and technology for development;
(c) Statistics;
(d) Human settlements;
(e) Environment;
(f) Population and development;
(g) Public administration and development;
(h) International cooperation in tax matters;
(i) United Nations Forum on Forests;
(j) Assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions;
(k) Cartography;
(l) Transport of dangerous goods;
(m) Women and development.
Social and human rights questions:
(a) Advancement of women;
(b) Social development;
(c) Crime prevention and criminal justice;
(d) Narcotic drugs;
(e) United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
(f) Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
(g) Human rights;
(h) Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues;
(i) Genetic privacy and non-discrimination.
Consideration of the request for conversion of the International Civil Defence Organization, an intergovernmental organization with observer status with the Economic and Social Council, to a specialized agency of the United Nations system.
Negotiation of an agreement between the United Nations and the World Tourism Organization to constitute it as a specialized agency of the United Nations system.
Annex II
Intergovernmental organizations designated by the Council under rule 79 of the rules of procedurea for participation in the deliberations of the Council on questions within the scope of their activities
Organizations and other entities accorded permanent observer status by the General Assembly
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (General Assembly resolution 36/4)
African Development Bank (General Assembly resolution 42/10)
African Unionb (General Assembly resolution 2011 (XX) and Assembly decision 56/475)
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (General Assembly resolution 43/6)
Andean Community (General Assembly resolution 52/6)
Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization (General Assembly resolution 35/2)
Asian Development Bank (General Assembly resolution 57/30)
Association of Caribbean States (General Assembly resolution 53/5)
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization (General Assembly resolution 54/5)
Caribbean Community (General Assembly resolution 46/8)
Central American Integration System (General Assembly resolution 50/2)
Commonwealth of Independent States (General Assembly resolution 48/237)
Commonwealth Secretariat (General Assembly resolution 31/3)
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (General Assembly resolution 54/10)
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States (General Assembly resolution 56/92)
Council of Europe (General Assembly resolution 44/6)
Customs Cooperation Council (General Assembly resolution 53/216)
Economic Community of Central African States (General Assembly resolution 55/161)
Economic Cooperation Organization (General Assembly resolution 48/2)
European Community (General Assembly resolution 3208 (XXIX))
Inter-American Development Bank (General Assembly resolution 55/160)
International Centre for Migration Policy Development (General Assembly resolution 57/31)
International Committee of the Red Cross (General Assembly resolution 45/6)
International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) (General Assembly resolution 51/1)
International Development Law Institute (General Assembly resolution 56/90)
International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (General Assembly resolution 49/2)
International Hydrographic Organization (General Assembly resolution 56/91)
International Organization of la Francophonie (General Assembly resolution 33/18)
International Organization for Migration (General Assembly resolution 47/4)
International Seabed Authority (General Assembly resolution 51/6)
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (General Assembly resolution 51/204)
International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (General Assembly resolution 54/195)
Inter-Parliamentary Union (General Assembly resolution 57/32)
Latin American Economic System (SELA) (General Assembly resolution 35/3)
Latin American Parliament (General Assembly resolution 48/4)
League of Arab States (General Assembly resolution 477 (V))
Organization of American States (General Assembly resolution 253 (III))
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (General Assembly resolution 53/6)
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (General Assembly resolution 48/5)
Organization of the Islamic Conference (General Assembly resolution 3369 (XXX))
Pacific Islands Forum (General Assembly resolution 49/1)
Palestine (General Assembly resolution 52/250)
Partners in Population and Development (General Assembly resolution 57/29)
Permanent Court of Arbitration (General Assembly resolution 48/3)
Sovereign Military Order of Malta (General Assembly resolution 48/265)
Organizations designated by the Economic and Social Council
Participation on a continuing basis
African Regional Centre for Technology (Council decision 1980/151)
Asian and Pacific Development Centre (Council decision 2000/213)
Asian Productivity Organization (APO) (Council decision 1980/114)
Common Fund for Commodities (Council decision 2003/221)
Council of Arab Economic Unity (Council decision 109 (LIX))
International Association of Economic and Social Councils and Similar Institutions (IAESCSI) (Council decision 2001/318)
International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (Council decision 1997/215)
International Centre for Public Enterprises in Developing Countries (ICPE) (Council decision 1980/114)
Institution for the Use of Micro-alga Spirulina against Malnutrition (Council decision 2003/212)
Islamic Development Bank (Council decision 2003/221)
Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Council decision 2003/221)
Latin American Energy Organization (OLADE) (Council decision 1980/114)
Organization of Ibero-American States for Education, Science and Culture (Council decision 1986/156)
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (Council decision 109 (LIX))
Regional Organization for the Protection of the Marine Environment (Council decision 1992/265)
Union of Economic and Social Councils of Africa (Council decision 1996/225)
World Tourism Organization (Council decision 109 (LIX))
Participation on an ad hoc basis
African Accounting Council (Council decision 1987/161)
African Cultural Institute (Council decision 1987/161)
Arab Security Studies and Training Centre (Council decision 1989/165)
Council of Arab Ministers of the Interior (Council decision 1987/161)
International Bauxite Association (Council decision 1987/161)
International Civil Defence Organization (Council decision 109 (LIX))
Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences (Council decision 239 (LXII))
Notes
a The text of rule 79, entitled “Participation of other intergovernmental organizations” reads: “Representatives of intergovernmental organizations accorded permanent observer status by the General Assembly and of other intergovernmental organizations designated on an ad hoc or a continuing basis by the Council on the recommendation of the Bureau may participate, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Council on questions within the scope of the activities of the organizations”.
b Superseding the Organization of African Unity.
Annex III
Composition of the Council and its subsidiary and related bodies
Economic and Social Council
(54 members; three-year term)
Functional commissions and subcommissions
Statistical Commission
(24 members; four-year term)
Commission on Population and Development
(47 members; four-year term)
Commission for Social Developmentd
(46 members; four-year term)
Commission on Human Rights
(53 members; three-year term)
Commission on the Status of Womene
(45 members; four-year term)
Commission on Narcotic Drugs
(53 members; four-year term)
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
(40 members; three-year term)
Commission on Sustainable Developmentg
(53 members; three-year term)
Commission on Science and Technology for Development
(33 members; four-year term)
United Nations Forum on Forests
The membership of the United Nations Forum on Forests comprises all States Members of the United Nations and States members of the specialized agencies (see para.
4 of Council resolution 2000/35 of 18 October 2000).
Regional commissions
Economic Commission for Africa*
(53 members)
* Switzerland participates in a consultative capacity in the work of the Commission by virtue of Council resolution 925 (XXXIV) of 6 July 1962.
Economic Commission for Europe*
(55 members)
* The Holy See participates in the work of the Commission in accordance with Commission decision N (XXXI) of 5 April 1976.
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean*
(41 members)
(7 associate members)
* Germany and Switzerland participate in a consultative capacity in the work of the Commission by virtue of Council resolutions 632 (XXII) of 19 December 1956 and 861 (XXXII) of 21 December 1961, respectively.
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific*
(53 members)
(9 associate members)
* Switzerland participates in a consultative capacity in the work of the Commission by virtue of Council resolution 860 (XXXII) of 21 December 1961.
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
(13 members)
Standing committees
Committee for Programme and Coordination
(34 members; three-year term)
Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations
(19 members; four-year term)
Membership from 1 January 2003 to 31 December 2006
Expert bodies
Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals
Subcommittee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods (TDG Subcommittee)
(27 members)
Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS Subcommittee)
(30 members)
Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting
(34 members; three-year term)
Committee for Development Policy
(24 members; three-year term)
Committee of Experts on Public Administrationq
(24 members; four-year term)
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(18 members; four-year term)
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues
(16 members; three-year term)
Membership from 1 January 2002 to 31 December 2004
Related bodies
Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund
(36 members; three-year term)
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(64 members)
Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme/ United Nations Population Fund
(36 members; three-year term)
Executive Board of the World Food Programmet
(36 members; three-year term)
Membership in 2003
Membership in 2004
International Narcotics Control Board
(13 members; five-year term)
Members elected by the Council to serve on the Board as constituted under the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961
Membership in 2003 and 2004
Board of Trustees of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
(11 members; three-year term)
Executive Board of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
(10 members; three-year term)
Committee for the United Nations Population Awardx
(10 members; three-year term)
Membership in 2003y
Membership in 2004z
Programme Coordination Board of the Joint United Nations Programme on Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (UNAIDS)
(22 members; three-year term)
Governing Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)
(58 members; four-year term)
Notes
a At its 60th plenary meeting, on 11 November 2003, the General Assembly elected Turkey to replace Portugal.
b At its 45th plenary meeting, on 19 December 2002, the Council further postponed to a future session the election of two members from Asian States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2005 and the election of one member from Latin American and Caribbean States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2004 (decision 2002/201 E).
c At its 9th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2003, the Council postponed to a future session the election of one member from Asian States, one member from Eastern European States and one member from Latin American and Caribbean States for a four-year term beginning on 1 January 2004 (decision 2003/201 B).
d At its 9th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2003, the Council elected the following 14 members for a four-year term beginning at the initial meeting, in 2004, of the Commission's forty-third session and expiring at the close of the Commission's forty-sixth session in 2008: Chile, Côte d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Haiti, Indonesia, Japan, Mali, Peru, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, Tunisia and the United States of America.
At the same meeting, the Council postponed to a future session the election of one member from Eastern European States for a four-year term beginning at the initial meeting, in 2004, of the Commission's forty-third session and expiring at the close of the Commission's forty-sixth session in 2008 (decision 2003/201 B).
e At its 9th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2003, the Council elected the following 10 members for a four-year term beginning at the initial meeting, in 2004, of the Commission's forty-ninth session and expiring at the close of the Commission's fifty-second session in 2008: China, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ghana, Suriname, Hungary, Iceland, Kazakhstan, Mauritius and the United States of America (decision 2003/201 B).
f At its 9th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2003, the Council elected Turkey, for a term beginning on 1 January 2004 and expiring on 31 December 2005, to replace Germany (decision 2003/201 B).
g At its 9th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2003, the Council elected the following 17 members for a three-year term beginning at the organizational meeting, in 2004, of the Commission's thirteenth session and expiring at the close of the Commission's fifteenth session in 2007: Algeria, Austria, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Colombia, Finland, France, Georgia, Ghana, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Luxembourg, Pakistan, Paraguay, Qatar, Sierra Leone and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (decision 2003/201 B).
h At its 51st meeting, on 31 October 2003, the Council further postponed the election of two members from Western European and other States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2004 (decision 2003/201 E).
i At its 51st plenary meeting, on 31 October 2003, the Council elected Greece for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2005, to fill a postponed vacancy (decision 2003/201 E).
j At its 9th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2003, the Council elected Turkey to fill a postponed vacancy for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2006 (decision 2003/201 B).
k Formerly Yugoslavia.
l At its 40th plenary meeting, on 18 July 2003, the Council amended the terms of reference of the Commission to reflect the admission of Timor-Leste as a member of the Commission (Council resolution 2003/7).
m At its 84th plenary meeting, on 1 May 2003, upon the nomination of the Economic and Social Council (see Council decision 2003/201 B), the General Assembly elected Canada for a term beginning on the date of election to fill a postponed vacancy.
n At its 12th plenary meeting, on 24 June 2003, the Council approved Senegal's application for membership contained in document E/2003/L.3/Add.11 (decision 2003/201 D).
o At its 12th plenary meeting, on 24 June 2003, the Council postponed the election of one member from Eastern European States and one member from Latin American and Caribbean States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2003 (decision 2002/201 D); and at its 51st meeting, on 31 October 2003, the Council postponed the election of two members from Asian States, two members from Latin American and Caribbean States and three members from Western European and other States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2005 (decision 2003/201 E).
p At its 51st plenary meeting, on 31 October 2003, the Council postponed to a future session the election of two members from Asian States, two members from Latin American and Caribbean States and three members from Western European and other States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2005, and two members from Asian States, one member from Eastern European States and two members from Latin American and Caribbean States for a three-year term beginning on 1 January 2004 (decision 2003/201 E).
q Pursuant to Council resolution 2001/45 of 20 December 2001, in which the Group of Experts on the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance was renamed the Committee of Experts on Public Administration, the members of the new Committee were nominated by the Secretary-General and appointed by the Council at its resumed organizational session of 2002 (decision 2002/201 B).
r At its 9th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2003, the Council elected France to replace Germany, Japan to replace Luxembourg and Norway to replace Ireland for a term beginning on 1 January 2004 (decision 2003/201 B).
s At its 9th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2003, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 57/185 of 18 December 2002 (decision 2003/201 B), the Council elected Cyprus, Kenya and Yemen.
t Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 50/8 of 1 November 1995, the Economic and Social Council and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), elect 18 members each from among the States Members of the United Nations or the States members of FAO, according to the pattern set out in that resolution.
The members of the Executive Board were elected from five lists set out in the Basic Texts of the World Food Programme and reproduced in document E/2003/L.1/Add.5.
u At its 51st plenary meeting, on 31 October 2003, the Council elected Melvyn Levitsky (United States of America) to complete the unexpired portion of the term of Rosa Maria del Castillo (Peru), who had resigned from the Board (decision 2003/201 E).
v At its 4th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2002, the Council postponed to a future session the appointment of one member from African States for a term beginning on the date of election (decision 2002/201 B).
The Council also extended the terms of office of the members of the Board pending the outcome of the Council's consideration on the future operations of the Institute (decision 2003/201 B).
w At its 51st plenary meeting, on 31 October 2003, pursuant to Council resolution 2003/57 of 24 July 2003, in which the Board of Trustees was replaced by an Executive Board, the Council elected El Salvador, Mexico, the Philippines and Spain as members of the new Executive Board at its resumed substantive session on 31 October 2003.
The terms of office of the new members began, exceptionally, on the date of election and will expire on 31 December 2006.
The Council also postponed to a future session the election of two members from African States, one member from Asian States, two members from Eastern European States and one member from Western European and other States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2006 (decision 2003/201 E).
x For the regulations governing the Award, see General Assembly resolution 36/201 and Assembly decision 41/445.
y The Council further postponed to a future session the election of two members from Asian States and one member from Latin American and Caribbean States for a term beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2003 (decision 2001/201 B).
z At its 51st plenary meeting, on 31 October 2003, the Council postponed to a future session the election of one member from Latin American and Caribbean States for a three-year term beginning on 1 January 2004 (decision 2003/201 E).
aa At its 11th plenary meeting, on 27 May 2003, the Council elected the Netherlands for a term beginning on 1 June 2003 to replace Portugal (decision 2003/201 C).
bb At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 30 January 2003, the Council elected Switzerland for a term beginning on the date of election to replace Sweden (see decision 2003/201 A).
cc At its 51st plenary meeting, on 31 October 2003, the Council elected France for a term beginning on 1 January 2004 to replace Germany (decision 2003/201 E).
A/58/3/Rev.1
iv
v