# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Mrs Ludford, are you sure your point of order is related to the Minutes?
Madam President, I signalled I wanted to raise a point of order, although it is not actually on the Minutes.
I do not want to delay the House unduly, but I think that as we prepare to debate the construction of Europe, it is important to take note of a landmark court judgement in the UK.
The so-called historian, David Irving, has lost his libel case against the American academic, Deborah Lipstadt, who accused him of manipulating evidence to deny the Nazi genocide of the Jews.
The judge has ruled, in a devastating judgement, that he was "an active Holocaust denier, anti-Semitic and racist and that he associates with right-wing extremists who promote neo-Nazism" .
This judgement is important, not just for Europe' s past, but also for its present.
With the rise in racism and anti-Semitism and the electoral success of extremist parties, this judgement boosts the fight to make Europe a society free of racism and at ease with diversity.
Thank you, Mrs Ludford.
I am happy to take note of your point of order.
But for the time being I would like comments to relate to the Minutes, so that we can adopt them.
After that Members are free to move any other points of order.
Madam President, item 2 of the Minutes on page 5, which is in fact the first substantive page, refers to the points I raised about certain political groups apparently not respecting the Rules of Procedure in that they appear to allow individual members of their group to table amendments in plenary, supposedly in the name of the group, although this cannot possibly be the case because contradictory amendments are tabled in the name of the same group.
I would like to underline that although the Minutes mentioned specifically the EPP Group, it is in fact not the only group to have acted in this way.
For instance, the Technical Group, the TDI Group, which did not table any amendments at committee stage whatsoever, has now arrived in plenary with between 20 and 30 amendments, many of which are contradictory.
They are tabled by different members within that group taking different positions and therefore cannot possibly be a group position.
That does not respect our own Rules of Procedure, which allow only 32 members or a group to table amendments in plenary.
Madam President, my point concerns the section of the Minutes on Question Time yesterday evening, when I raised a point of order.
First of all, Question Time was put back to 6:30 p.m., then it was announced on the screen that it would begin at 6:50 p.m.
In the end it was after 7:00 p.m. before Question Time started.
The first part was supposed to last 30 minutes, according to the Agenda; but it lasted much longer.
Basically, my problem is that I had questions down - as some other people did - to Commissioner Byrne.
We had group meetings at the time and saw on the screen "Question 41" .
But by the time I reached the plenary, you had moved on automatically within a few minutes to Question 49.
So five or six people had questions down to Commissioner Byrne, but none of us were here to ask the questions.
Commissioner Byrne seems to have taken offence at this and seen it as some kind of snub.
But it is very difficult for Members to sit right through every single question during Question Time just in case we jump from No 1 to No 99 in a matter of seconds.
So, could we please stick to the Agenda: thirty minutes for the first part of Question Time, twenty for the second part and so on.
We should not keep changing the Agenda because then it is extremely difficult for us to operate.
Thank you, Mrs McKenna.
I take note of your comment and will ensure this does not happen again.
Madam President, in recent days, immense natural catastrophes in which quite a number of people have died have again occurred on the banks of the River Tisza.
I would therefore ask the President to send our condolences to both the Romanian and Hungarian parliaments.
At the same time, we must be alert to the kind of environmental risks these natural catastrophes may entail for our common European environment.
The Tisza flows into the Danube delta, which is one of the world' s most significant protected areas of environmental interest.
Thank you, Mrs Thors, I am quite prepared to do so.
Madam President, with rather more levity.
Last night in the Committee on Budgets when the refreshments were being distributed, Mr Colom pointed out that the small cartons of milk were marked "for distribution in schools only" .
Had it said "for schoolchildren only" one could understand why it was being distributed in the European Parliament, but it was marked "for schools only" .
Could we find out why this has happened?
It is so embarrassing.
I know we campaigned for more school milk but, on this occasion, we did not want it here.
Thank you, Mr Wynn, I cannot answer you right now, but I will have the matter investigated.
Madam President, I wish to inform you and the Members who come into daily contact, although sometimes without noticing them, with the Parliament staff who ensure the running of the House as a whole, that certain sections (security guards, receptionists, firemen) were on strike yesterday afternoon.
They were protesting at having to work 12 hours at a stretch, day and night, for an average net salary of FRF 6 000, without even receiving extra pay for night or weekend work.
I want to express my solidarity with them.
Moreover, we have written you a letter, Madam President, on behalf of the LO and LCR Members, and hope you will follow the matter up.
Thank you, Mrs Laguiller.
I will give the letter my utmost attention.
Madam President, I have been listening to the translations of the speeches on my headphones for a long time now, and the sound disappears sometimes, even if I change places, and I also get a rasping noise, not only here but also in our Group' s room.
There is some technical fault here, and I wish the relevant people would check whether there is too much interference here, owing to mobile phones, for example.
Even the position of my head affects audibility, and I cannot really sit here listening with my head tilted to one side.
The other request I have is for a technician to adjust the sound volume here.
Some Members shout into the microphone, even though the microphone is, in fact, there to make shouting unnecessary, thereby making it impossible to hear anything over the headphones.
So whenever someone shouts into the microphone - even though they should not - I would ask that the sound volume in the Chamber be lowered immediately, so that we can also hear what is being said over the headphones.
Thank you, Mr Paasilinna, we will look into all that and check the sound system in general.
(The Minutes were approved)
IGC
The next item is the report (A5-0086/2000) by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the European Parliament' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference (14094/1999 - C5-0341/1999 - 1999/0825(CNS)).
First of all I must inform the House that the Union for Europe of the Nations Group has moved the report' s inadmissibility, pursuant to the Rules of Procedure.
Let me point out that the Council consulted Parliament on convening the Intergovernmental Conference and that the report by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen was entered on the agenda in accordance with the appropriate Rules.
Mr Ribeiro e Castro will present the motion.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, this report should not have been admitted.
It is generally anti what Europe really represents and anti most of what Europe has achieved.
Paragraph 15 of the motion for a resolution is a symptom of this aggressiveness towards Europe.
We are all attached to fundamental rights and the rule of law, starting here in this House.
So how can we agree when the fundamental right of recourse to the courts is being threatened?
This is not a question of internal affairs, but external affairs of great importance.
We are Members of this House and we represent our electors.
Anything which discriminates in our legal and political conditions, between our political parties and groups in terms of freedom and equality affects our right of representation and ultimately the rights and very freedom of our electors.
These are the elements particularly under threat in this report which wants to interfere with and discriminate between the statutes of the political parties.
The very essence of Europe is under threat.
The fundamental right of recourse to the courts cannot be altered by anyone and nor can the rule of law.
Paragraph 15 ruins the whole text by defiling a very serious issue.
The temptation for those in power to act arbitrarily which this paragraph encourages is a clear illustration of the position taken in the rest of the report, and a terrible omen.
We therefore move the inadmissibility of this report which, in addition to having a dubious legal basis, was not properly prepared and does not enjoy the broad consensus which Europe must have.
This is evident in both the injudiciousness of this regrettable paragraph and the fact that 222, I repeat 222, amendments were tabled on this report.
Is there any better proof that this report is totally inappropriate?
We therefore propose, in order to defend Europe and the rule of law, the immediate rejection of this report.
Thank you, Mr Ribeiro e Castro.
Does anyone wish to speak in favour of this request for referral back to committee?
Madam President, I think Mr Ribeiro e Castro is quite right to consider the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report inadmissible because it conflicts with and even infringes a number of rights enshrined in our institutions.
First of all, Mr Ribeiro e Castro is right to single out paragraph 15, which states that 'no actions may be brought in connection with the interna corporis affairs of the European Parliament.'
That statement clearly infringes the fundamental right of every citizen, and thus also of Members, to bring an action.
But more generally I believe this report infringes a whole range of different rights, beginning with the rights of the small and medium-sized states which have formed an integral part of our institutions and been highly respected by them since the early days of the Treaty of Rome.
Thank you, Mr Berthu.
Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen, the two rapporteurs, wish to speak against this motion.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, however much I respect the opinion of the Members who have just spoken, I find it harsh and unjust to regard our report as inadmissible because of paragraph 15.
Other colleagues have tabled amendments with a view to voting against that paragraph, and Members may agree with those amendments.
To agree or not agree with a paragraph in a report is justified and democratic, and that is what we are here for.
But I do not think it is right to move that a report is inadmissible because of one paragraph.
I call on Members to vote against this motion.
We must examine and vote on the report during this part-session, because it is not a matter of voting for the two rapporteurs but of voting for the European Parliament' s opinion.
Madam President, I am delighted that of all the groups, it is the UEN Group that is standing up for more fundamental rights and more democracy at European Union level.
I am pleased about that; it is a major step forward.
However, I also believe that the strong language my fellow delegates are using is completely uncalled for.
The EU countries have completely different cultures.
In some countries Parliament can draw up its own rules of procedure and one does not have the option of going to the court of justice.
Some countries have a different system.
We have recital 15.
Mr Dimitrakopoulos has already mentioned that there are amendments.
The UEN Group are welcome to vote against them and then we will see if it is left in or taken out.
All in all, I believe that there is no call for excessively strong language, and I am also in favour of us rejecting this amendment.
Madam President, I do not think this amendment is something we can vote on, as the Treaty of Amsterdam makes express provision for the relationship between the institutions and the procedures to be framed differently.
In this respect, this report forms part of the implementation of the Treaty of Amsterdam, and one cannot vote on erroneous, legal proposed amendments, one can only reject them!
(Laughter and applause)
If you feel duty-bound to reject it, you will have an opportunity to do so.
I shall now put the motion presented by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group to the vote by roll call.
(Parliament rejected the procedural motion)
Madam President, Minister, Deputy Minister, Commissioner, we are at a really very important juncture so far as the vocation of the European Union is concerned.
Today, through the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference, the European Union is being called upon to address the great challenges involved in the transition from the 20th to the 21st century, challenges we all recognise, which are important, which influence the course of the European Union every day, and challenges which, above all, raise a fundamental issue: how ready are we, as an institution, as the European Union, to face them?
The Intergovernmental Conference attempts to answer just that question.
It is common ground that in the face of all those challenges, the way the European Union functions at present is certainly in need of some changes, changes whose important aim will be the future progress of the European Union on the basis of what we have all accepted until now.
The report you have before you today is significant in that it covers the following points.
The first point is once again to consolidate the institutional nature of the European Union.
We repeat and insist that the European Union is both a union of states and a union of peoples.
It is precisely our acceptance of that principle which has guided the European Union towards the many successes we can mention, and which, of course, we all like to refer to from time to time.
The second point is to reconfirm and consolidate another important principle, the principle of a balance of powers, a principle that relates precisely to the role and relationship of those who participate in the European Union, a principle expressed by the way all the Member States express themselves in all - I repeat, all - the European Union' s institutional bodies.
And as you know, the European Union has got to where it is today, achieved what it has achieved, precisely because it has been and is functioning on the basis of a balance of powers as agreed and commonly accepted.
The third basic principle safeguarded in the report is the proposal for a general - and I stress the word general - review of all the institutional bodies that make up the European Union.
For some, perhaps, that may be a risky proposal.
However, I must stress that it is necessary and essential, particularly since we all agree that over and above all, the current reconsideration of how the European Union works is directly linked to the great challenge presented by the European Union' s enlargement.
It is only natural, when already in a Europe with 15 Member States we find and all agree that some things do not work quite so well and must be put right, that this will be all the more necessary when we it concerns a European Union with 18, 20, 25 and 27 Member States.
The fourth point concerns a number of new proposals, despite the fact that the issues to which they relate had always been debated.
I refer very specifically to closer cooperation.
Closer cooperation, at least as we view it, must comprise two main elements.
Firstly, it must be an incentive and not an obstacle - I stress: not an obstacle - it must be an incentive for all the Member States to participate more and in greater depth in the European procedures.
Secondly, it must contain a very highly developed element of democratic awareness, which means that if any country or countries for some reason do not wish to participate, at least during a first phase, this should not be regarded as an exclusion or as a factor that restricts the presence of those countries in the European Union.
We have taken a great many steps and we certainly can point to two examples of closer cooperation.
The Schengen Agreement, and Economic and Monetary Union itself.
I would also like to see closer cooperation in foreign policy issues and others as well.
To put it clearly, closer cooperation is a Community process and both foreign policy and common defence policy issues should be dealt with as a Community process, because it provides control mechanisms.
I would like to close by expressing my thanks to the Portuguese Presidency and in particular to Mr da Costa for his cooperation, to Commissioner Barnier, to you and all our colleagues, and of course, to my co-rapporteur Mr Leinen, with whom we worked hard but very well.
I would also like to thank the members of Parliament' s Secretariat who assisted us and the interpreters, who on very many occasions worked long hours to enable the difficult negotiations you all know about to take place.
Madam President, Commissioner, Minister, the national governments took the decision at the Helsinki Summit to almost double the number of Member States.
I believe that is the background to the reform we are calling for now, so as to enable the European Union to handle the enlargement process.
Doubling the number of Member States requires far-reaching reform of the working structures and the decision-making procedures in the Union, so that this whole undertaking does not become incapable of acting.
The key issue is the transition from unanimity to qualified majority voting.
That is the most crucial issue and it must be the yardstick for gauging the success or failure of this Intergovernmental Conference.
It is quite clear that when there are 27 Member States, it is no longer going to be possible to reach unanimous decisions.
It will either take too long or we will only be able to reach solutions that have a minimal effect.
This would not be in the interests of our citizens and our countries.
We therefore call for qualified majority voting to become the rule and unanimity the exception.
However, I am most disconcerted by the developments at the Intergovernmental Conference, because the message we are getting is that so far, the governments have been unable to reach agreement on a single issue regarding the transition to qualified majority voting.
I believe this only goes to show once again, that the Intergovernmental Conference is not the best way to get results, because it is a long time before actual negotiations take place and there is too much waiting around on the starting line.
Mr Dimitrakopoulos mentioned flexibility.
I believe this is also an important principle where enlargement of the Union is concerned.
Twenty-seven countries will not all be able to move at the same speed when it comes to integration.
That is why it is so important for some countries to integrate more closely, as we put it, if we want European unification to take place within the confines of the European Union rather than outside them.
Remember that the debate on the "hard core" or the federal core was revived again after Helsinki, because some people feared that it will not be possible for unification to proceed within the Union.
I ask myself what kind of message this Intergovernmental Conference sends out to our citizens.
I feel it must be brought to their attention that the Union will become more democratic, more transparent and more accessible to them.
In other words, we also need to offset the democratic deficit.
Parliament must be granted codecision rights in all matters where the Council takes majority decisions.
We also want to improve our opportunities for supervising the Commission.
In fact we have submitted proposals to the effect that the President of the Commission should be able to ask Parliament for a vote of confidence, and that it should also be made a little easier for us to express our lack of confidence in the Commission when we see fit to do so.
A Europe of the citizens - to pick up on a theme I touched on before - also goes hand in hand with the Charter of Citizen' s Rights in the Union.
We demand that this Charter be incorporated into the Treaty at the end of this year.
I would just like to mention that this would also enable the "Europeanisation" of the political debate to take an important step forwards.
We want a statute for European parties.
After all, politics must take place at European level and not at national level.
Many of us believe that European lists may prove helpful at future European elections, so that the debates directly associated with the European elections are not purely concerned with domestic affairs, with the opposition pitted against the government, but are European debates, so that the issues we are most concerned about here on the continent are brought to the fore.
The reform of the European Treaties must deliver two things: more efficiency and more democracy.
If the European Treaty of Nice succeeds in this, then the prospects are good for achieving stability and also acceptance amongst the citizens in an enlarged European Union.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, allow me first of all to make a few brief comments on foreign policy.
I would like to encourage the Portuguese Presidency - which so far has managed the negotiations for the Intergovernmental Conference very imaginatively and with a great deal of consideration towards the European Parliament - to give its backing to an extension of the mandate, for example, particularly in the sphere of foreign and security policy, and that of fundamental rights, and to take the decisions necessary to do this in Feira, once we know what is needed on the basis of the implementation of the Helsinki and Cologne Decisions pertaining to foreign and security policy.
This is where we must truly succeed in bringing about cooperation between the first and second pillars, and also in integrating the second pillar more effectively into the first.
In other words, we must bring about closer cooperation between civil and military crisis management.
The Treaty of Amsterdam made it possible for there to be far-reaching integration of the Western European Union into the Treaty; in particular, it transferred the Petersberg tasks.
I believe there is a need for the European Parliament to be empowered to undertake the necessary parliamentary supervision, so as to create equilibrium between the institutions.
I say supervision, not codecision - apart from where budgetary matters are concerned - because this is important if we are to make clear that foreign and security policy are, of course, primarily a task of the executive.
We should also reflect on what is to become of Article 5.
In my view, and that of the Committee, it should be included in the Treaty as a protocol, so that any country which so desires can sign up to this protocol on the basis of a free and sovereign decision.
I believe that in so doing, we would be able, in the long term, to create a European Union in which there would be no variation in security standards from country to country.
This would not be tenable in the long term, in view of the various interests that are represented here.
The European Union is not a State.
But it operates as a federal state where it has the authority to do so.
That is why relations between the institutions must also be organised along federal lines, and there must be a balance between large and small States.
This is certainly one of the difficult tasks facing this Intergovernmental Conference.
I can well imagine - and this is also the opinion of my group - that we would be able to work effectively with a Commission containing representatives of all the countries, if the President of the Commission was afforded the opportunity to structure a Commission of this kind in an efficient manner, that is if we were to create such an opportunity by strengthening the position of the President of the Commission here.
However, if we assume that due consideration is being shown towards the small countries, then we must also be in a position to create a stronger basis of legitimacy for the larger countries according to the "one man one vote" principle, and on this basis, adjust the proportional allocation system within the European Parliament, giving certain assurances as to minimum seat numbers, and also settle matters accordingly within the Council.
However, the crucial test facing this Intergovernmental Conference is to foster the enlargement process by extending majority decisions.
Therefore it must be clear that with the exception of constitutional issues, everything should be subject to majority decisions, although of course the Portuguese Presidency and the Commission would be well-advised to draw clear distinctions in their drafts, in areas such as social and taxation policy, between matters which, according to European rules, should be decided on by majority voting, because the internal market requires it, and matters which are to remain subject to unanimous decisions, being the preserve of the nation-state.
This leads me directly on to the matter of the catalogue of competences.
This is another task as I see it.
We must make it clearer within this European Union who is responsible for what and when.
If we were to clearly apportion responsibility in this way, then we would have more transparency and the people would be more willing to give the European Union their support.
This is also something the Intergovernmental Conference should strive for, and the proposals to divide the Treaty, the requests to make these distinctions clear, appear to me to be important, also the way in which, for example, the Council is at last bringing transparency and openness to its role as legislator, and we are therefore managing to separate the executive and the legislative.
It is all part of the same package.
As to closer cooperation: there will certainly be a need for this in an enlarged Community, particularly where foreign and security policy is concerned.
But I would like to make clear where the boundary lies.
The boundary is the point at which the unity of the system of laws and the unity of the institution are compromised.
That is why we must not push closer cooperation too far.
We must not use it as a fallback option because we are unable to extend majority decisions to a sufficient number of areas.
I feel that here too, there are certain rules that we need to stick to.
The European Union is a Community of values.
Therefore it is to be hoped that the Convention, under the leadership of Roman Herzog, will put forward a catalogue of fundamental rights which we will be able to include in the Treaty in a legally binding manner, and that on this basis, we will then be able to define our values in such a way that many of the things we discussed in the past will no longer be possible, because we will have a clear legal provision in place.
If we succeed in this then, all in all, we will have made considerable progress, and will thus have created the conditions necessary to the enlargement of the European Union.
Madam President, as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control, I would like to highlight two points that we included in the report.
But firstly I would like to thank both rapporteurs for the enormous amount of work they have done.
I would also like to thank Commissioner Barnier for his open-mindedness, and I would like to thank Mr Vitorino for making a particular point that I would now like to address myself.
My first point concerns the discharge, which is very topical at the moment.
The EU Treaty states quite clearly that the European Parliament grants the Commission discharge to implement the budget.
In practice, however, this act on our part is twofold, the first stage being to undertake a political assessment under the discharge procedure, and the second being to close the budgetary accounts.
Now the first stage, that of the political evaluation, can have mixed results.
There is assent, there is refusal, and matters are sometimes deferred.
This does not necessarily affect the budgetary accounts, the second stage that is, for they can be closed even if the first stage met with refusal.
This has the advantage that a balance from the budgetary accounts can then be carried forward to the following year.
This should be enshrined in the Treaty, for it is already included in our Rules of Procedure and is, as I said, established practice.
In addition, we would like to receive information directly from the Member States, so as to improve the way in which we conduct our assessment of budgetary management.
My second point relates to the creation of a European Public Prosecutor' s Office.
For years we have endeavoured to protect the financial interests of the Community more effectively.
This now also needs to be done under criminal law, at European level, in very open and clear cooperation with the Member States.
In other words, there is not enough police and judicial cooperation between the Member States in the face of increasing cross-border crime that is harmful to the EU budget.
That is why we need coordination at European level, without prejudicing the right of national courts to administer justice.
I am most grateful that some Member States, but particularly the Commission, have been so willing to take up this theme.
Madam President, I am sure it will come as no surprise to you if I talk about citizens' freedoms and rights and justice in relation to this fascinating report, whose two rapporteurs I congratulate.
It is the view of this Committee that the construction of this area of justice is important and, to this end, a reform of the Court of Justice is necessary.
In order to reform the Court it will be necessary to amend the Treaty, so that the Statute and the Regulations of the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance become operative.
None of them is currently operative.
Our first demand is therefore that qualified majority be established with the assent of the European Parliament.
With regard to the Court, Parliament also asks to be able to participate in the process of selecting judges as already happens with the posts in the constitutional courts in our states.
On the other hand, with regard to freedoms and rights, we want citizens to be provided with full rights to appeal so that they can be assured that Community legislation will be enforced in the event of violations of fundamental rights.
This is not currently the case.
We want to see a reform of Articles 230 and 300 of the Treaty so that Parliament is on an equal footing with the Commission and the Council as far as appeals are concerned.
Lastly, Madam President, we want to see a reform of the Treaty so that Parliament, in relation to the third pillar, also has full access to justice by means of repeal in the event of regulations and acts which do not conform.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, I would like to highlight three demands that we have to make of the Intergovernmental Conference, although all of them relate to the same facts.
We are now approaching the time when we will have a Community with a single currency and a common currency policy that is largely dictated by the European Central Bank.
But we still have 15 different economic policies in the Member States of the European Union, and we will only succeed in the long-term if this economic policy is framed according to common principles.
Hence our first demand is that we should firmly establish the social market economy, which adds a human dimension to the functioning of the market, in the European Treaty, as a model for our economic policy.
Our second demand is for Parliament' s participation in the drafting of the economic policy guidelines, which we have already discussed here today, to be placed on a more formal footing, i.e. the Commission should present us not with a recommendation but a formal proposal, on which we can then be consulted in the true sense of the word.
Our third demand relates to competition policy.
On the one hand, competition policy is the key to the social market economy, on the other hand, however, it is also the most robust instrument of economic policy that the European Community has at its disposal.
Numerous decisions on individual cases are taken in matters of competition policy and that is quite clearly the task of the Commission.
But in future, whenever general rules are drawn up, or the Commission drafts guidelines in conjunction with the Council of Ministers, then the European Parliament must also be involved in the codecision procedure, for only then will Parliament be able to realise its goal of becoming a fully-fledged member of the European forum, where European economic policy is not just discussed publicly, but is also framed with the participation of Parliament.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the Court of Justice needs to be properly armed in order to be able to cope with the growing number of disputes, as well as its ever expanding authority.
The Court must be able to focus on the real legal issues and legal protection of EU subjects.
The Court of First Instance must be better accommodated in this framework, and both jurisdictions must be able to take more autonomous decisions regarding their own structures and procedures.
Sound and timely administration of justice is a vital component of the constitutional state.
In the light of this, the role of the European Parliament should be upgraded to that of a fully-fledged legislative body and that of a fully-fledged European institution.
These are, in a nutshell, the motives underlying the opinion issued by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
As rapporteur, I am also delighted to note that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is on the same wavelength for the greater part of its principal report.
Unfortunately, time constraints prevent me from going into any detail.
But in order to bring the report of the Committee on Legal Affairs as far as possible into line with the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, I tabled four more amendments in the plenary meeting.
As some of these amendments are also to be found in the opinions of other committees, I believe that these amendments deserve - and will probably receive - the support of the entire Parliament.
This is where I would like to conclude my brief report on a not unimportant contribution to what will probably be the last IGC before the largest, most historic and most risky enlargement since the inception of the present European integration process.
This is why we need to seize this opportunity with both hands to prepare the European Union, with all its institutions and in all fields, to face the challenges of the 21st century successfully.
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets.
(ES) Madam President, the conditions of my intervention in this plenary session are illustrative of the budgetary problem.
I have just hurried from a meeting which, according to the Treaty, does not exist.
I am participating, on behalf of Parliament, in the tripartite dialogue on the budget to set the budgetary guidelines.
This is precisely the point we have raised on behalf of the Committee on Budgets.
It is the adaptation of the Treaty, Article 272 in particular, to the real situation.
We have spent twelve years practising with a timetable set by the interinstitutional agreements.
We have renewed them three times, and we believe that the time has come to include the fundamental principles in the Treaty so that we will not find ourselves in legally dubious situations, such as the case of the meeting which I have just mentioned.
Specifically, we must simplify the procedure in order to prevent the blocking of the budgetary procedure.
When there are 25 members, the current procedure will not work.
We should simplify it while respecting the existing balances of power.
Lastly, Madam President, we also believe that Parliament, as an institution embodying democratic legitimacy, must fully participate in the decisions on own resources.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, as rapporteur on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs on their report and I would also like to thank them for the pleasant cooperation.
I would like to raise two points.
Firstly, my Committee is of the opinion that in the field of trade policy, the European Community' s authority and also, therefore, the European Commission' s negotiating mandate must be reinforced.
So too, however, must be the role of Parliament.
This can be done a) by introducing codecision for the common trade policy, b) by introducing an assent procedure for all external agreements and c) by according Parliament a greater role in approving and monitoring trade negotiations.
My second point concerns energy.
The Commission has concluded that a coherent European energy policy has been lacking in the past.
There are no clear guidelines on institutional mechanisms for defining a common energy policy, let alone cooperation to guarantee the supply of energy or in terms of the environmental aspects of energy policy.
With a view to sustainable development, a new chapter on energy policy must be included in the Treaty, as well as the relevant sections of the ECSC and EURATOM Treaties.
In addition, the European Parliament powers must be adequately enhanced.
This means that the codecision procedure needs to apply to the EURATOM Treaty too.
It will specifically need to apply to the drafting of minimum safety standards for the design, construction and operation of nuclear reactors within the Union.
So far, the Member States have had their own technical standards and regulations.
In the light of Central and Eastern countries joining the EU, it is vital that uniform, European safety standards for nuclear reactors be drafted.
Unfortunately, my proposal to this effect has not been included in the current report.
I would therefore urge you most emphatically to vote for Amendment No 60 which I have tabled on behalf of my group, so that uniform safety standards can be drawn up for nuclear reactors.
We owe this to our citizens.
Madam President I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs warmly on their report, both in general terms and in specific terms because I believe that they have managed to address the points which we have raised in our opinion, albeit not always literally, within the confines of this reasonably concise report, which I hope will be adopted in this meeting by a large majority.
It is very important to mention the social market economy, as already indicated by Mr von Wogau.
It provides a kind of framework for internal policy which we need and renders a whole raft of discussions redundant.
I believe that this results in satisfaction all round.
The second major point is the Union' s legal personality.
It has been formulated here as if it were only related to foreign policy but it also has enormous significance for internal policy.
Indeed, it then becomes possible to ratify a number of Treaties, such as ILO Treaties and some UN Treaties in the social field, which will add legal clarity to this type of issue.
There are nonetheless two points that are lacking.
One of them is the issue of Article 137(6) which, in my opinion, should be repealed.
There are also a number of amendments on the table which I hope will yet be added.
I would like to finish off with a remark on the issue of the tax policy.
The report, in fact, mentions very little about this.
The tax policy, which also includes social security policy, is nonetheless of great importance, and not only to the Member States.
The Commission too has given the matter rather a lot of attention and has devoted a great deal of thought to it.
It is rather a pity, in my opinion, that we talk about it so little.
Maybe we will do so in future.
The policy is implicitly included in the report but I still think that, in a sense, not dealing with it now is a missed opportunity.
That does not, however, detract from the deep appreciation which we have for this report.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, as rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, I would like to inform you of the Committee' s key demand.
It is about extending codecision to all aspects of agricultural policy, which is something that still remains to be done.
The Treaty of Amsterdam led to a strengthening of the European Parliament' s powers, inter alia by extending codecision to various policy areas.
However when it comes to agriculture, it is only when health policy and public health are under discussion that Parliament has codecision rights, as per Article 152, for the core area remains outside the codecision procedure.
There is no justification for this in our eyes.
The common agricultural policy is the most long-established and evolved Community policy.
It is absolutely vital, particularly as we are talking about a huge budget (which actually accounts for half of the European Parliament' s total budget) for the European Parliament to make full use of its supervisory powers and its powers in the legislative sphere.
It should also be pointed out in this context that we are not in competition with the national parliaments.
They no longer have any decision-making powers where agricultural policy is concerned either, for this is a policy that is decided on purely by the executive - the Council that is - in the form of legislative acts.
Hence this is not about a clash between the European Parliament and the national parliaments, it is about making this policy subject to parliamentary control in the first place.
I call upon all my fellow delegates to do everything they can to persuade their respective governments to have codecision extended to agricultural policy at this Intergovernmental Conference.
I would like to thank those who will be representing the European Parliament at the Intergovernmental Conference, as I know they will pursue our concerns with great vigour.
Madam President, Commissioner, I would like once again to make the idea of extending codecision to the fisheries policy palatable to you.
The fisheries policy is one of those policies that makes a substantial contribution to the realisation of the single market.
It strengthens economic and social conditions.
How does it do this?
Well, here in Europe, in excess of 250 000 people are still directly employed in this sector; being engaged in activities ranging from the catch itself to fish processing, through to marketing.
According to the latest investigations, for every euro invested there is a three-fold return.
A substantial number of those employed in this sector - almost 60 000 that is - are reliant on the international agreements, since fish are, by their very nature, an extremely mobile source of food, and also - I might add - an extremely important source of protein.
It is up to us, today' s politicians, to set down a marker and guarantee the fishing industry' s future.
Consider the message we are to send out to those regions of Europe that depend on the industry.
I refer in particular to the forthcoming fisheries reform in the year 2002.
We must concern ourselves mainly with protecting and conserving this resource, which will have social, economic and environmental consequences.
It is obvious that the fisheries sector is not an isolated pawn in the game, for it has an impact on sectors such as development, the environment and foreign relations.
As a Community policy in its own right in the Union treaty, the fisheries sector will unite these aspects to good effect, for that is what we want to achieve: we want to place the fisheries sector on an independent administrative and legislative footing, in relation to agriculture for example.
In fact this political responsibility inevitably gives rise to a claim to the most far-reaching of codecision rights.
In addition, if qualified majority decisions in the Council and Parliament' s codecision powers accord with one another, then clearly this will help to tighten up on legislative procedures.
I would welcome any support the leader of negotiations can offer at the Intergovernmental Conference.
Madam President, the proposals by the Committee on Women' s Rights for the Intergovernmental Conference aim to enhance democracy and effectiveness.
It is a fact that the Treaty of Amsterdam was a major step forward for women' s rights, since it provides a firm base for an effective policy on equality, but unfortunately it does not go further than the professional sector.
For that reason we are proposing that the Treaty should include a uniform and cohesive legal base for equality between the sexes, which will include all policy sectors.
We declare that balanced participation of women and men in decision-making at every level is a prerequisite for democracy and social justice, and we are therefore asking for the related articles of the Treaties to be amended to take account of that principle in the composition of the Commission, the European Parliament, the Court of Justice, the Court of First Instance, the Court of Auditors, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions.
We also stress the need for a close link between the Intergovernmental Conference and the procedure for drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights, so that within the scope of the constitutionalisation of the Union, the fundamental right of equality between women and men will be enshrined in Community law.
So besides the essential equilibrium and cohesion that must be secured between the Union' s large and small countries and between the more and less developed areas and population groups, it is also necessary to take into account the balance between the sexes in planning the future of the EU and in decision making.
- (PT) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the work in the Intergovernmental Conference has been intensive.
This time the European Parliament' s participation has been reinforced through your President and two other representatives and also through full dialogue between the Council presidency and your Committee on Constitutional Affairs.
This reinforcement also stems from the direct information of this House and its debate in plenary, which have no precedents.
This is very encouraging for the future results of the IGC.
So far five main in-depth meetings of the preparatory group have been held, together with three meetings of the IGC itself.
Also planned are all the events in the calendar up to the end of Portugal' s presidency, involving both the IGC and the preparatory group.
A report is also to be prepared which will be submitted to the Feira European Council.
The Council presidency considers that this report should not be purely theoretical but should also make practical proposals.
It must enable the next holder of the Council presidency, which will be France, to continue developing this work and to reach a decision by the end of the year.
The issue tackled at the last IGC meeting was the question of extending qualified majority voting.
The Member States demonstrated a certain openness towards this but many have still not made a definitive decision.
Certain areas can already be identified on which the attitude of the large majority of Member States is that these should remain subject to the unanimity rule.
Debates on these issues reveal that there is actually significant reticence, although this may be overcome during the IGC.
The preparatory work carried out to date has also involved questions connected with the European Parliament, the courts, the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee.
As regards the decision-making procedure in the European Parliament, there is broad consensus that no revision of the Treaty should be effected which involves changing the existing institutional balance.
As for the scope of codecision, there is some openness towards extending this procedure to all legislative acts adopted by qualified majority without, however, establishing any kind of systematic correlation.
With regard to the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance, a group of friends of the Council presidency has been brought together to examine possible amendments to the Treaty relating to these two courts.
The study of possible amendments to the Treaty in respect of the Court of Auditors, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions has also been started.
Many consider that changes should only be made where strictly necessary to ensure the effective functioning of the European Union after enlargement.
Consideration has also been given to matters which may be included on the agenda of the IGC, on the Council presidency' s proposal.
It should be recalled that the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council specify that the Council presidency will submit a report to the European Council and may propose in this report the insertion of new items on the IGC' s agenda.
In the area of security and defence and the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the Council presidency considers that, depending on the progress of the work, the right should be reserved to propose to the Feira European Council next June the inclusion in the IGC of any adjustments or additions to the Treaties which may prove necessary in these areas.
With regard to other issues likely to be added to the IGC' s work, an initial debate has been held based on a list drawn up by the Council presidency.
The argument put forward in favour of a prudent approach to the inclusion of new items on the agenda concerned the risk, inherent in the technical complexity of this debate, of causing the deadline of this December for the completion of the IGC' s work to be missed.
On the issue of the size and composition of the Commission, there is a consensus that the Commission to emerge from this IGC must be strong, independent and legitimate.
Its collegiate nature must be preserved.
However, there is clear disagreement between, on one hand, the small and medium-sized Member States which want a Commission composed of one national from each Member State, all with equal status, and, on the other, the large Member States which favour a fixed number of Commissioners regardless of the number of Member States.
The size of the Commission is the main point of disagreement between the delegations.
The rest of the debate on the Commission is dependent on this issue as some directly link this question with their positions on the composition, internal organisation and structure of this Community institution.
With regard to the individual responsibility of Commissioners, there is general support for keeping the undertaking currently made by each Commissioner to stand down when asked to do so by the Commission President.
The delegations are divided into those which want to keep the informality of this undertaking and those which want the process to be enshrined in the Treaty.
As for the Commission' s collective responsibility as a college, there is some reluctance to accept alterations to the current institutional framework, with the current supervision exercised by the European Parliament being regarded as sufficient.
The idea submitted by this House of the Commission being able to request a vote of confidence in it was positively welcomed.
On the issue of the weighting of votes in Council, there is consensus that the criterion which should be used as the basis for qualified majority voting in Council must stem from the combination of the two elements which form the foundations of the European Union.
These are the population and the existence of sovereign states.
The EU is just as much a union of peoples as it is of states.
As for specific mechanisms to be established for the future system, there is also a split between those who defend a double-majority system and those who prefer simple reweighting.
One recurring argument is that the reform should be acceptable to public opinion and likely to be ratified by the national parliaments.
This is a common concern of all the Member States, whether large or small, not only due to the need, in ratifying the new Treaty, to enable enlargement and respect for its timetables, but also due to the feeling that a European crisis should not be allowed to occur on this type of reform.
There is also the idea that these reforms must be submitted to public opinion in the candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe so that the impression is not given that these are reforms which must be rushed through, not to improve the European Union but to prevent the new Member States from having access to the EU' s decision-making system.
With regard to closer cooperation, the need or the usefulness for the IGC to tackle this issue was also discussed in an informal debate.
Again there was a division of opinion both about the possibility of this issue being discussed and about the scope and nature of any alterations.
The next informal meeting of the Representatives Group on 14 and 15 April in Sintra, Portugal, will deal specifically with this issue which is problematic as there are no examples to follow.
There are no specific examples as the Treaty of Amsterdam already allows closer cooperation and so far no Member State has used this instrument and there are no theoretical examples as these are never put forward by the debaters.
Although this issue comes up time and again, it is very abstract.
In terms of the substance of the issue and the introduction of closer cooperation into the Second Pillar, an informal debate has revealed that the majority regard this as unnecessary in external or common security policy, although the possibility of its use in the area of security and defence may be considered.
This means that if closer cooperation were included within the Second Pillar, it would then be necessary to find a specific way of implementing this concept in this area.
This could not copy the First Pillar given the dissimilarity between the operation of these two pillars.
With regard to making the existing model more flexible, as supported in particular by the Commission, a certain openness has been detected towards eliminating the recourse to the European Council when launching closer cooperation.
However, the limit of eight Member States has been questioned even by those who support altering the requirement for the participation of the majority of Member States.
As you can see, the Portuguese Presidency is continuing to make every effort to take the work forward in order to achieve a comprehensive and balanced agreement which is acceptable to everyone by the specified deadline.
Close contact has been maintained with the Commission and the European Parliament.
In the latter case, this has been through both the participation of your President and two selected Members and the regular information provided to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and this House.
This is ensuring that this institutional reform work is carried out with a much higher degree of participation by the European Parliament than the previous revision of the Treaty.
This augurs well for the success of our work.
Madam President, President-in-Office of the Council Gama, Commissioner Barnier, ladies and gentlemen, firstly, on behalf of our Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and the European Democrats, I would like to convey my heartfelt thanks and appreciation to Giorgos Dimitrakopoulos and Jo Leinen for what we believe is a sound report, and it is important that we in the European Parliament - and I say this most emphatically - adopt positions on the key issues facing Europe for which there is a broad consensus within the European Parliament.
Despite all the arguments and discussions we might have (and these arguments and discussions are necessary, also between the groups), what we need is a broad consensus when it comes to the future development of the European Union and the European institutions.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, you, and also the French Council Presidency that is to succeed you, bear a huge responsibility, because the outcome of this Intergovernmental Conference will be of historic significance, be it for positive or negative reasons.
If the Intergovernmental Conference has a positive outcome, which is what we must strive for, then this conference will change the face of the European Union in the sense that it will mean more transparency, more democracy, and will bring the European Union closer to its people.
That is what we need.
But if this conference does not have the far-reaching outcome we desire and need, then this would be a tragedy for the European Union, for it would then be unable to undergo enlargement, and it would be awful if at the beginning of this century, the gates of the European Union were to remain closed to the countries of Central Europe, which have shaken off Communism, and if the Central European States were unable to gain access to the European Union.
That is why we must pull out all the stops to make this conference a success.
We want a strong and democratic European Union that has the power to act, and how apt that we should be making such statements only a matter of weeks before the 50th Anniversary of the day, 9 May 1950 that is, on which Robert Schuman made a proposal to the effect that Europe should develop as a community.
Recital 1 sets out the benchmarks that the Intergovernmental Conference must work to: balance between the institutions, dual legitimacy of the European Union as a Union of peoples and a Union of States, and - something which is particularly important - balance between the small and large States of the European Union.
The all-important benchmark - and you mentioned this yourself, Mr President-in-Office of the Council - is majority voting in the Council.
That is the real heart of the matter, and we must see to it that this principle of double majority, i.e. a majority in the Council and a majority support from the people, is upheld.
Certainly we have yet to discuss in detail how this is to be accomplished, but the principle of double majority is fundamentally right.
If majority voting fails to be drastically extended and fails to gain acceptance as the fundamental decision-making system, then this Intergovernmental Conference will have failed, and it cannot be allowed to fail in view of the enlargement process.
As far as the Commission is concerned, as I see it, the small States must still be entitled, in the future, to be represented in the European Commission, since it is felt to be important to maintain a presence in Brussels.
I sympathise with this view and we must secure this, which is why the position of the President of the Commission must be strengthened.
We want a strong President and a strong Commission, both now and in the future.
We are particularly keen to get this message across to those who may not want to see the Commission as a strong unifying force in Europe.
We must strengthen the President, and he must also be empowered to dismiss a Member of the Commission if they do not fulfil their obligations.
Naturally, the European Parliament must be the decisive factor in the democratic process, and it must participate in decisions pertaining to legislative issues in the European Union.
We do not want there to be less democracy in the European Union than there is at national level.
Allow me to raise a final point, that of the European Court of Justice.
This is a very important point and I am delighted that both rapporteurs saw fit to mention it.
We are a Community of law and we must not subject the European Union and its institutions to political opportunism.
That is why we must invest the European Court of Justice, as the legal body competent to settle disputes and conflicts, with the power to act and the ability to reach decisions in reasonable timeframes.
Lastly, I have a request to make of you, Mr President-in-Office of the Council: could we - perhaps also in conjunction with the Commission, with Commissioner Barnier - inform the candidate countries in Central Europe, and of course Malta and Cyprus too, of the discussions taking place and the progress made at the Intergovernmental Conference?
After all, the candidate countries have a legitimate interest in knowing what is being debated at the Intergovernmental Conference and what they will need to prepare themselves for.
Therefore I believe we should take account of this justifiable interest on the part of the candidate countries by engaging in fruitful dialogue with them, for the truth is that we are to share a common future with them as Members of the European Union in the twenty-first century.
On that note, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I wish you every success in the work you are to undertake at the Intergovernmental Conference, and for which I thank you.
Mr President, with the Dimitrakopoulos - Leinen report under discussion, the European Parliament is declaring its great vision for the European Union of the future.
This is a truly historic moment, as has been stressed.
Our fellow-citizens are waiting to be told what we are going to demand from the Intergovernmental Conference for that future.
Institutional proposals on particular issues without prior clarification of the basic philosophy of tomorrow' s Union of 27 are not convincing.
The draft resolution is therefore quite right to define that basic view in the form of three principles.
According to the draft, the European Union is, first and foremost, a Union of peoples and a Union of states.
Its citizens therefore have both a European and a national identity.
Secondly, it is based on an institutional equilibrium between large and small states.
That must not be just on paper.
Thirdly, the way the Union functions must be made more effective, so that it can cope with the major enlargement.
The above philosophical principles, to which the draft resolution remains faithful, are not metaphysical inventions of the European Parliament but arise from the history and from the political reality which we call the area of Europe.
Anyone who ignores that is building a Europe founded on sand.
The Intergovernmental Conference of 2000 is taking place to make the Union as effective as is required in view of the major enlargement that has been decided.
In this process Parliament' s responsibility is very great indeed.
For that reason, Parliament' s approval of enlargement cannot but depend on the adequacy of the institutional changes that will be decided.
That is not a threat, it is a declaration of responsible attitude.
In good faith, all sides are trying, by means of amendments, to make the way in which European Union functions more effective.
But is it enough for procedures to be simplified and speeded up for them to be described as effective?
The effectiveness of a police service, which indeed demands both simplicity and speed, is quite different from the effectiveness of the fundamental institutions of a democratic public regime.
The effectiveness of democratic institutions is not measured either with a stopwatch, or according to the number of decisions taken.
It is measured by the degree of legitimacy.
The dual legitimacy of the European Union by its European but also its national citizens, by its peoples but also its states, makes the European Union institutionally complex by its very nature.
For that reason the extent to which these procedures can be simplified and speeded up is restricted by the whole complex system of dual legitimacy.
We must bear that in mind tomorrow, when we come to vote on the amendments and the text.
Mr President, within our groups in Parliament and within the IGC itself we are still struggling with the problems that proved fairly intractable at Amsterdam.
These issues are tricky because they expose both the exaggerated self-importance of small states and the folie de grandeur of the big states.
These issues can only be resolved by a greater sense of trust between partners - such trust that is the essential glue of successful federal pacts.
This trust is precisely the quality that is needed so that we are able to ensure the successful accession of the new Member States.
The fact is - and somebody should say this - that if the IGC fails to resolve the Amsterdam questions, enlargement must be postponed.
The Liberal Group supports the efforts of the presidency and of the Commission to build up the extra trust required.
We support the main thrust of this report.
We support especially those elements which expand the European Union' s capacity for action in global affairs: those that strengthen the status and the profile of the citizen, including the Charter; and those that will postulate further political reform in the interests of a strong executive and a mature parliamentary democracy.
In this respect the splitting of the Treaties is vital.
So is retention of unanimity within the Council exclusively for the most serious questions.
Liberals everywhere support ministers that will subscribe to the development of European parliamentary democracy.
But we will be savage critics of those who prefer narrow self-interest and threaten the accession of new Member States.
Mr President, the European Parliament does not take part in Intergovernmental Conference negotiations.
It plays a secondary role, as do all those who are not part of a national government.
The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance has always maintained that the intergovernmental method, which excludes elected Members and does not allow public debate, is a very significant weakness of the reform of the Treaties and a substantial barrier to its success.
Therefore, our assessment of this report is based on the fact that it is being presented in an unsatisfactory context, in which our priorities - an open, working democracy capable of rendering economic development environmentally sustainable, which ensures the respect and consolidation of the rights of the citizens and residents, and, most importantly, which is able to enlarge to include new Member countries in a short period of time - are not the same as those of the negotiating governments.
The governments have one sole objective: to reach a unanimous agreement in Nice, whatever the outcome, so that they do not have to move on to some other city as obscure as Maastricht.
Although Parliament cannot take part in negotiations, it has a duty to indicate the way, to define clear options for the future, without pretending to take part in the actual negotiations and without being conditioned by governmental pressure or pressure from artificial comparisons, such as the comparison between large and small countries.
This report only partly achieves this objective, and this is why our Group was not able to be unanimous in its final assessment.
But although the final decision was not unanimous, the Group was united in its view of the positive and negative points of this resolution.
We fully support certain central points, but, unfortunately, our view is not shared by many national governments.
The issues on which we agree are as follows: systematic extension, not extension on a case by case basis, of the majority vote to the Council; codecision; the urgent need to make the Charter of Fundamental Rights binding and to extend the possibility of recourse to the Court beyond the economic sphere; the provisions on closer cooperation and so forth.
We are, however, very critical of the reduction of the constitution issue to a mere technical operation separating the Treaties into two parts, which, apart from anything else, would be very similar.
This is not the constitutional process, which should bear no resemblance to convoluted diplomatic negotiations and which, we feel, is essential to give the necessary boost to the integration process which, alone, can mobilise the citizens to strive for a better Europe.
We consider that the insistence on maintaining the limit on the number of Members at 700, even when we become a 20-State Europe, unnecessarily penalises the regions and those whose political orientations are neither socialist nor conservative.
In this regard, we hope that our amendment will find consensus in the House.
The Group is divided over double majority, closer cooperation, the number of Commissioners and security policy.
In particular, as regards the subject of the number of Commissioners, we will support the balanced position of those amendments which ensure both sufficient representation of the Member States and the efficiency of the Commission.
To sum up, this report may well be useful in assisting our two representatives in their often extremely frustrating daily work at the Intergovernmental Conference where others take the decisions, but to our citizens, it will seem about as clear as an interministerial memorandum.
Most importantly, in the same way as the 1984 Spinelli Treaty, this report does not live up to the challenge of being a milestone, a clear, unambiguous indication of where we want to be with those who wish to be there.
Mr President, our Group wishes to thank the rapporteurs, Messrs Dimitrakopoulos and Leinen, for the important work which they have carried out.
I must also tell them that, within my group, there are differing views, according to differing national experiences.
I will say the same thing here that I have said in my group: the debate is not whether we say yes or no to federalism.
The debate is how to go about European construction at the point of enlargement.
It is making sure that we do not just build a Europe of the States and a Europe of the people, but, especially, a Europe of the citizens.
We must create a fully democratic institutional fabric.
We know that there are democratic deficits and that they are considerable.
At the moment the challenge in the face of enlargement is to achieve, as the rapporteurs have said, greater efficiency and greater democracy.
The Intergovernmental Conference cannot end with the same disappointment that we had in Amsterdam.
We cannot create an Amsterdam 2.
We have to create a Treaty which gives rise to genuine European construction in which more than 400 million Europeans can share economic prosperity, a social dimension and a democratic life.
This is the great challenge for the European institutions and for European politics.
My vision of European construction is compatible with the fundamental lines which are laid out in the report which we are discussing today.
It is, of course, necessary to give the Commission the powers it needs and make it responsible to Parliament.
This is precisely the issue.
We must clearly define the different democratic powers in the field of European competences and we must know who is making decisions and to whom they are responsible.
Mr President, Parliament does not take a corporate position.
Our minimum demand is that Parliament be treated as an adult which has to request that the Commission take certain responsibilities, but which also has to participate actively in European construction on behalf of the European citizens.
On behalf of the European citizens, we have to ask today not only for that fine-tuning of decision making but also for the incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaty.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights must give citizens the capacity to demand compliance with these rights in the European courts.
This is the position which we can adopt in our Group, asking for more efficiency and more democracy.
Mr President, in our view the European Parliament' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference, as set out in the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report, are a misinterpretation.
What we urgently need today, on the eve of enlargement, is not to deepen the integration of the existing Member States at a faster rate.
It is not to trot out the old federalist recipes of the European Movement yet again.
It is not to propose a super-State again, with its own constitution, uniform rules and majority decisions.
No, what we urgently need today, ladies and gentlemen, is to show some evidence of clear-headedness, to accept that economic and political integration cannot be taken any further and to design new forms of cooperation that are far freer, and that will enable 30 or more States to work together on a basis of mutual respect.
Unfortunately, it would seem that the latest debates within the most well-informed groups of society stop at the doors of this Parliament.
In this matter, as in the case of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, our Parliament seems unable to depart from the federalist line it has been pursuing for many years.
That approach leads to an impasse, to what Mr Tsatsos a moment ago, if I understood him rightly, called a Europe built on sand.
First of all, it takes us away from the concept of Europe as an association of states, an association of national democracies, and puts all the countries, great or small, that are afraid of being marginalised on the defensive.
More generally, the rigid federalist approach reflects a more or less unconscious desire to set up institutional barriers against enlargement, which will once again call in question a whole range of long-standing patterns of behaviour.
We must adopt a more positive approach.
We must promote enlargement by adopting a new form of cooperation that is more differentiated, shows greater respect for national sovereignty, that is based on full recognition of the Luxembourg compromise, as I explained in the minority opinion attached to the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report.
Mr President, in Denmark there is a concept known as asset stripping.
Top class lawyers and accountants are being convicted one after the other because they have helped strip companies of assets and then left them with tax liabilities.
Asset stripping is a punishable offence.
The Intergovernmental Conference is designed to strip our constitutions and fundamental laws of assets and leave the voters with a democratic deficit, but constitution stripping of this kind is not punished.
The asset under our constitutions is the right of voters to be heard and to choose representatives who can pass laws on our behalf.
If we are dissatisfied with the laws, we can choose new representatives and obtain new laws.
This is the beating heart of our democracies, a heart which, because of the constitution strippers, will stop beating.
They are taking legislative power from our 15 national parliaments and transferring it to officials and ministers, from voters and elected representatives to the executive and from open assemblies to meetings behind closed doors in Brussels.
Electoral power is being transferred from our constitutions, but is not being transferred to the European Parliament.
We parliamentarians have been side-tracked.
Power lies with the Commission and the Council of Ministers.
The EU is not a parliamentary democracy, and the national parliaments have been still further marginalised.
A number of us in this House have therefore prepared 19 proposals for democratic reform of the EU.
We call the initiative SOS Democracy - "SOS" because it is a matter of urgency and "Democracy" because that is the heart of the problem.
We do not have democracy in today' s EU.
We should like to have it in tomorrow' s.
We have different opinions as to how the laws should look.
We have support across the political spectrum from communists to conservatives.
We disagree about a lot but agree that our differences should be resolved in democratic parliaments.
The voters in our countries should always have the last word.
We reject any attempt to strip our constitutions of democratic content and we urge the public to get involved in the negotiations concerning the Nice Treaty before it is too late.
Join us in SOS Democracy.
Mr President, dismayed as I am at the ongoing prejudice shown towards Austria by 14 Member States, I would like to confine my comments on the matter at hand to the issue of closer cooperation, in all its guises.
There has been a marked change in attitudes towards closer cooperation since the adoption of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
I can still clearly remember how long we used to spend discussing this, in what was still the institutional committee at the time.
The upshot was that Mr Mndez de Vigo and Mr Tsatsos - whom I greatly esteem - produced a report highlighting the risks associated with Member States developing at different rates, and welcoming the fact that the Treaty would be framed in such a way as to keep these risks down to a manageable level.
The present view taken by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen is that closer cooperation must serve to stimulate the development of the Union, and they even recommend that it should have its own chapter in the EU Treaty.
This is an astonishing turn of events, when one considers that this idea was once deemed the ultimate threat to the integration process.
A multi-speed Europe has become the order of the day.
We are now looking, by way of an attempt to deal with enlargement, to the possibility of a third of Member States forming a "vanguard" .
All this means is that those Member States not wishing to join the frontrunners will be left with a choice between complete non-participation or joining a system that was originally thought to be without merit at a later stage.
Multi-speed integration of this kind cannot act as a guarantee for coherent and stable development of the Union.
On the contrary, I am convinced that this plan is far more likely to jeopardise the Union' s goals than to help improve its decision-making structures.
In any case, that was the view taken by the architects of the EU as recently as 1996.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, I am speaking as draftsman of the opinion of this Parliament' s Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.
I understand the importance of institutional reforms, but I would also like to express the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism on the issues which we must tackle in relation to the Intergovernmental Conference.
We would like to make three points.
Firstly, the active recognition of the role, protagonism and participation of the regions in the process of European construction which began 50 years ago.
Secondly, the importance of transport.
To this end, we want an extended Article 70 and we also want it to be supplemented with a provision on the creation of a single European agency for air traffic control.
Lastly, the role of tourism for both the economy and for employment.
We - or at least I personally - accept Amendment No 168, presented by the chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy on this issue.
.
(FR) Mr President, Ministers, ladies and gentlemen, after listening carefully to the two rapporteurs, to all the committee representatives and to Mr Gama, the Portuguese Minister, and before listening just as carefully to all the speakers in the further course of the debate, let me explain the views of the Commission which, as you know, is playing an active part in these negotiations, in which I too was involved from the outset, along with your representatives and the representatives of the Member States.
I would like to tell you how much I appreciate the very high quality of the report presented by your two rapporteurs, Giorgos Dimitrakopoulos and Jo Leinen, which we are now debating.
The report is clear and comprehensive.
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs has set out a determined position and I want to pay tribute to its work and that of its chairman, Mr Napolitano.
I have two comments to make on the report.
The first is that, objectively speaking, the positions of your committee, which will probably be shared by the House when you come to the vote, are in many respects very close to the Commission' s.
Parliament, like the Commission, has sized up the challenge facing the Union with the prospect of an unprecedented increase in the number of Member States which, by the same token, will accentuate their diversity.
Your Parliament is aware that the reform of the institutions is necessary, that it must be tackled seriously and that, if need be, we must look beyond short-term national interests and offer the people a Treaty that is substantial enough to gain their support.
That is what is at stake in these negotiations, which we must bring to a successful conclusion at the end of this year, at the European Council in Nice.
I would stress the 'success' rather than the 'concluding' , for they are two different things.
And success is what we need in Nice.
These changes are essential to the success of enlargement.
In my view they are also necessary right now because in many respects the current institutional organisation is showing its limitations.
I am thinking, for example, of the Court of Justice' s workload and of the log-jams we see in some areas because of the requirement of unanimity in the Council.
Your Parliament has looked in depth at the decision-making system in the Council and at the composition and functioning of the Commission.
Since 26 January you have been well aware of the positions set out by the Commission.
For example, to make things quite clear with regard to the Commission itself, we proposed that each country should certainly have one Commissioner.
But we also proposed two options on that basis.
Either every country will have a national representative within the Commission at the same time, or not all countries will be represented at any one time.
But, if you look at those two options I have briefly described, you will find that the states will be represented on an equal footing, which is not currently the case within the Commission.
On this issue, as on others, we believed it was important, over and above the basic approach, to open up a debate, to take time to consider the pros and cons of the different options, and to decide between gut reactions that would consist of changing as little as possible and the long-term requirements of giving our institutions new impetus.
Negotiations on these issues have scarcely begun.
Whatever solutions are finally adopted, your debates, like ours, will help the Intergovernmental Conference to take more responsible and enlightened decisions.
I note there is broad convergence on the qualified majority issue.
Qualified majority voting should become the general rule for Council decisions, together with the codecision procedure for all matters that come within the legislative sphere.
The Commission itself said just that and recommended a means of achieving these results by identifying the categories of decision where unanimity must or could be retained.
We are well aware that certain Member States have difficulties with some of these questions.
We know there are reservations about the tax system, to give just one example.
What the Commission, what the European Parliament must do is precisely to look beyond these reservations and sincerely, honestly and without any ideological bias consider the coherence and effectiveness of the single market.
That is what we wanted to do with our additional contribution which describes the new area of qualified majority voting in relation to certain aspects of the tax system, certain aspects of social protection, to ensure the smooth operation of the single market.
There is agreement between our positions on other points too, such as the composition of the European Parliament, closer cooperation, the creation of a new European Public Prosecutor' s office which, as Mrs Theato pointed out, will help us to fight fraud against the Community budget, the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance.
And that does not surprise me, since the Commission and the European Parliament have always been very close in their thinking on these subjects and are inspired by the same concern for the general interest of Europe.
We will continue along these lines until the negotiations reach their conclusion.
My second comment relates to the active involvement of your Parliament, which is vital to our success.
Because the European Parliament has its own special perspective on things, I want to stress how necessary Parliament' s commitment is, the commitment of each and everyone of you, first of all during the negotiations - as your representatives in the negotiating teams, Elmar Brok and Professor Tsatsos, are well aware, and indeed their contributions often put the discussions back into perspective - but also during the ministerial discussions.
And I must say I was pleased with the most recent joint discussions that took place with your President, Nicole Fontaine, in Luxembourg the day before yesterday at the initiative of the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Gama.
But I also want to emphasise how important it is for us, outside our official and institutional establishments, to explain our activities and engage in dialogue with the national parliaments and the citizens of every EU country and with the candidate countries.
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by drawing attention to three particular aspects, while also noting that as we speak today a number of questions about the correct scope of the agenda of these negotiations have to some extent now been resolved.
I think that is a good thing.
In saying that, I want to pay tribute to the Portuguese Presidency and in particular to Jame Gama and to Franciscos Seixas da Costa for electing to adopt a pragmatic and objective approach, an approach that is as objective as possible and that consists in starting out from the needs and limitations of the existing system and proposing solutions.
That suggests that we can work on the basis of the Helsinki mandate as long as today' s presidency has the political will to give an impetus to tomorrow' s French Presidency.
Although this is a reasonably substantial and difficult agenda, there are still a few subjects that have been left aside for the time being, which we regret.
But it will soon be time for a decision to be taken, and, on behalf of the Commission, I would like to put forward three points for consideration.
The first point concerns European defence.
Since the Cologne Council, and in particular the Helsinki Council, the necessary structures are being set up, on an interim basis, within the Council' s General Secretariat.
As provided for by the Treaty of Amsterdam, the Union is now preparing to carry out the Petersberg tasks and missions, i.e. humanitarian and evacuation missions, peace-keeping, crisis-management and, where necessary, peace-making missions.
Discussions are under way on relations between the European Union and Nato.
The European Union Defence Ministers met on 28 February.
The first working documents have now been drafted on civil crisis management.
So we can see some progress and certainly a political will to move forward.
My friend and fellow Commissioner, Chris Patten, can confirm this assessment of the situation as regards these questions.
In a few weeks' time, the European Council in Feira will have to decide whether the Treaty should be amended with a view to building on the guidelines of the Helsinki European Council.
Our group of representatives has not considered these questions yet, but let me share a few ideas with you.
Ladies and gentlemen, after matters relating to justice and the police, a security and defence policy is without doubt the last major common policy we have to establish.
The existing Treaty, as amended at Amsterdam, has enabled us to make significant progress.
We can see that today.
But can we resolve everything purely within the framework of that Treaty?
Let us leave aside, for today, the question of future of the WEU Treaty with the collective defence commitment it contains and the different statutes of the EU Member States and of Nato and WEU member countries.
Looking only at the Petersberg tasks, I do not think the European Council has given enough thought to the organisation within the Union of a political authority that will give instructions to the chain of command that is being set up.
It may be that, before it concludes, the Intergovernmental Conference will have to consider the structures and appropriateness of the existing Treaty.
I do not have all the answers to this question but I think it needs to be asked, and to be asked in the context of the Conference.
I think it would be premature to close this file at Feira.
Instead, President Gama, I hope the presidency will give an even stronger political impetus on the question of defence.
My second point concerns the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and the EU' s democratic values.
The negotiating body is making good progress, or so we are told by Antonio Vitorino who is representing the Commission in it.
The interest that is being shown in this draft Charter and the support for its incorporation in the Treaty confirm what I regard as the need to reaffirm, over and over again, the fundamental values of the EU, to set down once and for all the principles shared by all the citizens of Europe.
It is the same need that inspired your Parliament' s report drafted by Mr Duff and Mr Voggenhuber.
One could say that these principles are self-evident.
But, as we know, what seems self-evident sometimes still needs reasserting, for all the existing Member States and for those that want to join us, because democracy and respect for citizens' rights are never won once and for all, but need to be fought for and defended again and again.
Your Parliament has considered these questions, as it has considered the existing Treaty provisions that would penalise any violation of the fundamental principles of the Union.
The Commission is prepared for this debate, which I believe is a necessary one, provided we keep it clear of any polemics.
My third and final point concerns the reorganisation of the Treaties.
The report before you discusses the constitutionalisation of the Treaties or, as we sometimes rather more modestly term it, the reorganisation of the Treaties.
That is a question of terminology.
Let me say a few words on this.
The Commission, as you know, has asked the Robert Schuman Institute in Florence to carry out a feasibility study on separating the Treaties into two parts: the essential provisions on the one hand and the applied provisions on the other.
This work is making good progress and I hope to be able to tell you the outcome soon.
But just as a mountain grows larger the closer you approach it, let me stress that this exercise involves major technical and legal difficulties.
The Treaties are not complicated in the sense of deliberately wanting to discourage the reader; they are complicated because the expression of the common resolve of 6, 9, 10, 12 or 15 Member States, over the efforts of 40 years, is not a linear operation, nor is it always as logical and simple as might be imagined after the fact, unless you start again from scratch.
But who would seriously suggest that?
We have to start out from what we have.
We must seek the best while remaining within the realm of the possible.
Then, if this reorganisation of the Treaties proves possible and convincing - as I personally believe it will - it will be time to examine the procedures for amending these restructured texts.
But the Commission wants to proceed one step at a time and for the time being we are sticking to the pragmatic and meticulous job of reorganisation.
I hope to present the results in May.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by repeating that I and President Romano Prodi are prepared to continue and intensify these joint discussions so that, together with the Council, indeed all together, we will succeed in achieving a genuine reform at the end of this year.
As the Conference progresses, I believe it will become ever more necessary for us to take concerted joint action.
(Applause)
Mr President, I would first of all like to express my appreciation for the sterling work carried out by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen.
I believe that this is one of the best reports which have so far been produced in the framework of IGCs over recent years.
I am making this statement as former rapporteur on the Maastricht Treaty.
By the way, Maastricht is not a strange city, Mrs Frassoni, it is a very exciting city where the Dutch-Flemish, German and French cultures all flow into one.
Just try one of the pavement cafs and you will see what I mean.
I will repeat this to Mrs Frassoni in Italian some time.
Mr President, it is rather a shame that so many amendments have been tabled as this might affect the quality and balance of the report.
The large groups should, therefore, restrict themselves to the absolutely necessary amendments during the vote.
This seems the best way to retain the good work which the rapporteurs have put in.
As far as our Group is concerned, the resolution needs to be amended on a number of points.
For example, we do not agree with the proposal in the resolution to restrict the number of Commissioners to 20 and to introduce a rota system for the smaller countries.
One Commissioner per Member State seems a much better solution to us.
In order to boost citizens' confidence in the European Commission, it is vital that each Member State should have a Commission Member.
Our Group, too, has therefore tabled amendments to this effect.
Next is the number of MEPs.
The resolution argues in favour of the possibility of European lists.
This is a sound idea, but if we want 10% of the European members on European lists, then this should not, of course, result in additional MEPs on top of the 700 which have been agreed upon.
It is important that we retain a maximum of 700, with or without the European list.
Parliament is already vast, the buildings are already packed and the whole thing has to remain workable.
The third point concerns the issue of unanimity.
We believe that in an enlarged Union, decision-making should not always be blocked by an excessive right of veto.
Unanimity should, therefore, be restricted to the bare essentials.
These are constitutional issues such as the deployment of military troops and issues pertaining to territorial integrity.
All other decisions should be taken by qualified majority with weighted voting, as is proposed, and - this is vitally important - with colegislative powers exercised by Parliament.
We would also thank the Commission for this support.
I would like to end by commenting on the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
According to our Group, it is of paramount importance that this Charter be included in the Treaty.
Work to this effect is being carried out, and we sincerely hope that a text can be produced which everyone can agree to incorporate into the Treaty.
This is a key issue for the citizens of Europe.
Mr President, firstly, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I would like to express my support for the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report and, furthermore, thank the Portuguese Presidency for their positive attitude towards the incorporation of Parliament into the Intergovernmental Conference.
This report is of great value and I therefore believe we should support it today by a majority in this Parliament, because this is an opportunity for a completely open debate on the great issues still facing us in Europe.
This debate is going on between political and national groups in different Member States.
Please allow me to make a correction, Mr President: there are no large and small countries here.
Here we must consider ourselves to be small.
In the past, the countries in Europe which considered themselves to be large tried to impose their hegemony by force.
Here were are all amongst small countries, especially given the challenge of globalisation.
I believe this should be an important element in our coexistence.
In European Parliament debates, political groups, citizens of different countries and diverse interests and prejudices come into play and this allows us to be aware of when we touch a nerve and of when it is necessary for us to take special care in what we do.
Therefore, this is an important debate and I believe the Council should take account of the position we take.
Secondly, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, I believe we should also try to introduce some vision and some idealism into this debate.
I have always been against the idea that we had to deal with the 'leftovers' from Amsterdam.
Leftovers are thrown in the bin.
These are clear and fundamental challenges, which refer to and are linked to the membership of the Commission, the power of the President, fair contributions by the Member States and such important questions as closer cooperation, majority voting and - a vital issue - the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
I say this particularly in view of the crisis which we have seen in a Member State as a result of the presence of a party whose fundamental values are contrary to the community of values which we hold here.
A final consideration: Commissioner Barnier has said that, before the end of the Conference, we must resolve certain problems relating to the chain of command.
Mr President, in relation to the appeal to public opinion which we are making, I believe we must clearly affirm the principles of democracy and transparency and also the chain of command.
We must not allow a situation where, while we are discussing this, a kind of Loch Ness monster reappears every month in the press.
I understand the journalists, but we cannot allow a situation where crises are created by certain anonymous officials, who are frustrated mandarins, and certain ambassadors, who seem to behave like a Praetorian Guard, and who do not hesitate to make anonymous declarations in the press.
Here, the only risk involved in democracy is the risk taken in elections.
This is the risk taken by Minister Gama, Commissioner Barnier and by all of us.
However, here in the gossip shops of Brussels we create a situation and certain centres of power which do not correspond to the principles of democracy and transparency, which are precisely the principles which we have to strengthen in this Intergovernmental Conference.
I believe that it is important for all of the institutions to confront this issue responsibly.
If not, the Intergovernmental Conference will not have been a success for our future.
Mr President, the EU is faced with enormous challenges.
In just a few years' time, the Union is to be enlarged to include almost double the number of Member States.
The euro is to be introduced.
We are to have a security policy worthy of the name, implement administrative reforms and, hopefully, win back some of the confidence our citizens have lost in the European project.
The Intergovernmental Conference should prepare the EU for these changes.
It provides us with the opportunity to adapt our work to the new Member States and to the new tasks we have before us.
It is a question of finding a balance between democracy and efficiency and of maintaining the historic balance between small and large countries.
These are the questions which remain following the conclusion of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
It is important in these discussions not to become lost in technical details and lose sight of the goal - that of making the EU more open, more efficient and more intelligible.
We must all make sacrifices in order to achieve this goal.
Unfortunately, governments appear to have lost sight of this goal.
The Intergovernmental Conference is making only limited progress, which is not the fault of the Portuguese Presidency.
Probably what will happen is what usually happens: at five minutes to midnight on the last day, a compromise will be reached with which no-one is entirely satisfied.
The talk is already of the next Intergovernmental Conference where the major questions will then be solved.
We have heard this before.
There is starting to be a surfeit of half-baked intergovernmental conferences.
Our citizens have higher expectations than that, and we do not have much time.
That is why we have to take the opportunity now.
The EU must be changed in the way we Liberals have demanded, that is to say in the direction of transparency, public control, more explicit accountability, a clearer distribution of competences and a common constitution.
Quite simply, the EU must become more liberal.
The report includes many of our amendments, and I support these with few exceptions.
The challenges faced by the EU are exciting and historic.
They should inspire us all to roll up our shirt sleeves.
We are in a position to create something unique: democratic, competitive and peaceful cooperation throughout the continent.
Instead, however, of awakening hope and enthusiasm, present developments appear, rather, to be giving rise to anxiety among governments.
One might well ask what has become of political leadership and vision.
Mr President, I would like to express my personal admiration for rapporteurs Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen.
I would like them to know that my scepticism, and any decision on my part to reject this report, is no reflection on them, but on this House, which does not have the backbone to confront the European Council with its own vision of what the future should hold for European integration.
In terms of power politics, or following a constitutional line of thought, it is quite clear what the Council wants.
It wants Europe to be run by the executive, to be under the leadership of national governments, a bring-and-buy for national interests.
It wants the basic model for European integration to be intergovernmental cooperation.
The European Council wants Europe to be under the leadership of a handful of States, it wants Europe to be run by a board of directors, and to pursue a nineteenth century style policy aimed at striking a balance amongst the States of Central Europe.
The Council does not see a democratic deficit; it sees a lack of efficiency at worst.
Separation of powers, public scrutiny of legislation, parliamentarianism, unrestricted legal supervision on the part of the European Court of Justice, binding fundamental rights, strengthening of the original European institutions - the Commission, Parliament and the European Court of Justice - none of these matters are of concern to the Council.
It is the task of Parliament to stand up to the Council and to present it with its own vision.
Parliament must pluck up the courage to vie with the Council when it comes to determining the future of European integration.
This is about nothing less than the rediscovery of democracy in the supranational sphere.
It is about nothing less - and this is, or would be Parliament' s task - than making European unification public property.
We have a long way to go before we achieve this.
If you demand a constitutional process but satisfy yourself with the division of the Treaties into two parts, then this constitutional process is already at an end!
If you accept without criticism that not only does the Council see itself as a legitimate representative of the States, it also claims to represent the people by virtue of the double majority, thereby depriving Parliament of its legitimacy, then we still have a long way to go before......
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, if the changes to the Treaty proposed in the resolution we are debating are implemented, the European Union will take an absolutely crucial step on the way to becoming a federal state and one, moreover, in which the national parliaments will lose control over almost all crucial areas of policy.
In addition to the massive increase in supranational forms of decision-making, the proposal contains quite a few qualitative changes in the direction of federalism, among these the proposal to remove the national right of veto in the course of changes to large parts of the current Treaty and, also, the demands for a single EU constituency in the elections for the European Parliament.
I am convinced that this transformation of the EU into a federal state is a blind alley in every way.
The EU' s major problem today is not a lack of centralised power but a shortage of real democracy.
What the Union needs in place of more supranationalism is democratic reform leading to a dramatic reduction in the Commission' s political power, to the legislative process in the Council' s being made public and to the national parliaments' being given decisive influence.
Through the Treaty changes proposed in the resolution, the EU would become a Union wholly dominated by the big Member States.
The power wielded by the major countries would be increased dramatically through the introduction of a system of "double simple majority" voting in the Council of Ministers.
Their power would also be increased through the increase in their representation in the European Parliament.
In an EU which has been enlarged by a further twelve States and in which seven hundred seats in Parliament have been distributed as proposed in the resolution, Sweden would have thirteen seats, Finland seven and Ireland five.
This would mean that, in many Member States, important political powers would not be represented at EU level.
This also shows how weak the democratic basis of such a Parliament would be.
Compared with other federal states, the "EU state" would, on this model, be unusually centralised and offer little protection to small constituent States.
A comparison might be made with the United States in which the one chamber in a two-chamber system has proportional representation, while representation in the second chamber is the same for all constituent States.
In the EU, the big countries would instead dominate both chambers on the basis of the proposal we are now debating.
For anyone who wants to change anything regarding monetary union or EMU, it is now, when the Treaty is being changed, that the opportunity exists.
Many adherents of EMU on the Left have, of course, argued in favour of altering the nature of monetary union in such a way that the Central Bank is placed under democratic control and that the goals of economic policy are not merely monetary.
It is noticeable that they are now completely silent and that it is now only the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left which is demanding the democratisation of monetary union.
As you have perhaps noted, I am going to vote against the present resolution.
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, I support the enlargement of the European Union because I know it will consolidate the new democracies in eastern and central Europe.
I know it will also increase the size of the European Union as a trading block which in time will ensure that the Union as an economic entity becomes more competitive.
I know that reform within the existing European institutions must take place.
However, any changes within the internal decision-making procedures must be balanced and fair.
We do not want to see a two-tier European Union in which larger Member States dictate the pace at the expense of the smaller Member States.
For example, the report which we are debating today recommends a rotation system for the composition of the European Commission.
This will mean that the automatic entitlement of smaller Member States to have one Member of the Commission will be downgraded.
I do not believe that this is a particularly sensible proposal.
380 million citizens of the Union have an affinity with the Commission.
Certainly, from an Irish perspective, Irish people recognise the importance of the Commission as an institutional body within the European Union.
It is still the institution that controls the operations of competition policy, the common agricultural policy, the common fisheries policy and the common transport policy.
The Union must draw nearer to the citizens of the Union.
We should also remember that some Member States, including my country, must hold a referendum on any Treaty changes that arise at the forthcoming IGC.
The loss of an automatic right to nominate a Commissioner would certainly be a very difficult, if not impossible, proposal to sell to an Irish electorate in this referendum.
I would now like to return to the issue of extending the qualified majority voting system at European Council level.
The Council represents the interests of the 15 Member State governments within the institutional framework of the Union and currently, under existing EU Treaties, unanimous agreement of the 15 Member States is required for any tax changes sought within the Union.
The report we are discussing today seeks to extend qualified majority voting to all legislative activities except those of a constitutional nature.
I believe that national Member States should retain the right of veto on taxation matters.
The Irish taxation system is innovative in many ways and has contributed to our present growth rates.
I do not believe that the extension of qualified majority voting to taxation matters at European Council level is a particularly welcome development.
Mr President, a biblical parable teaches the reader to build his house on a rock.
After all, a house built on sand has no solid foundations.
This parable was meant as a reference to faith and its foundations.
Nonetheless, I was reminded of this parable during the IGC discussion.
The relentless attempts to turn Europe into a political unity seem to be built on quicksand.
Indeed, the citizens of Europe do not feel European and this will not change overnight.
Still, the discussion on the EU' s future is peppered with concepts such as European citizenship.
This does not exist by any stretch of the imagination and is simply quicksand!
In the IGC discussion or the present report for that matter, the end goal of European cooperation is not taken into consideration.
What do we want to achieve as a European Union?
I would be keen to hear the Council' s and Commission' s opinion on this.
If there is a well-considered vision on the foundation of European cooperation, the European House will be on more solid ground and will be able to brave the bad weather.
I share the minority view of Mr Berthu, a member of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, as it has been included in this report.
This document does include a solid foundation for the Union, namely a cooperative of independent states, in which the national democracies enjoy the highest level of legitimacy.
Regarding the enlargement issue, the fact that Member States joining the EU can become fully-fledged Members of the Union should be central.
"Degrading" acceding countries to second-class members does not do them justice and has unwanted political consequences.
Instead of the idea of different speeds, I support the idea of carrying out only the core tasks, that is to say in cross-border policy areas, at European level.
Another specific point I would like to raise concerns the European Commission.
This high official college should in future not have more or fewer than 20 members.
If necessary, combinations of countries can alternate in appointing a Euro Commissioner.
I support the policy of granting the European Parliament codecision in all cases in which the Council decides by qualified majority.
This must, however, go hand in hand with sound scrutiny by the national parliaments of their "own" ministers in the Council.
Mr President, whilst I too wish to express my dismay at the ongoing prejudice displayed towards Austria by 14 Member States, I would like to take the opportunity to comment on the opinion of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, which refers to a number of very important areas.
The diversity of cultural traditions in Europe is not just a colourful mosaic of artistic activities but gives expression to cultural, religious and also national diversity, to a sense of belonging and a feeling of attachment to one' s native land.
Very often in the past, Parliament regarded culture as nothing more than a breeding ground for art.
However, it is much more than this, and cannot be separated from a minority' s sense of identity and its self-perception, therefore neither can it be separated from the rights of these groups, which are to be respected.
Most minority groups in Europe define themselves through their cultural traditions, and it will only be possible to afford them the protection they need if we make it possible for them to integrate into mainstream society, whilst respecting their own traditions.
If we are to acknowledge and comprehend these traditions, we will have to do more than register the differences purely as ethnic characteristics or as a list of discriminations.
We hear so much these days about the dangers of disregarding the rights of minorities, and very often this takes the form of cultural discrimination.
The debate about the human rights of minorities, xenophobia, and racism, particularly in the light of the enlargement process, is doomed to failure unless we re-define and extend our concept of culture.
Otherwise we will end up endlessly repeating hollow words that do not mean anything to most people these days.
The Convention should take account of these thoughts in its drafting of the Charter on Fundamental Rights.
In defining and reworking the concept of a minority' s culture, a new dimension will be added to this very important basis for identity, and cultural issues within the EU will not be treated as a mere colourful adjunct to our other very important responsibilities.
President, Commissioner, we are faced with a fundamental difficulty, in the exercise in which we are involved, in maintaining the balance between enlarging the EU and reforming the institutions to make that enlargement possible.
British Conservatives cannot accept the report, based on the long list of ancillary items which are not on the agenda of the IGC.
We are concerned by the proposals for constitutionalisation of the Union, by the proposals to incorporate the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaty, by the progressive diminishing of the distinction between the first and second pillars, by the proposal that the Council should adopt broad guidelines of economic, employment and social convergence policies by qualified majority.
These are just some examples of the complex and controversial issues which are raised.
We are overloading the wish list of the IGC.
The great danger, if all these extra items were to be adopted on the agenda, is that the deadline of December 2000 would inevitably be missed.
Where would that leave the candidate countries like Poland and Hungary, whose government leaders have already expressed concern over the timetable?
We believe the IGC should concentrate on the essential institutional reforms.
It should ensure that it meets the deadline, to enable the first wave of enlargement to include Central and Eastern European countries by 2004, and to continue any further necessary reforms with the full inclusion of our new partners.
If the EU delays enlargement too long, it may make it more difficult, or impossible, for some candidate countries to join within the envisaged timetable.
The President-in-Office addressed some of these concerns in his speech.
Commissioner Barnier in his speech said that the intention is to succeed with the reforms, not necessarily to conclude them.
Some people say that this is the last opportunity for reform.
I do not think that is a very fair reflection on the extraordinary reforms that many of the candidate countries have made in the last 9 and 10 years since they were within the Warsaw Pact or formerly part of the Soviet Union.
Our priority is enlargement.
We should not confuse or reverse our priorities.
Mr President, my group welcomes this report.
It sends a clear message to the IGC to be ambitious, to think long-term and not short-term, to think of how a Union with nearly double the number of Member States we have now can actually function effectively and to take this opportunity to change the Treaties, because future IGCs with nearly 30 states around the table will find it even more difficult than it is now to agree on reforms.
The report puts forward ambitious proposals, as one would expect of the European Parliament.
If adjusted by the amendments by my group, it will be a well-balanced set of proposals, well-balanced notably on the delicate question of the equilibrium between large and smaller Member States.
On the size of the Commission, for instance, the formulas that are likely to be adopted tomorrow will refer either to one Commissioner per Member State or to a smaller number, a fixed number of Commissioners.
The Commission cannot go on expanding indefinitely.
In the second case, it will be a rotating system, so that every Member State, large and small, has equal opportunities of seeing one of its nationals serve in the Commission.
On the question of the size of the European Parliament, we have also found a point of equilibrium, based on to a minimum number of Members for each Member State.
Every state will, of course, have to make a sacrifice following enlargement, but a minimum number will be guaranteed, with digressive proportionality thereafter.
So the report is balanced and I think can be welcomed.
It is ambitious.
Some people are saying: ' The IGC will never agree to this point or to that point' .
But we are not in this Parliament trying to guess the outcome of the IGC; we are trying to encourage it to move in a particular direction, in a more ambitious direction, to make sure that we actually have a Union capable of functioning effectively when we enlarge to nearly 30 Member States.
That is essential for our future.
Mr President, the aim of the IGC is to reconcile enlargement with deepening.
In particular, we need to review the interinstitutional balance, representation within the Commission and the other institutions, the weighting of votes and the areas covered by qualified majority voting.
Unanimity voting must apply to decisions of a constitutional and fundamental nature.
Closer cooperation must make it possible to manage diversity and avoid getting bogged down, without calling the fundamental structure of the Union into question.
The report by our fellow Members, whom I want to congratulate, has been substantially improved over the course of the discussions.
Nonetheless, the outlined reform will hit the small Member States hardest.
That applies in particular to the provisions on the composition and operation of the institutions.
A Parliament in which the ceiling of four seats per Member State, which does not allow for a balanced representation of the political forces, is unacceptable.
The same is true of a Council in which the qualified majority rules have to be readjusted and whose proposed method of operation will inevitably lead to deadlock and inconsistency, and of a Commission in which the rule must be one member per Member State.
Lastly, let me bring up the question of the seat of Parliament and call for the promise made to be respected.
I am always surprised to see our Parliament, which sets itself up as the committed champion of respect for minority rights when it comes to others, go against this approach when it comes to deciding on the institutional architecture of our own House.
Mr President, we, for our part, welcome the enlargement of Europe and will participate in the discussion of how to prepare for it.
The Scottish National Party, which I represent, is committed in its manifesto and its general policy to the idea of Europe as a confederation of peoples, countries and regions, not as a sovereign federal union in its own right.
That is something which the parties of European Free Alliance have in common and our votes will be cast in that light.
I want to draw attention particularly to Amendment No 138, in its interaction with paragraph 32 of the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report.
Regarding its proposal for all-Europe lists of candidates, we in Scotland - a small nation within a large Member State - are seriously concerned about the practical disappearance of Scotland as a distinct entity within the Union This would also apply to Euskadi, Flanders, Galicia, Andalusia and Wales.
The reduction in Members of the European Parliament that we would face, coupled with the arrival of new Member States which are smaller in population than Scotland or Wales and which would be fully represented in all the institutions of the Union, will certainly increase the pressure for and our people' s commitment to the idea of our own independence in this great European confederation.
As it is now voting time, the debate will be adjourned and will resume at 3 p.m.
VOTE
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Recommendation for second reading, in the form of a letter, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European and Council Decision on the application of aerial-survey and remote-sensing techniques to the agricultural statistics for 1999-2003 (13300/1/1999 - C5-0065/2000 - 1998/0296(COD))
(The President declared the common position approved)
Simplified procedure without report:
Proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 95/50/EC on uniform procedures for checks on the transport of dangerous goods by road (COM(00)0106 - C5-0129/2000 - 2000/0044(COD)) (Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism)
(Parliament approved the Commission proposal)
Proposal for a decision of the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission, the Court of Justice, the Court of Auditors, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the organisation and operation of the Office for Official Publications of the European Communities (EC, ECSC, Euratom) (C5-0080/2000 - 2000/2043(ACI)) (Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport)
(Parliament approved the Commission proposal)
Recommendation for second reading (A5-0071/2000), drawn up on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on action to be taken against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants by engines intended to power agricultural or forestry tractors and amending Council Directive 74/150/EEC (10323/1/1999 - C5-0225/1999 - 1998/0247(COD) (rapporteur: Mr Fitzsimons)
(The President declared the common position approved)
Report (A5-0102/2000) by Mr Lehne, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the Republic of Finland with a view to the adoption of a Council decision concerning arrangements for cooperation between financial intelligence units of the Member States in respect of exchanging information (11636/1999 - C5-0330/1999 - 1999/0824(CNS))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Recommendation for second reading (A5-0083/2000), on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position of the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms and repealing Directive 90/220/EEC (11216/1/1999 - C5-0012/2000 - 1998/0072(COD)) (rapporteur: Mr Bowe)
Wallstrm, Commission.
Mr President, as I explained during the debate yesterday, the Commission is able to accept fully Amendments Nos 9, 17, 19, 29 and 47.
The Commission can also accept Amendments Nos 1 to 4, 8, 11, 24, 35 to 38, 46, 48, 49 and 52 in principle, as far as they clarify the intention of the Commission to establish an efficient, transparent and balanced regulatory framework for GMOs.
Some of these amendments need only to be brought into line with the legal wording of the text of the directive and the overall legislative framework.
For other amendments, for instance those amendments concerning antibiotic-resistant marker genes, the principle is politically acceptable but the proposed text as such does not seem to be appropriate.
The Commission is unable to accept Amendments Nos 5 to 7, 10, 12 to 16, 18, 20 to 23, 25 to 28, 30 to 34, 39 to 45, 50 and 51.
More specifically concerning Amendments Nos 22, 23 and 25, the Commission cannot accept them as they stand but is willing to consider how due account can be taken of the concerns they reflect.
Mr President, I have a question for the Commission, so as to make it quite clear to my fellow delegates what we are voting about.
I have the Council' s common position of 9 December 1999 before me.
It says in the document passed to us by the Council that this common position was adopted unanimously.
If I remember correctly, we were still under the Finnish Council Presidency in December 1999, with a Green Environment Minister.
Political Union took place in June 1999, under the German Council Presidency, also with a green Environment Minister.
However, I am a little confused because the Greens in this House are maintaining that the common position is so weak that it is imperative that we make a huge number of improvements to it.
That is why I wanted to put the question again as to whether we are really voting on the common position that all the Environment Ministers subscribed to, or whether we are mistaken?
(Laughter, Applause)
Thank you, Mr Liese.
May I remind you that the debate is closed.
Nevertheless I will give the floor to the Commission if it wishes to clarify the matter further.
It is that very common position.
Mr President, since Mr Liese has addressed a question to us, I will take the liberty of answering him.
The Green Group is not dependent on the positions of the Green ministers represented in the Environment Council.
We have freedom of choice, and I would hope the same applies to all the political groups here present.
But I wanted to speak specifically on the vote on Amendment No 37.
I think it is quite logical to vote on Amendment No 11 first, before Amendment No 37, because Amendment No 11 goes further than Amendment No 37.
It proposes a total ban on antibiotic-resistant marker genes, which is not the case in Amendment No 37, which relates only to Part C of the directive.
So I believe it would be more logical to vote first on the amendment that departs furthest from the original position.
Mr Lannoye, the rapporteur discussed this question with the competent services yesterday.
He does not seem to agree with you.
In fact he believes that the wording of Amendment No 11 is such as to suggest a different voting order from the one you recommend.
I can only regret that.
After the vote on Amendments Nos 38 and 49: President.
We will now adjourn the vote and resume after the formal sitting.
(The sitting was suspended at 12 noon for the formal sitting and resumed at 12.35 p.m.)
Mr President, I understand perfectly that it is an honour for us to receive a distinguished guest of state.
However, I would ask you, when the Bureau next meets, to address the question as to whether it is a constructive use of time to interrupt a vote that we need a qualified majority for and for which there are only seven or eight proposed amendments.
I would urge you to address this matter in the Bureau.
I am happy to put this question to the Bureau, Mrs Roth-Behrendt, but I was bound by decisions outside my control.
Mr President, just before the formal sitting you interrupted this vote very suddenly.
It rather surprised me, and I am sure many other Members of the House, who during the formal sitting expressed their surprise at the way in which the vote was interrupted.
We have just seen the first vote after the formal sitting fail to secure a qualified majority by only a handful of votes.
Does that not demonstrate what we were talking about and the point Mrs Roth-Behrendt has raised?
When we have qualified majority votes they should not be interrupted in any way by the formal sitting.
There were eight votes to go.
I can inform you, on the basis of my experience, that you could have completed that in three minutes.
It is ridiculous that we are now proceeding with qualified majority votes when Members have not been given a reasonable amount of time to come back into the Chamber.
I hope you could address that issue, Mr President.
I quite understand your feelings, Mr Bowe.
To tell the truth, I agree with you.
But I also had to respect the protocol which, once again, unfortunately often takes precedence over our proceedings.
That said, it is true that your comment makes good sense and I think the Bureau will have to give it the fullest consideration.
Mr President, I have a question about the method applied here.
It seems to me that, normally, when the sitting resumes and we resume the vote after a formal sitting, a bell sounds to warn our colleagues that the sitting and the vote are resuming.
I did not hear that bell and I would ask you to confirm the method used in such cases, for this probably adversely affected the result of the vote in this Chamber.
In principle, Mrs Lienemann, the bell sounds when the sitting has been adjourned in order to call Members back.
Some Members had left the Chamber, others remained.
I had in fact announced that the voting would resume immediately after the formal sitting.
Moreover this was indicated in the Minutes and on the agenda.
But I too am sometimes faced with imponderables.
Let me assure you that all your comments will be passed on to the Bureau.
You yourself are a member of the Bureau.
I think that by taking concerted action we will manage to improve the system.
(Mixed reactions)
Mr President, if the problem about sounding the bell is that the sitting has to resume first, the solution is quite simple.
I propose to the President that we suspend the sitting for two minutes.
For it is unacceptable...
... that for reasons purely of protocol the number of Members in the Chamber has decreased by about 60, which makes it extremely difficult to adopt amendments that will affect the health of European consumers for generations to come.
(Applause)
Once again, Mrs Liepitz, I can only take note of the situation, deplore it like you and propose that we finally press on with the vote.
(The President declared the common position approved as amended)
Report (A5-0088/2000) by Mr Papayannakis, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 820/97 (COM(1999) 487 - C5-0240/1999 - 1999/0204(COD))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Joint motion for a resolution on the Lisbon Summit
(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)Motion for a resolution (B5-0320/2000) by Mr Suominen and others, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, on the outcome of the Extraordinary European Council in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March 2000
(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)
Motion for a resolution (B5-0322/2000) by Mr Cox and Mr Jensen, on behalf of the ELDR Group, on the outcome of the Extraordinary European Council in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March 2000
(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)
Motion for a resolution (B5-0328/2000) by Mr Le Pen and others, on behalf of the TDI Group, on the Lisbon European Council
(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)
Motion for a resolution (B5-0329/2000) by Mr Berni, on behalf of the EDD Group, on the Extraordinary European Council of 23 and 24 March, on the subject 'Employment, economic reforms and social cohesion: towards a Europe of innovation and knowledge'
(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)
Motion for a resolution (B5-0331/2000) by Mr Figueiredo and others, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, on the outcome of the Extraordinary European Council in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March
(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)
Motion for a resolution (B5-0333/2000) by Mr Queir and others, on behalf of the UEN Group, on the outcome of the Extraordinary European Council in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March 2000
(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)
Motion for a resolution (B5-0335/2000) by Mr Flautre and others, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group, on the outcome of the European Council in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March 2000: Presidency' s conclusions
(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)
Motion for a resolution (B5-0338/2000) by Mr Goebbels, on behalf of the PSE Group, on the meeting of the European Council (Lisbon, 23 and 24 March 2000)
(Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution)
Joint motion for a resolution on the EU-Africa summit
Before the vote
Mr President, an error has slipped into paragraphs 15, 17 and 18 of this joint resolution of the European Union and Africa.
In paragraph 15, instead of saying "the OAU" it should say "the African States" .
In section 17, instead of "the OAU" it should say "Africa" .
In section 18, "members of the OAU" should be replaced by "Africans" .
(Parliament agreed to vote on the oral amendment)
(Parliament adopted the resolution) EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Resolution on the additionality principle
Mr President, I would like to give the following explanation of the vote that I cast in the debate concerning additionality.
I would like particularly to underline the point in the motion that Parliament fully endorses the Commission' s statement that the spirit of additionality, as well as the letter of the law, represents a key consideration and is vital to ensuring that programmes have a maximum impact on the ground.
In that light it is absolutely unacceptable that the current policy allows Member States, after submission of region-based plans, to reallocate funds internally yet still formally comply with the additionality principle while defying its spirit.
This matter urgently calls for review by the Commission.
Since the debate - yesterday in fact - I have received a very courteous and helpful letter from Mr Barnier indicating that the Commission is moving our way on this.
I am very glad about that.
I should like to congratulate my colleague, Mrs Evans, for setting up this marvellous debate and getting this superb result today.
Mr President, I am delighted this resolution has been adopted by Parliament in recognition of the problem that exists with additionality.
I represent Wales which, due to the practices of the UK Government, has not received, and will not receive, what the EU intends to be spent on combating poverty over and above normal government spending, even with Objective I status in the current programme period.
As Commissioner Barnier has stated, it is as important to comply with the spirit of additionality as with the letter of the law.
The Commissioner also endorsed the statement by Commissioner Liikanen that in future the Commission would be particularly attentive to the spending figures put forward by the Member States when there is evidence of reduced expenditure in a given region or regions.
I trust now that the Member States will comply with the wishes of Parliament and the Commission in this matter to ensure that the effective targeting of structural funds at the poorest regions is not undermined.
- The EPLP delegation voted in favour of the compromise resolution on additionality because we believe that the principle of additionality is one of the core fundamental pillars of the structural funds reforms, for which I was Parliament' s rapporteur.
However, I believe that parts of this resolution, rather than bringing clarity to the rules, will only serve to confuse the general public and in particular funding operators.
Paragraph A continues to confuse the principle of additionality with the separate but equally important principle of co-financing.
Paragraph G is inaccurate.
There is no regulatory requirement to check additionality on an annual basis, but as stated in the regulation, simplification requires three checks on additionality during the programming period.
It is inappropriate for Members to try with this resolution to rewrite regulations which were agreed unanimously by this Parliament and will be up for review in 2006.
More disappointing is the naked party political games which British Members Mr Davies, Mr Bradbourn and Mrs Evans have attempted in this resolution.
This will not serve the best interests of our poorest communities, with deliberate misinformation and hijacking this debate for narrow party political advantage.
Our real goal must be to plan and give our support to the successful implementation of these funds to improve the life prospects of people in our poorest regions.
My party is committed to this goal and will work with other parties in a constructive and positive way to achieve this.
Agricultural statistics for the period 1993-2003
Mr President, of course, it is important, if not essential, for the European Union to be engaged in statistics.
However, this undertaking can sometimes be extremely harmful for certain States in our Union, take, for example, the milk quotas which have been so detrimental for so many areas of Europe.
In my opinion, we must ensure that these statistics are calculated, and are calculated appropriately, but, most importantly, I would like to take the opportunity presented by this explanation of vote on statistics to invite Parliament, the Commission and the Council to avoid what so frequently occurs as a result of the application of statistics to milk quotas and agricultural products, for example, according to which a certain amount may or may not be produced - namely, the waste of resources due to the destruction of excess produce.
Checks on the transport of dangerous goods by road
Mr President, I voted for this resolution because, clearly, the transport of dangerous goods is constantly in need of regulation.
We must do everything possible to reduce the number of vehicles carrying dangerous goods along the roads of Europe to a minimum.
I would argue that rail, sea and air transport should be favoured instead, and, in particular, we should favour employing the elderly to drive dangerous goods vehicles and work in related activities.
Young people lack experience and are certainly at greater risk than the elderly.
The experience of workers who have been performing this activity for a substantial period of time should be recognised, and employment of the elderly in all the most hazardous activities should be promoted.
Recommendation for second reading: Bowe (A5-0083/2000)
President, we are very disappointed with the outcome of the vote.
I think it is quite disgraceful that the European Parliament bowed to lobbying pressure from the genetic engineering industry on key issues.
There has been a massive campaign in recent weeks, but I would have liked Parliament to display the sense of responsibility it gave expression to at first reading.
My first point relates to liability.
It is quite ludicrous just to call upon the Commission in a recital to put forward an environmental liability directive by the year 2001.
We are well aware that the White Paper made no provision for personal liability insurance and that it only related to the Natura 2000 areas.
If industry maintains that products of genetic engineering are safe and do not present risks, then I cannot understand why the majority of delegates have caved in and allowed industry to continue to evade responsibility.
My second point relates to antibiotics.
A lame demand of this kind takes no account whatsoever of consumer interests.
All scientists warn that pathogens in human beings and animals are becoming increasingly resistant, and are calling for an immediate ban on the use of antibiotic-resistant marker genes.
Parliament has shelved the issue again, and has failed yet again to deal with these major problems.
This is most disgraceful!
The same goes for the issue of genetic pollution.
Simply to ask that the problem be taken account of really is a complete joke, for that is precisely what environmental risk assessment caters for.
Parliament originally called for the Member States and the Commission to be placed under an obligation to adopt measures.
Parliament has caved in on this too.
I think today has been a black day for consumer protection, and I can only hope that this vote will do industry a disservice.
With any luck, consumers will continue to give genetically modified food the thumbs down, for it is unacceptable that industry should be allowed to get away with evading responsibility.
Mr President, I feel that we should not be too alarmist in these matters, and that, with regard to genetically modified organisms, we should not hold back scientific progress with an excessive amount of regulations.
In any case, no one has ever succeeded in blocking the advance of science.
I have heard on the grapevine that a gene is being discovered which prolongs human life, and I am a little concerned that we may be placing too many restrictions on science and the use of genetically modified organisms.
When this gene is discovered, it would be a shame if Parliament decided not to allow the movement of genetically modified organisms, ourselves, in fact, when, at last, we could live longer in better health.
For this reason, in the interests of the elderly, I would call for less stringent regulation of GMOs.
Mr President, I want to give an oral explanation of vote because what has happened, once again, is not very good news for our Parliament.
In fact consumers, associations and all those concerned with the environment, with health, with the expected risks due to GMOs released into the environment, were expecting the European Parliament to send out a strong signal.
Once again we have simply kowtowed to the lobby of the advocates of GMOs on the pretext that science will help to make the world a better place.
We know full well that as yet there is no toxicology study that evaluates the consequences of releasing GMOs into the environment.
So we can only regret that those amendments that went much further, that indeed allowed us to anticipate the implications of GMOs for nature, were not accepted.
Mr President, I therefore condemn the kind of compromise reached between the major political groups, which goes against what the consumers and associations expected of us, as well as all those who trusted the European Parliament and who expect our Members to adopt firm positions.
- The European Parliament will vote on 12 April, to adopt a new directive on the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms (GMOs).
There are major issues at stake.
The time has come to make those who engage in the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms legally responsible for damage to human health and the environment.
They should be liable for any damage caused by such releases and they should be required to take out liability insurance just as every driver has to take out liability insurance in case he kills or injures another human being.
The argument has been made that this issue should instead be covered by horizontal legislation.
It is worth noting, however, that we have heard this argument since discussions about Directive 90/220/EEC first started in 1989.
At that time, the Commission promised that liability for environmental damage caused by GMOs would be covered by horizontal legislation, but we have been waiting for more than 10 years for that promise to be fulfilled.
We must adopt an immediate and categorical ban on the use of antibiotic resistant genes.
Many scientists and organisations, such as the Pasteur Institute and the British Medical Association, have called for a ban on the use of antibiotic-resistant marker genes, which do not perform any relevant function on the plants and are therefore completely superfluous.
In the common position antibiotic-resistant genes would just "be phased out" in the future, and only if "they may have any adverse effects on human health and the environment" .
This would mean that antibiotic-resistant products that have already been authorised would remain.
There are many less damaging forms of marker genes available and it is EU policy to prohibit all unnecessary use of antibiotics if there is a risk for human or animal health.
The directive should take a clear stand and insist that the use of these marker genes is stopped now.
The pharmaceutical industry wants a total exemption from the directive.
The Environment Committee adopted two contradictory amendments, one for a total exemption and one tightening up the common position line of a conditional exemption with all the normal environmental risk provisions.
It is unacceptable that the industry could be allowed on exemption unless the environmental risk provisions apply.
- (FR) I am extremely disappointed at the way the second-reading vote on the amendments to the draft directive on procedures for authorising genetically modified organisms (GMOs) went.
Admittedly, we have known since first reading that the principle of banning GMOs, or at least having a moratorium to allow for more in-depth studies, was rejected.
But the least we could have expected was for Parliament now to decide to take serious steps to protect the consumer.
Nothing of the kind has happened, however.
The European Parliament has just given way on three vital issues, in circumstances I consider shameful:
On banning the release of GMOs containing antibiotic-resistant genes: Amendments Nos 11 and 37 which called for such GMOs not to be released into the environment were rejected.
Instead we have adopted an amendment that simply calls for particular consideration to be given to this problem in order to identify and phase out by 2005 antibiotic resistance markers in GMOs which may have adverse effects on human health and the environment;
On the risk of unintentional gene -transfers to other organisms: Amendment No 12, which called for measures to be taken to prevent such unintentional transfers, was not adopted.
Instead, Parliament adopted Amendment No 38, which is much more vague and simply calls for an assessment of the various forms of risk that might be involved in such transfers;
On the liability and insurance obligations of persons deliberately releasing GMOs: to our great indignation, Parliament rejected Amendment No 33 which called for persons legally responsible for releasing these GMOs to assume total liability for any damage they caused to human health or the environment and which required them to take out adequate insurance to compensate for possible damage.
Instead, it adopted much weaker amendments that express the hope that, in the future, general legislation will be adopted in relation to environmental liability and that call on the Commission to submit a proposal on the impact of biotechnology on all areas over which the European Union has jurisdiction.
Alas, as we already know from the White Paper it prepared on the subject, the Commission is not in favour of compulsory insurance in this area.
We are particularly disgusted that Amendment No 33 was rejected, for if we want to authorise the marketing of products containing GMOs, we should at least ensure that those who sell them assume liability.
The pressure groups in the biotechnology industry explain that there is no risk, while at the same time saying that compulsory insurance is impossible because the risk is not insurable.
That tells us something.
I have never seen an insurer refuse to insure a non-existent risk.
One obscure aspect of this business is that the French Government which, according to the most recent information, includes ecologists, had officially expressed reservations about this Amendment No 33.
Once again the biotechnology industry pressure groups have done their job at every level, out of sight of the citizens.
I warmly congratulate Mr Bowe on his report on the deliberate release into the environment of GMOs.
This subject, which has given rise to much debate, is a very topical one, given that yesterday two European regulations entered into force which require manufacturers to label "food and food ingredients" containing more than 1% of GMOs, together with "genetically modified additives and flavourings" , although without setting out any threshold value in this case.
As a consumer, I am very pleased about this compulsory labelling because it will allow us to make an informed choice, although I would have preferred stricter rules that required a very clear indication on the outside packaging!
Yet this is a positive first step, since it has led several large firms to stop putting GMOs into their products.
Coming back to the issue under discussion today, this is a proposal to amend Directive 90/220/EEC, which covers both the deliberate release of GMOs for experimental purposes and their deliberate release with a view to putting the products concerned on the market.
In the light of the progress of scientific research in this field, it seemed vital to clarify the scope of this legislation in order to give due protection to consumer health as also to the environment.
The proposals of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy set out a strict and transparent framework, thus responding fully to consumer concerns.
The purpose of the three main amendments I support is as follows:
to prevent any accidental contamination of fields by cross-pollination between GMO and non-GMO crops.
To that end, we must require either minimum distances between fields in which GMO crops are grown and those reserved for traditional crops, or that GMO crops are confined to special greenhouses because of the inherent risk of genetic pollution;
to prevent any risk of antibiotic resistance developing as a result of the transfer of the resistant gene from one species to another.
So we must ban the release of all GMOs containing an antibiotic-resistant marker gene;
to impose a strict liability system on producers.
Like the rapporteur, I am convinced that the person legally responsible for releasing a GMO into the environment must assume full civil liability for any damage to human health or the environment.
This principle of responsibility, together with that of GMO traceability and, in particular, the precautionary principle, will enable us to limit the risks as far as possible!
Given the uncertainties that remain in this area, we must be as prudent as we can!
Let me conclude by repeating and emphasising that we must listen to what the people of Europe expect of us!
Public opinion has in fact expressed its reservations about the development of 'Frankenstein foods' on several occasions and its desire for healthy and natural food.
So we must be the spokespeople of this desire to preserve high-quality food in the European Union!
It is good that the Council common position already incorporates some of the amendments approved by the European Parliament.
However, as proposed by the rapporteur, the amendments approved at first reading but not accepted by the Council must now be included.
Following the approval of the Biosafety Protocol in Montreal in January 2000, we must take further steps to protect the rights of consumers and to re-establish their confidence.
We therefore support the amendments which aim to include in the directive the ban on the release of GMOs containing antibiotic resistance markers, even for the purposes of research, and the requirement imposed on the Commission and Member States that no GMO and/or products thereof should leave the territory of the European Union without the prior informed consent of the importing country.
We also support the defence of total environmental liability as it is unacceptable not to force companies in the biotechnology sector to take the necessary measures to protect human health and minimise environmental risks.
Finally, when consenting to a deliberate release, Member States and the Commission must ensure that measures are taken to prevent gene-transfer from GMOs to other organisms in the environment.
- I welcome Mr Bowe' s report as a balanced and considered approach to the important subject of the release into the environment of GMOs.
The three key issues covered in Mr Bowe' s report are: environmental liability, antibiotics and gene transfer.
On environmental liability I tend to take the Commission' s view that this is best dealt with through horizontal legislation.
On antibiotics I would be in favour of a ban on the use in GMOs of genes conferring antibiotic resistance.
As far as gene transfer is concerned I believe measures must be foreseen in the new Directive to control the release of GMOs which can outcross with other plants.
A strong Directive which deals with concerns about the environment and the health risks of GMOs could go a long way to ensure we realise the potential benefits from GMOs and avoid the pitfalls.
Genetically modified organisms, or GMOs, mean that industry and, ultimately, human beings themselves are, in the name of health, medicine, larger harvests, insect-resistant crops and other supposed forms of future progress and improvements to human existence, embarking upon a path towards an unknown destination.
The path may one day prove to have led to something which is the total opposite of all the promises which were given when the journey was begun.
I want to issue this warning today.
The European Union needs new, tighter regulations in place of the first and still current directives concerning GMOs from 1991.
Since 1998, the Commission' s proposals have been under discussion.
Further delays would be a mistake.
As a Swedish Christian Democrat Member of the European Parliament, I want to state that it must never be the GMO industry and economic interests which are allowed to govern legislation and regulations.
The representatives of these have, on repeated occasions, expressed the view that Europe has "fallen behind" the GMO industry in, above all, the United States and China, that the GMO industry cannot be "developed" as "freely" in Europe and that opportunities for new jobs and businesses "are being lost" in the EU' s fifteen Member States.
Our political decisions must instead be guided by the concept of stewardship and not by manipulation of the genetic code.
Our task is to hand the earth and the environment over to future generations in as good a state as possible.
We must be able to show that, on the basis of stewardship and the precautionary principle, human beings have a desire to forgo what might appear to be short-term "gains" in favour of higher and significantly more long-term values such as a concern for creation and for genetic diversity.
In purely practical terms, this means regulations which guarantee a minimised risk of the spread of GMOs, a halt to the use of antibiotic resistance markers, an increase in independent research into the risks presented by GMOs, liability for damages based on the principle that those who release GMOs into the environment with deleterious effects upon health or the environment should be held strictly liable, long-term evaluations of the socio-economic and environmental consequences of the release of GMOs into the environment, permanent labelling of GMO products, compliance with all current regulations, such as the Biosafety Protocol, and an open application and decision-making process in which the public are entitled to express an opinion and in which each application is dealt with separately and no simplified application procedures are approved.
- (SV) It is an important report which Parliament has voted on today.
There are many uncertainties surrounding the use of genetically modified organisms, and there is good reason for being very careful.
On important points, the Council has wished to introduce risk assessment, together with evaluation of the use of genetically modified organisms.
The Directive guarantees a high level of protection.
Where most of the points are concerned, I have been able to agree with the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
Where other points are concerned, however, other measures can justifiably be demanded.
In the case of genes expressing resistance to antibiotics, the Council' s position makes continued research possible under strict conditions based upon environmental considerations and respect for the consumer.
Nothing is so enduring as the accidental.
I therefore consider it very important to devise general regulations governing liability for environmental damage.
Dealing separately with the GMO sector may lead to major differences in the regulations governing liability in different areas.
When it comes to investigating the costs, together with the benefit to the public finances, of releasing genetically modified organisms into the environment, I have voted in favour of Amendment No 8 in order to guarantee continued discussion of how such an investigation ought to be carried out.
I do not, however, believe that investigations of that kind can be carried out annually.
The EU ought not, therefore, to become inundated with reports on the matter.
- Madam President, I wholeheartedly applaud the efforts of my Labour colleague, David Bowe, to put forward measures to control the release of GMOs into the environment.
With such fast-changing science and a host of possible unknown effects, it is important to protect Europe' s people and our environment.
Strict controls on plants to prevent the transfer of genes from GMOs to other species are crucial.
This will ensure that other species are protected.
We must put safety first and make sure that GMOs do not enter the food chain unseen by the back door.
Furthermore, those responsible for the release of GMOs should bear full financial liability for any damage to human health and the environment.
Industry should pay and face the consequences of its actions, not the man-on-the-street.
Europe should stand up for the rights of the citizen and force industry to take responsibility.
Of course, the health and well-being of our citizens is of paramount importance.
I say no to the release of GMOs resistant to antibiotics.
We must not put our people or our animals at unnecessary risk.
Labour Euro MPs have been at the forefront of protecting our citizens and our environment.
We have consistently backed proposals to ensure that the use of GMOs and products derived from GMOs are strictly controlled within the EU.
David Bowe' s report is yet further proof of Europe greening up its act and putting the safety of our citizens first.
Papayannakis report (A5-0088/2000)
Mr President, I voted for the measure on the labelling of beef.
At last, we are going to be told the place of birth and residence of the cattle, and, doubtless, whether they were called Daisy or Buttercup.
Likewise, however, it would be as well if everyday folk, human beings, pensioners even, were not treated as mere numbers; it would be as well if, rather than just being a file on a desk, they were to become a person with a name, a surname and a life story.
All too often, the governments of our 15 States think of citizens, particularly pensioners and the elderly, as numbers, people without an identity, a life story or a date of birth.
Let us place photographs of our citizens inside all the bureaucratic files with which the States fill our offices.
It is a good thing that a system for the identification of bovine animals and the It is right that this should enter into force as soon as possible but not, however, before September given the codecision procedure which is being used.
Through this system, consumers can obtain information about the origin of the meat which they buy and the background of the animal can be checked.
Due to this improved link between producer and consumer, potential risks to public health can be detected at an early stage and avoided much more effectively.
It is essential that identical labelling rules are applied to beef imported from third countries.
If not all the information required by Community regulations is available, it is vital that a specific label is attached to the product clearly indicating its non-EC origin.
The European Parliament report also proposes, to ensure consumer protection, that operators or organisations producing and marketing minced beef, beef trimmings or cut beef should also be subject to the compulsory labelling system.
They should not benefit from the exceptions proposed by the Commission as this would be equivalent to automatically exempting between 30% and 50% of beef from the labelling obligation.
- I welcome Mr Papayannakis' report on proposals for an EU-wide compulsory identification system for cows and the labelling of beef and beef products.
The main aim of the new regulation is to enable consumers to trace the source of the meat they buy right back to the animal.
This system should enable any potential threats to human health to be tackled early and effectively.
I support the rapporteur in stressing that the same rules must be applied to imported beef from non-EU countries and, in cases where not all information is available, a clear indication to that effect should be provided.
Mr Papayannakis is right to insist that labels mention antibiotics and stimulants that have been administered and to oppose derogation from the regulation for minced beef, beef trimmings or cut beef.
Properly applied this regulation will go a long way to enhance the reputation, quality and safety of EU beef - good news for consumers and producers!
- (FR) By way of introduction, let me point out that Directive 79/112 clearly sets out the purpose of food labelling, by stating that the prime concern of all rules on food labelling should be to inform and protect the consumer.
Consumers need to have confidence in the food they eat.
In this case, the aim is not simply to change our tastes and our traditions in regard to chocolate, but to deal properly at last with the consequences of "mad cow" disease.
It is quite astounding that, given the gravity of the situation, today, so many years after the crisis, we still do not have an effective system of traceability in place.
We do not propose to repeat the debate we had in December 1999, but the Commission would have been well-advised to scrupulously monitor the application of that regulation; so once again it committed a serious political mistake.
Let us look back for a moment at the embargo on beef.
Although one swallow does not make a summer, in this case the French Government gave precedence to reason and caution over the ideology of the single market.
Knowing the options that exist in matters European, we can gauge what that must have cost it.
The reason why France chose this option is that the Community institutions are not always able, at this point in time, to ensure real traceability of food products.
Our consumer information and protection system is totally inadequate: for example, there is no way a citizen of the Union can know whether ravioli imported from another Member State contains any British beef.
Should the general public trust a Commission that does not ensure the compulsory traceability of beef yet lifts the embargo?
I did not find it acceptable for the Commission to teach lessons to France, which, for its part, knows that the impact of the voluntary rules it adopted effectively helped restore consumer confidence.
Indeed we also defended that point of view by tabling amendments in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.
We note with satisfaction that some of the amendments we tabled in the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on the Environment were adopted.
The Committee on the Environment amended important points of the Commission proposal.
It is high time we set up a reliable and transparent system.
During this vote, we supported the rapid and rigorous application of traceability, with a view to ensuring unfailing traceability and clear and transparent information, and we are satisfied with the results.
We hope that today' s vote will not lead to new and shameful calls for an extension or a derogation a few months hence.
- May I support the efforts of Mr Papayannakis to endorse proposals for an EU-wide compulsory identification system for cows and the labelling of beef and beef products.
Following the hullabaloo of food scares in recent times, most notably Mad Cow Disease, it is vital that we take measures to ensure that this type of food hazard does not happen again.
Food safety is a top priority and we must work hard towards alleviating the fears of consumers.
These new proposals enable consumers to trace the source of the meat they buy right back to the animal.
This should allow for any possible health threats to be tackled early and effectively.
From September 2000, beef labelling must show the point of slaughter of the animal, and from 2003, the origin of the animal including where it was born, reared and slaughtered must be added.
Public confidence in food safety has fallen tremendously in the past.
We must, of course, put safety first, and also make moves towards rebuilding public confidence.
British farmers particularly recognise that clear labelling is the best way of reassuring worried consumers that the beef they buy is safe.
This House should do its utmost to ensure that public health and safety is high on the agenda.
Pushing for clear labelling is the only way to convince our customers that food safety is top of our list.
Lisbon European Council
Mr President, I have taken the floor, for the last time today, to explain the way I voted on the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit.
I am not very happy: I would have preferred our 15 heads of government to have been more effective, more decisive, more energetic and more courageous.
With regard to social security, I would have preferred it if the decision had, at last, been taken to create a single European pension for the Union.
When the European citizens grow old, all the governments abuse them.
They are told off for living too long, whereas the real problem is that their contributions have been wasted.
The European citizens call upon the Union to set up a single European pension and thus show itself to be more capable, a better administrator and less careless with money than the individual governments.
- (FR) The Lisbon Summit was supposed to focus on a social Europe.
In fact, a new wave of neo-liberalism swept through Lisbon and gave the EU its marching orders in the global economic war.
Far from focussing on social and democratic rights, indeed looking more to the US social model, the summit once again sang the praises of the law of profit, workforce flexibility and all-out competition, with new forms of privatisation and liberalisation.
In short, everything should be quoted on the stock exchange.
And this was done with the complicity of all the left-wing governments present in Lisbon.
To sugar the pill, the EU is promising us quasi-general access to the Internet and cutting-edge vocational training.
To crown it all, it is actually dangling the idea of full employment, i.e. the creation of 20 to 30 million new jobs, before our noses.
These splendid promises mean only one thing: a huge rise in insecure jobs, casual work and low wages, with the constant threat of redundancy and, on top of that, a scheme for an inegalitarian overhaul of the social protection system.
Employers, for their part, will once again enjoy quite indecent subsidies.
A new economy, but we are being served up the same old recipes again.
- The Portuguese presidency is to be congratulated for calling a summit to agree new strategic goals for the Union in tackling unemployment, economic reform and social cohesion in light of the new knowledge-based economy.
The Council is right to say that the shift to a digital, knowledge-based economy, prompted by new goals and services, will be a powerful engine for growth, competitiveness and jobs.
In addition, it will be capable of improving citizens' quality of life and the environment.
However, it is equally true that without active intervention this shift will widen the gap between the haves and have-nots.
The Council is therefore to be applauded for acknowledging the importance of promoting social inclusion, for emphasising the role of education and training for living and working in the knowledge society; for highlighting the need for more and better jobs; and for stating that social protection must underpin the transformation of the knowledge economy.
I understand the presidency' s conclusions as confirming the goal that every section of society should have the opportunity to benefit from new technology.
The Lisbon Summit created enormous expectations.
Some saw this as the 'Employment Summit' , others as the 'Summit for the Society of Innovation and Knowledge' .
In the end, it turned out to be the 'Internet Summit' , as it was in this area that some of the most promising promises were made, if you will forgive the repetition of terms.
If only these promises could be fulfilled.
We share these expectations but we should also like to be able to congratulate the practical results achieved.
On this score, only the future will tell.
Yet we already regret certain weaknesses.
Furthermore, the mainly socialist European leaders who met at this summit could not resist the bewitching rhetoric of promising results for which they are not really responsible, yet did not make any promises on the issue which is their responsibility, namely the actual means to achieve these results.
We should also like to have seen more practical emphasis on two basic points.
These are the reduction in tax and the obligation to pay employment contributions and the effective deregulation and removal of red tape, thereby stimulating entrepreneurial initiative and promoting growth.
The desire to defend the 'European social model' is admirable.
Yet this defence cannot be achieved at the expense of economic dynamism and, ultimately, the very future and quality of this social model.
These thoughts are reflected in our votes and the amendments tabled.
- (EL) The Lisbon Summit, which can only euphemistically be termed "an Employment Summit" despite the clamorous declarations that went with it, achieved no more than to take another step towards changing employment into employability, redefining the concept 'working person' and destabilising labour relations and rights, to serve the celebrated 'New Economy' in the best possible way for big business, this being the new name for the old, familiar but still more unrestrained and harsh economic and social liberalism.
Masquerading with the greatest cynicism under the grandiose title of 'modernising the European social model by investing in people' , are the demands of big business for greater profitability as a means of 'supporting employment' .
The competitiveness of enterprises is being increased by cutting labour costs, the labour market is being fully liberalised and made more flexible, atypical forms of employment are being promoted, social security systems are under review and any remnant of the welfare state is being provocatively squeezed.
That is not 'investing in people' as the Summit meeting would have it.
That is the estrangement of people to the benefit of the market, the subjugation of working people to the demands and criteria of monetary credit, and the subjugation of the social state to the indexes and criteria of nominal convergence and EMU.
What the Lisbon economic and social policy guidelines are promoting, what is in practice being prepared for working people and 'served up' under a misnamed 'modernisation' - intended to 'sugar the pill' , deceive working people and reduce public reaction against the anti-labour and anti-grass roots economic and social policy of the EU - is a minimum level of poverty and not a minimum level of prosperity.
The 'New Economy' is actively preparing the creation of an extensive stratum of 'employed poor' , with miserly wages, restricted security and welfare rights, who will be obliged to change jobs according to the dictates of the unaccountable market and the laws of the lawless interests of big business.
The EU does not seem interested in fighting unemployment and promoting and supporting stable and full employment.
On the contrary, it is preparing working people, and this indeed at a fast rate, to live in a situation of complete and permanent insecurity.
Besides, the Presidency' s conclusions boldly state that the aim is 'improved employability' and both the information society and education are dragged along in chains to serve that rationale as tools to support part-time work, tele-employment and piecework employment.
Prosperity is destined for big business, to which splendid fields of glory are being opened since, in order to satisfy its demand for a 'fully operational internal market' and greater competitiveness against the USA, the pressures of international competition are being fully transferred to the labour market, liberalisation is being speeded up and the so-termed 'structural changes' (privatisations, market liberalisation) in vital sectors such as energy, telecommunications, postal services, transport, water supply and others are being promoted.
Instead of being controlled, restructuring, mergers and company relocations leading to tens of thousands of job losses are being made even easier.
Public and social investments are dwindling, equal opportunity and the fight against all forms of discrimination related to access to employment, and labour relations are being undermined, and priority is being given to whatever serves the aim of the 'economic productivity of labour' for big business, in other words low wages, lack of social protection, flexible and temporary employment, and the persistent exclusion of women, young people and people with special needs from the labour market.
The more than 60 million people who are victims of long-term unemployment, mass poverty and social exclusion, and all the working people in Europe too, cannot react 'adaptively' , 'supportively' , 'obediently' or 'cooperatively' to such choices.
You will find them in front of you, unsubdued, uncompromising and unyielding, fighting for and demanding full and steady employment and a system of social policy that includes insurance, health, pensions, protection for the unemployed, real equality of opportunity, quality education and substantive professional training.
The only thing in the Lisbon conclusions one could agree with is that 'people are Europe' s main asset' , except for the fact that they are not disposed to be 'liquidated' in the international money markets and to sacrifice themselves so that the monopolies can inflate their profits.
That asset is, and will prove to be, valuable in the struggle for a social, democratic and supportive Europe, a Europe of peace, progress and socialism.
EU-Africa Summit in Cairo
Mr President, I voted against the motion for a resolution on the EU-Africa Summit for several reasons.
The first was because the respective conclusions do not contain any significant reference to the issue of protecting human rights in Africa or to the development of independent legal systems.
The second reason was specifically because there is no mention in the text of last week' s events in Angola which involved yet another brutal attack on the freedom of expression and freedom of the press, values which are so dear to the European Union.
Two journalists and human rights activists - Rafael Marques and Aguiar dos Santos - were sentenced by a court in Luanda to imprisonment and fines for simply having criticised, in a press article, the Angolan President, Jos Eduardo dos Santos.
As defendants, their rights to a defence, which are fundamental in any rule of law, were violated, particularly by the absence during the trial of Rafael Marques' lawyer and by them not being permitted to prove the veracity of the facts as the judge argued that the case concerned the figure of the President of the Republic.
The international community and the political leaders of Europe must react against this climate of intolerance and constant disregard for human rights in Angola.
On this first occasion for the discussion of EU-Africa relations in this House, I must therefore once again strongly protest about this attack on the freedom of expression by the Angolan authorities.
Finally, having taken advantage of this opportunity to highlight these events, I must remind you that this Parliament recently approved a resolution on freedom of expression and press freedom in Angola which condemned the abuses occurring in that country.
I therefore ask the Council and its presidency, and also our President, to use all the means at their disposal to put pressure on the Angolan authorities to re-establish the rule of law, freedom and peace in Angola.
This is the only way to end the suffering of a people who are as entitled as anyone to human dignity and happiness.
- (FR) The solemn declaration of the first EU-Africa summit in Cairo opens by stating, and I quote: "Over the centuries, ties have existed between Africa and Europe ... developed on the basis of shared values of strengthening representative and participatory democracy" .
Given that this secular past was a story of slavery, massacres, forced labour, plundering, colonial conquests and oppression, during which the rich European countries bled that continent dry, we can only wonder what is the most shameful aspect: the pride of the representatives of the imperialist countries or the baseness of the local Heads of State who agreed to co-sign such a declaration, on the pretence that they were doing so in the name of their peoples.
We express our solidarity with these African peoples who have paid a heavy price to our ruling classes; and it is not even enough for us to cancel a debt that has already been largely repaid.
Genuine cooperation with Africa could only begin if we return to the people of that continent what was stolen from them over a century of colonisation and is still being stolen from them today.
Genuine cooperation on an equal footing can only be established between Europe and Africa if they are no longer in thrall to industrial and banking groups that grow rich on exploiting the working classes of the two continents.
In view of these circumstances, we voted against the joint resolution that welcomes the Cairo summit, while voting for the only amendment that contains concrete proposals.
- (FR) This Cairo summit is the first meeting at the level of the EU and the African continent as a whole.
Yet the EU persists in wanting to divide Africa between the Mediterranean area and black Africa.
During this neocolonial transition period, the EU is seeking to impose a system of neoliberal relations dominated by liberalisation and structural adjustments.
In fact the only purpose of the famous equal partnership is to remind the Africans that they are indebted to international law and must bow to the panoply of neo-liberal instruments.
The various conflicts in Africa were discussed, but no support is being given because of the rivalries between the great Western powers that are either sharing out or contesting spheres of influence.
As for the question of Aids, although its urgency is recognised, and aside from a moralising approach, the fine speeches cannot mask the cold reality of the figures, which reflect the fall in EU development aid to Africa now that priority is being given to Central and Eastern Europe.
Although the Africans have managed to wrest a few promises of debt cancellation from a few EU countries, the EU remains opposed to the idea of a global cancellation of the third world debt, which means the people are starving daily.
Like the EU-Africa civil society Forum in March, which brought together more than 80 NGOs, we declare our opposition to the structural adjustment programmes and our continued support for the debt-cancellation campaigns.
That brings us to the end of the explanations of vote.
(The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
Madam President, I did ask to speak this morning when my intervention would have been more appropriate.
However, as this was not possible, I will speak now.
I regret that the President-in-Office was this morning struck down by an Austrian malady and was absent from this Chamber.
As a result of his indisposition, he was also absent when we voted on two issues of particular interest to the Portuguese presidency, namely the Lisbon summit and the EU-Africa Summit.
As a Portuguese person and as an MEP, I regret that the Portuguese presidency has confused the position which it took as a government in its bilateral relations with Austria with the responsibilities which it must assume and fulfil when holding the Council presidency.
As we were all here, apart from one political group which was also absent from a certain point, I must regret that the Portuguese presidency chose to align itself with a political group which has the most recent totalitarian memories in this House.
In a fair and respectful manner, I must also criticise the behaviour of our President.
I have the highest respect for her but she must also respect us.
Frankly this does not appear to be the case.
Our President exceeded the rules of protocol.
She must realise that being President of the European Parliament does not make her the leader of the majority.
She represents this institution and must act and speak in this House with respect for all the different positions expressed here.
She is not the leader of the majority and I must therefore register my protest.
Mr Ribeiro e Castro, your views will certainly be conveyed to the Council and to the President.
IGC (continuation)
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report (A5-0086/2000) by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the European Parliament' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference (14094/1999 - C5-0341/1999 - 1999/0825(CNS)).
Madam President, tomorrow I am going to vote for the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report.
The Committee for Constitutional Affairs has done a good job and has taken a progressive, courageous position on certain areas of reform of the Treaties.
However, if I were asked to give my opinion on the overall status of the situation in Europe, I would have to say that I am somewhat confused and concerned.
There is no point in trying to deny anything.
Certain facts which have become clear in the last few days, some of which have been the subject of furious political debate in recent weeks, show that, in actual fact, much of the confusion and fear that has been expressed and many of the objections raised are well-founded.
In connection with this, a few days ago, Le Figaro published a revealing article by Mr Schmidt and Mr Giscard d' Estaing, the founders of the European monetary serpent, which frankly and explicitly repeated an observation previously made by Jacques Delors, to the effect that if the institutions do not undergo thorough reform, the European Community will rapidly be reduced to a free trade area.
Personally, I find some of the decisions adopted extremely excessive, if not rash, such as, for example, the proposal to open the Community to Turkey - a country which I respect and which it is right to respect, despite its differences from the European Community in terms of history, culture and politics and the concept of the State as well, quite apart from the issue of human rights - and these decisions are evidence of an organisation which is becoming increasingly more economic than political.
There are two alternatives: either the founding countries of the Community change direction, or else, slowly but surely, we will be forced to abandon all hope.
There is no longer even any question of the creation of a different State; it is history which must change course.
The Europe which we Europeanists dream of is a Europe of States, and it should therefore be no cause for concern to anyone who, and rightly so, believes strongly in national identity.
Nobody wants to eliminate the States: however, all these different national situations in the different States, which have reached the point where they are incapable of overcoming the challenges of the world today, must be adapted and tuned to something greater.
I should now like to touch on the vicious attacks on President Prodi, not only from the press but also within the political sphere.
There is no point in denying anything in this case either.
I am not passing judgement on President Prodi now, for it would not be appropriate to do so at this time, but I do feel that these attacks are evidence of strong criticism of a Commission line, a line which has been progressive and open.
It has sometimes been a little on the optimistic side, but it certainly represents progress.
Madam President, the fact that I am addressing Commissioner Barnier in this Chamber, with whom I have often had the opportunity for discussion in smaller meetings, gives me a positive feeling about tomorrow' s debate, but my view of the medium- and long-term progress of European development is pessimistic.
I feel that Parliament will be required to take courageous, decisive action in matters much more important than a resolution, if, as I fear, the agenda is not extended, and if, in the end, as the current state of affairs would suggest, an excess of caution results in a Conference which makes nothing more than cosmetic changes to the Treaties and avoids any substantial modifications.
Madam President, as far as the budget is concerned, it is becoming increasingly essential that we bring the Treaty up to date with the procedures.
The integration of the financial perspectives into the Treaty will thereby be a medium-term financial plan which will be agreed between Parliament and the Council.
This integration will create much more stability, as well as the legal certainty which Mr Colom i Naval, the permanent rapporteur for the financial perspectives, spoke of this morning.
Let us remember that the financial perspectives procedure has brought budgetary stability to the European Union.
Nevertheless, Parliament believes that the integration of the financial perspectives into the Treaty will mean that, as well as stability, there will be sufficient flexibility to allow for a review of those perspectives when necessary.
If we do not do this, we will run the risk of confusing the financial perspectives with the annual budgets.
This confusion will lead to conflict year after year.
With regard to the classification of expenditure, which this House has also long wanted to see, we must find an institutional point of balance which combines the European Parliament' s requests for a greater degree of codecision in budgetary matters with the defence of the privileged nature of certain expenditure which forms the basis of the European Union' s economic and social cohesion.
The European Parliament wants the Community budget to be financed by own resources rather than by contributions from the Member States.
The fiscal and budgetary autonomy of the European Union rests on this, as does, to a certain extent, its political autonomy.
However, let us remember that, if what we want is an autonomous financial system for the Union, we must at the same time create a fair tax system.
Progressiveness cannot only be based on expenditure.
Sooner or later we will have to be sufficiently progressive in terms of own resources as a basis for this fair tax system.
Madam President, we are usually very quick to criticise the Commission or the Council when they do not attend our debates, but this time, ironically, the finger seems to be pointing the other way.
At the very least, the two rapporteurs should have been present during the debate on their reports.
I am aware that these days are extremely tiring for all concerned, but duty comes before everything else.
I listened to Mr Segni' s speech.
Somewhat aided by the fact that he was speaking in Italian, I realised that he was not speaking on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, whose views are completely different from those he expressed and which I share.
We are on the brink of an historic occasion where the risks are great, but so are the opportunities.
We must be aware that this historic occasion provides us with the opportunity to enlarge a community of values and not merely orchestrate the geographical and territorial enlargement of an advanced economy which has raised the standard of living of our communities.
This is the real challenge.
Enlargement is thus our opportunity to change our operating rules and ensure that they are based on greater transparency and stronger guarantees of the rights of citizenship, and also streamline our decision-making.
The basic requirement we uphold is the need to confine unanimity to constitutional issues and to use qualified majority voting for all other matters.
In the very short space of time remaining, I would like to refer to paragraph 51, which puts forward the idea of our coming together with the national parliaments to examine the possibility of holding an Inter-Parliamentary Conference on the future strategies of the Union.
Clearly, a substantial amount of responsibility would fall to our President and to the French Presidency.
I am convinced that this opportunity for representatives of the national parliaments of both the Union countries and the candidate countries to meet and discuss future strategies and the implications of the Intergovernmental Conference is extremely valuable and must not be passed up.
Madam President, why is the gulf between the European Parliament and the European governments so wide?
There is an excellent resolution on the table which refers to the many necessary reforms.
Indeed, majority decision-making as a rule and reinforcement of the Commission and the European Parliament are essential in order for the enlarged Union to function.
Cooperation should be more flexible and each Member State must retain a Commissioner.
Unfortunately, the many sound proposals from Parliament are at odds with the willingness of the governments to extend the IGC agenda and reach compromises.
If the European governments do not change their attitudes soon, a treaty will be drawn up in Nice which guarantees to cripple the Union once it has been enlarged.
Over the past few years, many European government leaders have presented their own people with the view that the European Union is becoming too powerful and too bureaucratic and is taking away too much national sovereignty.
They have contributed to a climate of Euroscepticism where there is no room for compromise.
At the same time, the same politicians have decided in favour of a substantial enlargement, necessitating reforms which were declared taboo in the first place.
As such, many European politicians are hostage to their own rhetoric.
If the European government leaders are serious about new countries joining, they must display the necessary political courage and agree to far-reaching reforms.
We are the representatives of the people.
If the governments manage to narrow the gulf between themselves and Parliament, they will ultimately be able to narrow the gulf between themselves and their own people and, at the end of the day, this is what matters.
Madam President, aside from the letter of the report, I want to draw attention to a few of the numbers contained in it.
First number: 700.
Limiting the number of Members of the European Parliament to 700 would not be a cause for concern were it not that it would render our Parliament less representative.
By marginalising small countries, while at the same time allowing high electoral thresholds to be set up in the largest ones, this sordid electoral mechanism would prevent whole sections of European society from being represented any more in this Chamber.
We must reaffirm that it is our Parliament' s prime and absolute task to represent the people and the peoples of Europe in all their diversity.
Second number: two thirds.
Two thirds of the vote is the majority required for our Parliament to censure the Commission.
This very high threshold of two thirds is a sad and unique case.
For what European government can boast of being so safe from any real parliamentary control, of having such impunity?
We must create a formal symmetry.
If a simple majority is good enough for the investment of the Commission, then the same majority should suffice for a vote of no confidence.
The people' s representatives have the power to undo anything they have done.
That is the rule everywhere, and it must be the rule here too.
Third and last number: 2009.
The report proposes the year 2009 as the date for electing MEPs from transnational lists.
Now this is a case of either or: either our Parliament decides this measure is not a good one, which would mean abandoning it - even in 2009 - or, like the Greens, it must admit that such lists are vital if we want to create real families of thought in Europe, in which case this important political debate can begin by the time of the 2004 elections.
Otherwise we would be being neither lucid nor ambitious enough.
Nor does this report, which, without being bad, does not match up to the issues at stake, seem very lucid or ambitious.
In changing size, the European Union will change in nature.
So our continent will have to rethink its rules rather than simply tidy them up.
This timid IGC 2000 can in no way represent an end result, but only the first step towards a constitution.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, we should go back to basics and ask ourselves what makes the European Union different.
Over the centuries many attempts were made by some countries to dominate others.
Ideas may have varied according to the times and individual countries' interests, but the system stayed the same, with power for some and subjugation for others.
We suffered centuries of war and even destruction and ruin on several occasions.
Many times we had to start over and it was the last time this happened that the European idea came into being.
So what is different?
The answer is everything.
We have a system based on mutual freedom for everyone, instead of supremacy for some.
We have a framework agreed between nations and not one imposed on the nations.
We therefore have a permanent contract between free and sovereign states which are all equal.
Instead of changing majorities, we have the rules of a stable contract in which we are all minorities.
This is the secret of the unequalled peace and progress which we have enjoyed, based firstly on a common culture of human rights, democracy, the rule of law and free markets and, secondly, on strict mutual respect with no trampling over other countries.
The instruments which we use are procedural rules, unanimity or at least broad convergence, and substantive rules, concrete harmonisation policies and the promotion of economic and social cohesion.
The price is patience, which is a small price to pay for such great results!
We need to be patient with each other and in terms of time so that Europe can continue along the same lines.
We particularly need to resist the age-old temptation of wanting to impose ourselves on others, to break this contract between equals, for this has never led to union.
By cherishing the idea of union in Europe we are being realistic, not imposing a rose-tinted fantasy.
It would be wrong to strip away the rules of the game which have brought us so much success to date.
In my opinion, the motion for a resolution is a dangerous anti-Europe deviation, which completely alters the balance.
This would be a disaster for my own country, Portugal, as for other smaller or medium-sized Member States.
For Europe in general it would mean a crisis or breakdown.
We cannot have a Europe in which less rules over more, which gets annoyed but does not listen and which aims to replace a Treaty between states with a constitution imposed on the states.
We want an open Europe, not one tied in a straitjacket.
Finally, I must mention the idea of transnational European parties.
As a Conservative Christian Democrat, I stand as a witness against this.
My party, the Popular Party or CDS-PP, founded the PPE.
Some years ago we were expelled from the PPE because we advocated a referendum on Maastricht.
It is now our former Austrian companions from the Christian Democratic Union who are in difficulty because of elections in their country.
What a frightening idea of democracy!
We need to be careful, for federalism is so dazzling that it destroys with its hands those concepts which it asserts with its own mouth.
This is because it covets power and ignores partnership and we cannot go down this road.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, as far as I, and I believe the majority of my fellow delegates are concerned, the crunch question is whether a programme will be put forward at the end of the Intergovernmental Conference that creates the conditions we need to strengthen our own foundation and admit a further 12 States.
When I hear the ongoing debate and consider how much opposition there has been from the Council over the past few months, some members of which are barely prepared to go beyond the three "leftovers" , then I think it is hypocritical to conduct negotiations with the candidate countries at the same time.
Today' s statement by President-in-Office of the Council Gama has inspired me with a little more confidence, but I still see no evidence of political will on the part of the other Member States.
Our goal must be to equip our parliamentary representatives at the Intergovernmental Conference with a clear negotiating brief, which we will then also use as a yardstick for assessing the outcome of the Intergovernmental Conference.
In my view, it is crucial that we set down a clear marker for the proportional composition of a future European Parliament, subject to an upper limit of 700 Members.
Extending majority voting in the Council must lead to codecision rights for the European Parliament.
The Council must have open meetings when it takes on the role of legislator.
We need to clearly distinguish between competences at European and national level without delay.
The self-inflicted crisis in the Council is a matter of deep regret to me.
I would like to ask the Council how it proposes to pull off the stroke of excluding a certain Member State from taking part in discussions without any legal basis, when it needs this State' s support in order to achieve unanimity in the Council on Treaty amendments.
I cannot support the proposal in recital 29 of the report to make the procedure for suspending a Member State easier.
How I vote at tomorrow' s vote on this resolution will depend on the outcome of the vote on these issues.
Madam President, the IGC should prepare the EU for the reorganisation needed to bring about the complete process of enlargement that is in hand.
The most important consideration regarding enlargement in the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen report is increased flexibility.
Only differentiation within the EU can create the preconditions necessary for enlargement on such a massive scale.
It is important that the report proposes that closer cooperation should be facilitated.
The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party has recommended that the principle of flexibility should also be realised in the form of greater scope for cooperation for those countries that cannot or do not want to accept the Union' s statutes in their entirety.
This would facilitate and speed up enlargement of the Union.
In making its review the Group of the Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party states that flexibility might lead to a larger concentric Europe, composed of a federal core and a less integrated outer circle.
At this stage it is not necessary to adopt a precise position on how the Union should be differentiated.
It is enough for now that we create an institutional framework in which it is possible to deepen and expand the Union in practical terms.
I hope that Amendment No 154, which the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party has tabled regarding increased flexibility, will be adopted.
Madam President, the European Union is starting the necessary process of enlargement, initially involving thirteen new Member States, without defining what the Union is and even without knowing the size of its future territory.
This is causing a situation of uncertainty which could lead to the dilution of its political character into a union of national governments without the means to solve the internal problems of social cohesion and territorial balance or to take its place in the world according to its full political and economic weight.
As a Member for Galicia and a European citizen, I must express my disapproval of this legislative initiative from the Commission.
This disapproval does not relate so much to the issues dealt with in this initiative as to its fundamental failings which this House still has time to remedy.
How can this Parliament, which represents all European citizens, rule out its own full legislative initiative?
How can we, in the same context, not accept that the Commission President must be elected from among MEPs?
Why is the exercise before the Union of the powers of the national authorities, federal states and Autonomous Communities not recognised?
How can we deny the establishment of a European employment policy linked to the Structural Funds policy?
These questions are useful to highlight some of the grave deficiencies in the legislative proposal on reforming the Treaties.
Mr President, eastward enlargement is the foremost issue concerning the EU' s future.
The Swedish Christian Democrats think that the European Parliament must change a number of points in the proposal that has now been approved by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs.
I shall concentrate on these.
1) One Commissioner per Member State.
This concerns the Commission' s legitimacy, popular support and future.
If, in the future, there is no Commissioner for each Member State, the Council of Ministers may assume the Commission' s current role.
2) Six Members of the European Parliament per Member State, reflecting the political breadth and diversity in each Member State.
This is especially important in a situation where States such as Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, together with Slovenia, join the European Union after having previously been part of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia against their will.
3) No Europe-wide lists.
The distance from the voters would be too great.
4) A more flexible approach to a maximum of seven hundred Members of the European Parliament.
5) No financing by the EU of parties which operate at European level.
This would be an unwarranted use of resources and would make for a good deal of arbitrariness.
Party financing may be misused.
That is something of which we are well aware in today' s Europe.
6) The qualified majority in the European Council, as referred to in paragraph 8.1 of the resolution should be a two-thirds majority, not a simple majority.
7) The suspension of a Member State must be by unanimous agreement of the Member States, except for the State concerned.
Suspension is a serious measure.
8) In the future too, the EU should be dependent upon the Member States for financing.
9) There is no wording concerning the principle of subsidiarity and the clear distribution of competences.
There is a need for wording of this kind.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, what are the issues at stake in this Intergovernmental Conference?
Manifestly, the first and main issue is the quality of the decision-making process in the Union.
Here we attach the utmost importance to extending the scope of qualified majority voting.
If we were certain that tomorrow every decision could be taken by a qualified majority in the European Union, we would not have raised the question of closer cooperation.
But we have to acknowledge that undoubtedly we will also need this instrument.
That is what this Parliament said when it first stated its position and I think that in a way we have helped persuade the community of Heads of State and Government to listen to our refrain.
Of course we can only be delighted at this.
But today I want to address those MEPs who see, behind this closer cooperation, the risk of too far-reaching consultation between the large countries.
It seems to me that at present it is in the interest of all the members of the Union that any closer cooperation within the Union should be established on a basis of respect for the Union' s legal system and institutions.
To that end, let us authorise closer cooperation when one third of the Member States takes part or is involved, and let us authorise this closer cooperation by a qualified majority, after obtaining Parliament' s assent.
Tomorrow we will certainly have to consider the question of the democratic scrutiny of this closer cooperation, an area where our Parliament will have to play a major role.
So I understand why the Intergovernmental Conference will look into these questions and I am glad the discussions are thus going to the heart of the matter.
But you will find these same questions coming up again in other discussions you will be holding during the Intergovernmental Conference.
Let me make one more point before concluding, Madam President.
I want to sound the alarm about the progress in drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights we want to see incorporated in the Treaty.
It is most important to incorporate that Charter.
At a time when the values of the Union are at times being overturned or seem undermined, that Charter is coming at just the right moment; but it will be meaningful only if it is incorporated in the Treaty and has real substance, based on the Cologne mandate, the entire Cologne mandate, i.e. only if it includes economic and social rights.
Madam President, this is a strange, uncomfortable and schizophrenic report.
Parts of it are clearly crafted as helpful suggestions to the IGC; other parts form a list of pious hopes and hopeful wishes which are certain to be rejected by the Conference.
How much of this schizoid quality reflects the positions of the two rapporteurs is hard to estimate.
If so, I am sure that I can attribute the better parts to my friend and colleague Mr Dimitrakopoulos and the more unusual parts to Mr Leinen.
However, the majority of my Conservative colleagues have voted to reject the report and will vote accordingly in this House.
The Conservative delegation regards many of the ideas in the report as centralising, syndicalist, unnecessary and backward-looking.
Instead of examining new, flexible and radical approaches to an enlarged Union in the global market, the message of this report is: carry on regardless down the road from Maastricht and Amsterdam!
Nevertheless, in rejecting this report the Conservative delegation shows it too has a schizophrenic quality, since it therefore rejects the excellent amendment by Mr Duff, to give a legal opt-out to Member States, and that of my friend Mr Perry and others, to enable Parliament to put public money where its mouth is by saving wasteful expenditure entailed in the absurdity of these Strasbourg sessions.
That is the nature of democracy and democratic decisions.
They too are often strange, uncomfortable and schizophrenic, but they remain the best we have all the same.
Madam President, the report by the two rapporteurs is very ambitious, very ahead of the times, but it has two major defects, which ought to be corrected by the vote in plenary.
Firstly, to generalise the system of dual simple majority voting is not the panacea of the future integration of Europe.
A principle of that kind could induce public opinion in the Member States and the national parliaments to reject that system for the most sensitive issues which are in fact exceptions to the general rule.
It would be better to seek a compromise acceptable to all, as in the past.
It is a question of legitimacy and acceptability.
Secondly, Member States with a large population get more than their fair share.
The underlying principle of "one man - one vote" is unacceptable.
It conflicts with Article 190 of the Treaty which provides that the number of elected Members must ensure the appropriate representation of the peoples of the States brought together in the Community.
It is a question of equality and solidarity.
Finally, there is no serious argument to back up the thesis we keep being served up, namely that a Commission of more than 20 members would not work.
Equally, in the case of the Commission, let us avoid making numbers into an absolute principle.
On the contrary, if we want decisions proposed on the Commission' s initiative to gain wide support in all the Member States, it is vital for them all to be represented.
The important vote we will be holding tomorrow will, I hope, enable the European Parliament to put an end to this ambiguity and to make some adjustments.
Only a more politically realistic proposal will have a chance of being taken into consideration.
IGC 2000 is not the end of the story.
Madam President, at a time when the future of the European Union depends more than ever on the balance and smooth functioning of our institutions, I want to begin by thanking the two rapporteurs, Giorgos Dimitrakopoulos and Jo Leinen, for the high quality of their work.
We all agree today that we must adopt institutional and political reforms prior to any enlargement of the Union.
That is the challenge we have to meet at a moment when many of our fellow-citizens are beginning to feel doubts and see few political prospects.
Today the European Union which the founding fathers conceived, achieved and then bequeathed to us must evolve and change.
Europe is at a crossroads.
Either we content ourselves in future with being merely a free trade area, or we seek to construct a political Europe.
But let us make no mistake: if we choose to sit on the fence, we are likely to see the worst scenario.
A Europe with a single currency, but without its attributes of political power, would revert to being merely a geographical area, which would give free rein to national rivalries.
The time has come for Europe to be a power capable of genuine political expression, of sustaining a social project and framing a common foreign and defence policy.
It is up to us, the elected representatives of the people of Europe, to work towards improving the efficiency and democracy of our institutions.
But Europe will only be democratic if the people themselves determine the principles and rules of its organisation.
I am happy that the Dimitrakopoulos report takes this aspiration into account in the framework of a constitutional process aimed at simplifying and clarifying the Community treaties.
But I think we need to go further; we need a constitution, i.e. a basic law, so that Europe can assert itself as a genuine democratic society.
Thus the reform of the institutions is not only the condition for enlargement, it is also the condition for the survival of Europe.
Commissioner, I hope the representatives of the Member States will embark on real reforms and take the measure of the issues at stake in the Intergovernmental Conference, so as to make this century into the century of Europe.
Madam President, I would first of all like to thank both rapporteurs.
Long before the IGC was launched, the Dutch social democratic delegation had already taken an active interest in the IGC.
We have held large public debates in the Netherlands and have done a great deal of groundwork.
After all, the IGC should prepare the Union for enlargement, and this enlargement will require the current Member States to make sacrifices.
These sacrifices, however, are small, given the historic opportunity of unifying the East and the West in a secure Europe characterised by peace.
In addition, it should, of course, bring Europe closer to its citizens, because the distance between Brussels and our citizens is still far too great.
The IGC should therefore make up the democratic shortfall.
For this purpose, it is essential to extend majority decision-making to all legislation, except for constitutional matters, and have codecision power for Parliament, as well as the well-known double formula in the Council decision-making process.
Simply reducing a democratic deficit is not sufficient to improve contact with the citizen.
This is why we have specifically committed ourselves to a better and institutionalised social dialogue with non-governmental organisations, since they look after many of the citizens' interests.
This is provided for in Amendment No 162.
Another subject which is close to our hearts is that of making closer cooperation more flexible.
It is clear that the de facto veto, currently inherent in this procedure, must go.
Once enlargement has taken place, closer cooperation could do a great service to a Union containing a still greater diversity of Member States within its borders.
In our opinion, the report does not go far enough regarding another point, namely that relating to individual responsibility which must be granted by Commissioners.
We firmly believe that it must be possible for Parliament to issue a strong warning to a Commissioner who loses the confidence of Parliament.
In our opinion, such a procedure does more justice to a democratic balance between the institutions than the Prodi procedure, but unfortunately, the majority of MEPs considered this step a bridge too far.
Madam President, with regard to our Euro-Commissioner, we would ideally like to have one Commissioner per country.
We would accept a rota system for all states at a pinch, because we support the compromise made by the socialist group.
We think that, ultimately, our compromise has struck a sound balance between small and large Member States.
We hope that this will receive support from this Parliament.
Madam President, where should our travels in Europe take us?
To a European federal state with a strong centre and far-reaching competences, or should we carefully develop what has so far been the trademark of European integration and a guarantee of its success, namely a Union of Europe' s peoples and States?
To read the text of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, you would almost believe that the European federalists have already won the day: a Commission that does not contain representatives from every Member State, a Parliament in which even the representatives of the medium-sized States no longer carry any weight, and a Council that essentially bases its majorities on 51% of the total population of the Member States.
This would be a travesty, even for an ardent European.
The text we adopt tomorrow will, I hope, be a different one, a more balanced text that is geared to continuing teamwork between large and small States, and which continues to respect the distinguishing features of our European peoples and States, and therefore does not make even more demands of the citizens of Europe, who have enough problems with the degree of centralisation in Brussels as it is.
My second point is that I am hoping for a change to the Committee' s text.
Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen put forward a proposal in recital 29 to modify the procedure for suspending a Member State in the event of serious democratic and human rights violations.
Allow me to leave you in no doubt as to how the vast majority of people in my country, Austria that is, feel about such a development.
They are already learning, from bitter experience, what it is like when Community law in force is not adhered to, in the name of political correctness.
This does nothing to boost confidence in the central tenet of a united Europe.
A community of law must uphold its own law.
It is simply not true that the policies adopted towards Austria at present are only bilateral in nature.
Anyone still requiring confirmation of this fact need look no further than the speech made today by the President of this House.
How else are we to interpret Nicole Fontaine' s statement to the effect that she hopes that Austria will become a full member of the Union again one day?
What does that make us now?
Therefore let us dispense with hypocritical amendments to Articles 6 and 7 of the EU Treaty.
Let us abide by the law in force and handle the Austrians as required by the EU Treaty.
Inclusion, and not exclusion, is what we need!
Madam President, enlargement is important for the people of Europe.
We must therefore find a way of cooperating throughout Europe.
The accession negotiations are now under way.
It is therefore important that it should be possible to conclude the Intergovernmental Conference before the end of the year.
Both large and small States must be able to exercise influence in the future EU.
We must strike a balance.
This is necessary if our citizens are to have confidence in European cooperation.
If the composition of the European Parliament is to be adjusted, I therefore advocate a proportional, degressive reduction in the number of Members.
All present Member States must be included and make their contribution.
At the same time, the smallest States must be guaranteed a certain number of Members within the framework of the seven hundred seats we have set as a ceiling.
When it comes to votes in the Council, we must find a method of distributing votes which does not need to be renegotiated at each subsequent enlargement.
I therefore recommend a system which takes account of differences in the size of the population.
It is important that each country should have a Member in the Commission.
The Commissioners work for the whole of the Union and are, in fact, important if consensus is to be achieved between the Member States.
The Commission must therefore be able to draw upon knowledge and experience from all the Member States.
EU cooperation is, in the first place, a civil European project and ought to be distinguished from anything of a military nature.
The Member States do have different backgrounds where military alliances and neutrality are concerned.
In Cologne and Helsinki, great progress was made in terms of preparing ourselves for preventative crisis and conflict management.
It is therefore important that the Treaty should reflect the difference between civil and military cooperation.
A European military alliance should not, therefore, be created within the framework of the EU' s institutions but between individual States.
Military support of a kind which places States under an obligation to each other has no place in the EU' s Treaties.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, enlargement is the most crucial European issue as far as we are concerned.
It is now also at the top of the agenda prior to the Swedish Presidency.
We do not, however, want to see European cooperation cease or degenerate into bickering, which would be a risk if 30 countries could constantly use their vetoes.
Development of the Union can only seriously be accorded priority through also, at the same time, welcoming qualified majority voting in the majority of areas but excluding, for example, the area of new treaties.
We also want to see majority decision-making in regard to Article 289, because it would then be possible, where the European Parliament' s headquarters and meetings are concerned, to establish rules which would prevent the waste of human resources and tax revenue.
Swedish taxpayers, who also pay net amounts into the European Union, are in fact at a loss to understand the madness of travelling backwards and forwards with thousands of cases every month.
Perhaps it would be more efficient to have the offices in a pan-European caravan than to waste all these man-months, as we now do, upon plane journeys.
We have every respect for symbols of peace, but the billions spent on gadding off to Strasbourg could, of course, be spent instead on our neighbours in the East, who perhaps have more use for these "peace billions" than we do.
Finally, I want to thank the rapporteurs for a very good report and to express my hope that the Citizens' Charter will usher in the new Treaty.
I also want to end by expressing special thanks to Commissioner Barnier for being present throughout the debate and for his commitment to these issues.
In fact, he gives me hope and inspiration on many occasions when I think that the Member States are being both negative and unreasonable on a whole range of issues with which, as European citizens, we really have problems.
I would thank you, Commissioner Barnier, for your efforts which in fact help me to take an optimistic view of Europe' s future development.
Madam President, we have a very challenging task before us.
We have to find answers to the challenge of enlargement, but the Union at its present size also needs to re-establish the rules of the game and the decision-making process.
We have to strike a balance between efficiency, democracy and Member State equality.
Above all, we have to be able to restore confidence of our citizens in decision making in the European Union.
This will come about by increasing genuine transparency and by developing the way administration actually serves the people.
The Commission must be given support while it puts the changes into effect, but the Council and Parliament must also themselves be able to work to strengthen confidence among our citizens.
Both an enlarged Union, and one that is the present size, must ensure that decision making is mainly in the form of qualified majority decisions.
We have seen that matters of taxation, for example, have become stumbling blocks.
It is hard to understand why we cannot introduce a reasonable tax on capital in Europe.
At present, capital is like a dog off its leash.
We all have a lot to gain and protect in a common Europe.
We also have to cling to the notion of European solidarity for as long as possible in changing circumstances.
I cannot accept the idea that closer cooperation can be achieved on the strength of the vote of one third of the Member States.
In my opinion, we need more than that.
The Commission should also be as thorough as possible in the way it drafts topics for debate, and this is why in future there should also be a Commission Member representing each Member State.
The balance between the small and the large Member States must also be preserved in the Council so that double majority voting can never be acceptable under any circumstances.
Madam President, the constitutional questions we are debating today are highly controversial, as the vote in committee clearly shows.
In fact 12 Members voted for and 12 voted against.
Of the latter, 8 voted against and 4 abstained.
That is not something to be proud of.
But I find it reassuring that so many Members agreed that the length of the shopping list of proposals contained in the report' s 52 paragraphs and 58 sub-paragraphs is exaggerated and that, as things stand, there is a risk that the Intergovernmental Conference will not take it seriously.
But unlike Talleyrand, I cannot console myself with the idea that what is exaggerated is by the same token insignificant.
I want to dissociate myself from demands such as that we should cut my country' s delegation in the European Parliament by one third.
I know that by head of population the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has more representatives here than the large countries, but that is a primitive and premature method of calculation.
With 6 Members it is materially impossible to follow up all the dossiers that are crucial to our country.
Moreover, we cannot sit on all the committees.
It is easier to divide up the work and to specialise in a large delegation: even if the largest delegation, comprising 99 Members, was reduced by a third, they would still be able to share out the work.
For the time being, it is enough to propose that the seats in the European Parliament should be allotted on the basis of a degressive proportional system, with a minimum number of seats per Member State, while of course respecting Article 190 of the Treaty.
The idea of European lists is premature, if not hare-brained.
There can be no question of a majority of MEPs deciding the location of the seat of this Parliament here, against the views of the others: we must respect the Edinburgh compromise.
In the case of a qualified-majority Council decision, it is inconceivable to provide for a simple majority of Member States.
We must have a majority of two thirds of the Member States, even if that means providing at the same time for a simple majority of Member States representing a majority of the total EU population.
There can be no question of restricting unanimous Council voting to decisions of a constitutional nature.
We must also retain majority voting for fundamental questions, such as own resources, taxation and so forth.
I hope the idea of not allocating one Commissioner to each Member State is well and truly dead.
Finally, if we really need closer cooperation, it must involve at least half of the Member States, otherwise we risk ending up with something like the French Directory.
This document contains other incongruities too, especially in relation to the budget, which fortunately have no chance of success in the Council and even less chance of being ratified by national parliaments that have any self-respect.
I will not vote for this shopping list unless it is amended along the lines I have just set out.
Madam President, I wonder which of these is more serious: what the Council has done by means of an intergovernmental method, once again, to reform the Treaties and an extraordinarily limited agenda for this IGC, bearing in mind the challenges facing us, or the report that we are going to adopt tomorrow in this House.
I believe that our report is more serious.
How can it be argued that this report is less serious when it proposes exactly what we need?
It speaks of constitutionalising the European Union, it proposes suitable changes for its institutions, it requests an extension of policies and, above all, through its proposals, it tries to put the Union in a position to confront such important challenges as, firstly, globalisation and, secondly, the new economy which we have just discussed in Lisbon.
I do not believe that the proposals which we make in this report are extravagant.
They are consistent with what this Parliament has always demanded: more democracy and efficiency for the European Union.
Furthermore, in this respect, I believe that the effort of the rapporteurs in drawing up the original draft and seeking a compromise through the amendments will lead to a position which should be taken into account by this Parliament and by the national governments.
Madam President, I would also like to welcome the efforts of the Portuguese Presidency at the moment, and ask certain governments - I am not going to say which ones - to be a little bit more generous when it comes to European construction.
Madam President, enlargement and its strategic, political and economic consequences for the European Union cannot remain issues undiscussed by the public or viewed exclusively from the national perspective.
This is why the debate caused by the presentation of the European Parliament' s position on this promising Intergovernmental Conference is vital in understanding this new phase of European construction which is both risky and open to question.
We are pleased that this contribution from Parliament stresses, as the main themes and guiding principles, the democratisation, efficiency and greater supervision of the European institutions, exactly where the respective deficits have been most felt and where the risks of disintegration, caused by the significant increase in the number of Member States, were greatest.
Although the majority of the proposals aim to enable and reinforce the joint progress and the integration process in this new and complex framework, and these are to be applauded, there are others which are not so great.
I am specifically referring to the European lists for this Parliament or to the rules on decisions by qualified majority or on closer cooperation, for example, in which a fairer balance between the Member States, more in accordance with the representation and legitimacy of the respective bodies, could be attempted.
We fortunately have the opportunity to improve these points tomorrow in plenary.
As for the countries which were for years subjected to forced and authoritarian integration and which are now knocking on our door, attracted by the success of our joint experiment, we must receive them with our house in order and operating properly.
There must also be no doubt about everyone' s participation in the search for the best solutions for all and about the primacy of the values of justice, democracy and solidarity within these countries.
I warmly congratulate the rapporteurs on their work.
President-in-Office, Commissioner Barnier, I must start my intervention with the same question as Mr Carnero Gonzlez.
I wonder why, as a committed Europhile, I find myself disagreeing in this debate with many other committed Europhiles and specifically the rapporteurs.
In my opinion, the grounding of the European project in the dual legitimacy of a union of peoples and a union of States is not reflected in the end result of this report' s proposals.
At a time when the European Parliament should be achieving a consensus which could act as an important reference, politically speaking, for the Intergovernmental Conference, our position is cause for regret.
We hope that certain amendments will be approved tomorrow.
These are essential to guarantee a balance between small and large Member States and even between the dual legitimacy of a union of peoples and a union of States.
We therefore hope to have reason to vote for this report tomorrow.
We will if this House approves a set of just six or seven amendments which we feel are essential to ensure that this issue is considered not from a position of national egoism but from one which defends the coherence and solidarity of the European project.
My second point is directed at the President-in-Office.
We were puzzled about what Mr Gama said, in his initial intervention, on the current state of the work in the IGC.
We are well aware of the Portuguese presidency' s determination.
I would therefore like to encourage the presidency to continue working to ensure that the Member States understand how vital it is that more questions are decided by qualified majority and that there is greater flexibility in EU decision-making.
I would also encourage you to ensure that the IGC agenda is extended to questions which we regard as essential, such as the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
We hope that this can be included in the Treaty as, if so, not only would we be making a significant contribution to the EU' s future but we would also bring ourselves closer to the people at this politically important time.
We must now reaffirm once again the community of values which will be enshrined by this Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Congratulations, Mr President-in-Office.
Madam President, this is an extremely interesting debate.
I am also grateful for the many suggestions put forward for the report compiled by myself and Mr Dimitrakopoulos.
It is clear that "Operation Intergovernmental Conference" is an extremely difficult one, but I also see that everyone is taking the trouble to reach a compromise, because we must move the European project forward.
Parliament must be a driving force in this.
Our demands must not be more conservative than those of the European Commission or of individual Member States.
That is not on!
Our role is to be the driving force behind further European unification, and that is the spirit in which this parliamentary report, which we are to vote on tomorrow, has been compiled.
I believe we have struck a balance between Europe of the States and Europe of the citizens.
We are the citizens' chamber;
Parliament is the chamber of the citizens, the Council of Ministers is the chamber of the States.
We have not struck the right balance yet.
After all, Parliament is excluded from a whole range of important issues that parliaments normally decide on; issues pertaining to legislation, the budget, and to codecision concerning the nomination of individuals appointed to institutions.
Therefore I hope that this Intergovernmental Conference will use the opportunity to at last restore the balance between the two institutions, Parliament and the Council that is, and to give Parliament more powers.
I too feel that it is extremely important to strike a balance between the large and small countries.
This is a very sensitive issue, which we must take into account, and I feel that everyone has endeavoured over the past few weeks to strike this balance.
We will see that small and large countries alike will enjoy equal rights where the composition of the Commission is concerned, and that the double majority in the Council, which we are proposing, will favour the small countries.
There will be far more small countries than large countries in the enlarged Union.
When the support of the majority of the States is required, then the small countries will in fact be very much at an advantage, because it will not be possible to reach any kind of decision unless a large number of them support it.
I can also see that we are favouring the small countries in applying the degressivity factor to the distribution of seats in Parliament, so that the number of MEPs is suitably representative.
The European Union is not just an economic community.
We are also a community of values.
The European Union must also defend itself against forces that are injurious to the European spirit, and that abuse it.
We know who the populists are, and the nationalists and the racists who are to be found in many European countries, and if we are a political union then we must also have the instruments we need to implement sanctions and measures, both at party and government level.
We have an excellent report for voting on tomorrow.
I would like to thank the Portuguese Presidency, which has been most cooperative.
I would expressly like to commend them for this.
I would also like to thank the Commission and Commissioner Barnier, who is always very approachable and cooperative, as I would like to thank my colleagues on the Committee and my co-rapporteur.
I believe that tomorrow, Parliament will adopt a position that will afford us a prominent role at the Intergovernmental Conference and also lead this European Treaty to success.
Madam President, with your permission I should like to use this brief opportunity at the end of this debate to respond to something which was raised in a point of order at the start of this sitting.
I consider this to be the Council' s legitimate right.
Comments were made about the Council' s absence during the address by the Austrian President to this Parliament.
I must say firstly, to clarify matters, that the Council presidency was not supposed to be present nor was this Parliament' s understanding.
We did not have any indication from the President of this House that we should attend for what was purely a parliamentary matter.
Secondly, I must say that, on questions of political responsibility, the Council refuses to be given lessons and be subjected to pressure by something that has much more to do with the internal chicanery of Portuguese national politics than properly with matters of substance.
In my opinion, this House has ended up being used as a kind of platform for political provocation and we will not accept this situation.
There is a clear boundary around the work of the Portuguese presidency with regard to the functioning of the institutions and the role of Austria in these institutions.
This was totally obvious from my intervention in this House when this issue was first debated.
Within the European Union we have met all the requirements allowing Austria to act and participate fully in the European institutions and in their own functioning as a country.
We are therefore not confusing any of our positions and we refuse, due to a mere internal political provocation, to consider in this debate issues which have nothing to do with the European Parliament and the European institutions.
Moving on now to the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report, I must say firstly that I have the greatest respect for the work carried out by the two rapporteurs.
This is a report of great depth and vision but, conceivably, it might not be the subject of consensus in Council, which would allow it to represent a step forward in the enlargement of the Union.
However, I must repeat that I have great respect for the work carried out as it provides a certain vision of Europe and of what European ambition must be.
I wonder, like everyone else - and we will probably have the opportunity to consider this in more detail during the debate within the IGC - whether the conditions exist within this framework to achieve the ambition expressed in this report, particularly by the deadline.
I wonder whether we can close an IGC such as we all want, by the end of this year, with such a high level of ambition in terms of reform.
This point is very important.
This House must also consider, in voting on this report, whether or not the set of proposals which it contains is sufficiently realistic about what can be approved by the end of this Conference.
This is regardless of the excellent quality of the proposals, as I have said, and the vision of the future which they provide.
We must realise that the European Union, being governed as it is by rules of efficiency, democracy and transparency, must always consider, as stated by Mr Poos, the problem of whether public opinion will systematically accept all the reforms to be made.
There are fifteen parliaments to which we must answer and which must ratify this Conference.
If one of these fifteen does not ratify the IGC, then we will be faced with a European crisis.
I hope that the people will realise that the work we are doing in the IGC is serious, realistic and responsible.
We do not want this to become a fatuous exercise which may tomorrow have a negative effect on the whole reason for its existence, namely the expectation that the EU will modernise and reform in order to make it compatible with the future enlargement which may know no bounds.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, at the end of this debate, after listening to each and every parliamentary speaker with the attention they deserved and before the extremely important votes you will be holding tomorrow on the various proposals, I want once again to thank the two rapporteurs, Jo Leinen, who is present here, and Mr Dimitrakopoulos, for the extremely thorough and useful job they have done.
As I pointed out this morning, they have sought the greatest possible convergence between the Commission and the European Parliament, in order to imbue these negotiations with the political impetus they need.
Following on from what Mr Seixas da Costa said, let me also say, and I can testify to this, that these negotiations conducted under the Portuguese Presidency have indeed, as the Portuguese Minister just said, been conducted with great authority, realism and pragmatism.
From that point of view, as I had hoped, the Portuguese Presidency has proved itself to be in no way an interim or secondary presidency.
It has an extremely important role to play and it really is playing it, in order to make the necessary progress before handing over to the French Presidency.
And from that point of view, I want to thank the Council.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I just want to make three comments at the conclusion of this debate.
Firstly, many speakers discussed the question of the equilibrium between what are termed the large and the small states.
We are well aware that this equilibrium is both necessary and difficult to achieve.
It is necessary because, since 1957, all the states are recognised as equal, as having equal sovereignty; but at the same time it is difficult to achieve because they do not all have the same size of population and because, out of respect for democracy, we must by one means or another take account of the fact that the number of citizens differs from country to country.
What I mean to say is that for its part the Commission has sought to establish this equilibrium in the proposals it put forward on 26 January, and which it has defended week after week, as indeed it did on the double majority question.
One way of achieving an equilibrium is for qualified-majority voting always to secure the support of at least a majority of states and half the population.
We even went a little further on an issue which has given rise to much comment and at times to anxiety, namely the Commission.
We have gone beyond the search for an equilibrium and proposed an egalitarian solution in relation to the composition of the Commission.
And to those who are worried, let me say again that I have seen no sign of any proposal that any Member State should not have a Commissioner.
What we proposed, let me repeat, is one Commissioner per Member State, but with two options.
I would like you to consider these options carefully, and indeed we have the time to carefully consider the consequences of these options between now and the end of the year.
The first option is one Commissioner per Member State on a permanent basis, all sitting at the same time, but with a Commission which will one day have 30 or 35 Commissioners, which will inevitably mean a hierarchy within the College.
The second option is a Commission with one Commissioner per Member State, but not all sitting at the same time, which would mean the Commission would remain more collegiate by nature.
That, ladies and gentlemen, remains our aim: to establish an equilibrium between the small and the large states.
In that regard, I share the concerns expressed by a number of speakers.
Second concern: the role of the European Parliament as the driving force, as referred to by Jo Leinen.
As I said this morning, I really believe that we, and you, ladies and gentlemen, during your term of office, must spend some time explaining these European issues not just in your constituencies, your countries, but everywhere else too, to all the citizens, and as often as possible.
Opportunities must also be created to convince and speak to the national parliaments.
President Napolitano proposed the idea of an interparliamentary conference.
At his invitation I myself took part in a meeting between the national parliaments and the European Parliament, where I found a great deal of interest expressed.
The Commission will be prepared to take part in any exercise aimed at enhancing this dialogue and this mutual understanding between the national parliaments, which we need in order to ratify a genuine reform, and the European Parliament.
Lastly, I heard Mr Poos say earlier that this IGC 2000 was not the end of the story.
Of course we know that history will not stop at the end of the year 2000 and that there will be further institutional changes.
But let me state quite emphatically and formally that, after the end of the year, we will not be returning to some of the important issues under consideration during these negotiations.
These issues are: the composition of the Commission, the scope of qualified-majority voting, the composition of the Court of Auditors and the Court of Justice and the voting system.
One way or another, these questions will be settled at the end of the year and they will be settled for the long term, the very long term.
So we must take the time to reflect carefully about what we are doing.
There is no way that later, when we have 20, 25 or 30 Member States, we will be able to do what we did not manage to do either in Amsterdam or today, this year, for lack of political will.
So I hope that together, working with the Council, we will manage to give a sufficiently strong political impetus so that in the final analysis, at the end of this year, we succeed with these negotiations, rather than merely concluding them, and that together we demonstrate a collective political courage that goes beyond considerations based merely on caution or national interests.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Famine in Ethiopia
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the famine in Ethiopia.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, we can all remember the pictures of the famine in Ethiopia in the 1980s.
We can also remember the drought in Africa in the 1990s, which affected around ten countries.
Yet we must also remember that we managed to get nearly four million tonnes of food to sub-Saharan Africa thanks to action by the international community.
This was partly in response to media coverage, which is playing an increasingly important role.
We must realise that, notwithstanding the crisis situations which now exist, the international community has taken objective action in response.
This has probably not been adequate and not what we would have liked it to be, but at least the international community has adopted an objective attitude.
Within the international community, either individually or through the European Union as a whole, the European countries have made an important contribution.
We must remember this, now that the crisis in Ethiopia is occurring again due to drought.
The European Union is keen to ensure that this situation does not worsen and is trying to mobilise all possible means to lessen its effects.
Certain instruments are currently working effectively at both EU level and in the role played by the EU within international organisations.
This intervention is very important in tackling the problem of nearly 16 million people currently at risk throughout this area.
Commissioner Patten will explain, at the appropriate moment in this debate, the actions which the Commission has planned or has been developing.
These actions are very important and have been implemented in time.
The decisions were also taken at the right time.
Both the Directorate-General for Development and ECHO have already sent enough food to satisfy the most urgent needs.
At this precise moment, the Executive Director of the World Food Programme is in Addis Ababa for discussions with the Ethiopian Government on this issue, which involves technical and practical problems in transporting the food.
We cannot separate from this issue the current political and military position in Ethiopia.
We must be aware that this situation, which is in itself extremely serious due to the drought, is currently being made worse precisely because of political and military circumstances which are hindering the distribution of aid.
In particular, means of transport may be lacking because they are being used for purposes other than those for which they are intended.
As I said, the European Union has been monitoring this situation.
In the General Affairs Council the day before yesterday the Commission presented a report on the current situation in the Horn of Africa and specifically tackled one point of the humanitarian situation.
However, these concerns are the centre of attention not only for the Commission but also for the Council.
A meeting was held yesterday in Brussels of a group of experts specifically to analyse the best ways of tackling this situation.
There were representatives from ECHO, the Directorate-General for Development and the Member States of the European Union.
This meeting was preceded by one with the Ethiopian Ambassador to ensure the most effective coordination of the aid and support which the European Union can mobilise, both overall and in terms of that from individual Member States.
To conclude, the situation in the Horn of Africa, in both political and humanitarian terms, is at the centre of our concerns.
On Monday in the General Affairs Council we had a debate on this subject at which the Council' s Special Envoy was present.
He gave a presentation on the situation and its gravity.
The European Union approved in this same Council a set of recommendations which are to be added to all the political actions which the Union has been developing, particularly since last year, following the severest onslaught in the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia.
We are monitoring this issue.
Unfortunately, sometimes we cannot react as rapidly as we would like to the various situations of humanitarian need and shortage.
However, we are watching this issue and we hope that the attention raised by this debate may itself also help to mobilise public opinion on such a serious problem.
I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this debate - grateful but sad that the debate is necessary at all.
I am standing in for my colleague, Commissioner Nielson, who would have liked to have been able to respond himself.
For me there is an awful sense of dja vu - or perhaps I should say dja entendu - about this debate today.
Over a decade ago, from 1986 to 1989, I was my country' s development minister.
I know that there are a number of honourable Members in this House who have done the same job for their own countries.
I was speaking in similar debates then, tackling similar crises in the Horn of Africa.
I am afraid the story is grimly familiar: there are military conflicts, there is environmental degradation, there is drought, and sometimes there have been - and this was especially true in the past - extremely ill-judged policies.
It is a lethal mix.
It is capable of producing hunger and misery on a massive scale.
We face the same old frustrations, as I said in the Chamber yesterday.
Despite all the problems we will, in the end get help to the starving, never quite as fast as we would like, but faster than used to be the case.
So we improve our capacity to deal with the humanitarian problems in spite of the difficulties.
But alas we are still incapable of preventing the humanitarian problems arising in the first place - very often problems with largely political causes.
That is the frustration.
Let me set out for honourable Members what we are doing to alleviate the present crisis.
There are currently two Commission teams in Ethiopia: one from ECHO and one from the Food Security Unit of our Directorate-General for Development.
They will be making recommendations on our future efforts.
The Ethiopian Government has asked for 821 000 tonnes of food aid, 25% more than in recent years.
This amount is nearly covered by existing pledges by the international community.
The Commission has programmed the delivery of 283 000 tonnes and we are about to take decisions on delivering an additional quantity of up to 260 000 tonnes.
Let me also correct an inaccuracy that is circulating as a result of an Oxfam statement which claimed that the Commission provided only 50 000 tonnes to Ethiopia last year.
The real figure is more than three times that.
The deliveries this year come on top of a quarter of a century in which the Commission has been involved in providing food assistance to Ethiopia.
During that time nearly 40% of our total aid to Ethiopia has been in food assistance or food security programmes: some EUR 875 million' s worth, EUR 250 million in the last four years alone.
That is the background.
It is important to be aware of it.
There have been a number of allegations about an inadequate European response to the crisis.
There is an admirable letter in the London newspaper, The Independent, by the honourable Member, Mrs Kinnock, who knows a very great deal about the Horn of Africa, in which she sets out the real facts.
I hope that letter gets wider circulation.
One of the things that she said in her letter - and I guess she speaks with almost more authority on this subject than anyone else - is: "The European Union, together with Member States, remains the biggest donor of food aid to Ethiopia" .
She then argues: "This is not 'visible' since it is directed through the government, the World Food Programme, the Red Cross, NGOs and others."
It is important to remember that point.
What matters most is not to rake over these old controversies.
What matters most is what we are doing right now to get help to the starving.
I want to remind Parliament that total Commission food aid, now being off-loaded, shipped or procured, amounts to over 282 million metric tonnes.
An EC food aid shipment of 30 000 tonnes channelled through the World Food Programme arrived in Djibouti port last weekend.
A further shipment of over 16 000 tonnes through EuronAid is due to arrive on Sunday.
This will be followed by further shipments through Djibouti and Berbera in view of the limited port-handling capacity.
Total shipments from all donors expected to be offloaded between now and July amount to 504 000 metric tonnes.
This quantity should be sufficient to meet immediate needs.
Total donor pledges, as I said earlier, are over 800 000 metric tonnes.
So that is what we are doing.
We will continue to devote our full attention to this crisis until it is over, and our people in ECHO on the ground will continue to work tirelessly to get help to where it is needed.
We are facing a major problem posed by the lack of adequate port facilities for food-aid deliveries, not least because of the non-availability of the Eritrean ports at Assab and Massawa, which means that only Djibouti and to a lesser extent Berbera can be used.
Djibouti is expected to be congested with the arrival of 600 000 metric tonnes over the next three months.
We are looking urgently for alternatives, including better use of the Port of Berbera through rapid improvements to the road from Berbera into Ethiopia.
We are also considering using the Port of Sudan.
Road improvements are under way on the Sudanese side and roads on the Ethiopian side are reported to be quite good.
As my friend said in opening this debate, of course there are problems because of the conflict zone and I just want to repeat what I said at the outset.
I have had to speak in too many debates like this dealing with the consequences of crises like this, in the Great Lakes, in Ethiopia, in the Sudan and now in Ethiopia again.
I repeat, we are better at delivering assistance now than we were a decade ago, but it is intensely frustrating that all the assistance should be required in the first place.
It is intensely frustrating that as millions starve, governments spend small fortunes on guns and weaponry to wage war against each other when the only war they should be waging is a war against starvation, a war for food security, a war against poverty and environmental degradation, a war in which we are morally bound to help them.
It follows therefore that as we combat the hunger, we should also lend our full support to those who fight for peace.
We give our whole-hearted backing to the efforts of all of those, including the OAU and the European Presidency' s Special Envoy, Ambassador Serri, who worked for a peaceful settlement to regional conflicts.
They will have our unstinting assistance.
I am afraid that I should add that experience suggests that they need our prayers as well.
Madam President, I wish to begin by welcoming Commissioner Patten' s statement, which sets out the truth about our European assistance.
Once again, we see the scenes on our TV screens of starving children in Ethiopia and we remember the horrors of the last famine in the Horn of Africa.
Once again, we have pop stars and celebrities criticising the institutions of Europe and national governments for doing too little too late.
It is amazing how quickly some people become experts when a situation like this arises and they can see some publicity, without knowing more of the background to the overall position.
Somalia is war-torn into small fiefdoms, which makes it extremely difficult for anyone - institutions or NGOs - to deliver food aid to the starving people.
Who does one negotiate with in such a situation?
Ethiopia is engaged in a border dispute with Eritrea, which means most of the manpower is tied up on a war front and much-needed food is being diverted in both countries to feed soldiers rather than starving children.
Of course we must do everything in our power to alleviate famine.
However, where countries are at war, all our aid must be humanitarian and channelled through NGO organisations to ensure that aid goes to the starving people and not to the war front.
We must watch the situation in Eritrea and balance humanitarian aid there, if required.
We desperately want these two countries to sign a peace agreement through the efforts of the OAU so that we can resume full development aid to both countries.
I recently spent a week in both Ethiopia and Eritrea.
I visited refugee camps in both countries and saw for myself the hardship and the poverty people are suffering.
It is not true to say that Ethiopia has not been crying for help for food aid over the past two years, but the war situation has blurred the vision of many looking on.
When I was there they were pleading for help.
I saw children with serious malnutrition and in need of health care, as well as food and proper shelter.
I saw families living in caves, the walls running with water, and listened to the hacking coughs of children racked with fever.
It looks bad on TV; it is a hundred times worse when you stand amongst it, when people are in such dire situations.
However, I saw food aid being delivered in Eritrea by German NGOs to a camp of 16 000 people, spread over 7 kilometres in case of bombing raids.
I watched two strong men lifting 50-kg bags on to women' s backs and saw them stagger off to their plastic shelters kilometres away.
I saw children aged eight walking eight kilometres out and eight kilometres back to get water.
They were the lucky ones: they were the ones with food.
We never seem to learn a lesson from the past.
It should not be TV cameras and pop stars who alert us to starvation and drought: there should be a proper monitoring system in the sensitive areas of the African continent.
Perhaps this could be built into Commissioner Patten' s rapid reaction unit we heard of yesterday.
We must have action and we must have action decisively and urgently.
Madam President, I gladly concur with the previous speakers, Mr Patten and Mr Corrie.
We all witnessed the fight against hunger ten years ago.
We subsequently visited many projects and saw many things, such as very expert local farmers who were involved in reconstruction projects both in Eritrea and Ethiopia.
I find Ethiopia' s criticism hard to take: Europe undertakes too little, you need to send food.
Meanwhile the logistical capacity, such as lorries, roads and money, is used to wage a regional war.
The least both parties could do is to impose an absolute freeze on military activity.
If we talk about distributing food fast to the right places, then these lorries are needed, and these lorries were the force behind the movement which now leads Ethiopia and the movement which leads Eritrea.
Both have a great deal of logistical experience, expertise and know-how.
If they really channel their energies - and want to channel their energies - into what is available at this stage, if they want to make their ports and roads available, their capacity would be enormous.
According to them, we are entirely to blame.
But there is huge responsibility on the part of Ethiopia and Eritrea, and they should not try to throw it back at us using a cheap marketing trick.
They are jointly responsible.
Put a freeze on the military trade, try to reach a peace agreement and meanwhile, deploy your military lorry capacity and manpower where they are needed.
My second point concerns food.
There is enormous pressure to send food fast, and I mean fast.
Experience has taught us that things can go very far wrong depending on how food is distributed, and it could well end up sitting in the warehouses.
I would suggest looking at all the options - this will certainly be done by the monitoring clubs of the EU now in Ethiopia.
Is there anything for sale locally in the region?
We were right to turn our food aid policy round.
We should not send our surpluses there but examine whether anything can be bought locally.
After all, anything we can get and arrange there will help their economy and will prevent the local situation from being distorted.
Because, ultimately, that is what causes the structural hardship which accompanies these wars.
I hope that the early warning facility, which involved a great many experts, will also be built into our ability to receive signals at an earlier stage.
It is not easy.
Everyone knows that, but it could be an enormous bonus in removing the image of inadequacy when we handle such situations.
Ethiopia and Eritrea bear the ultimate responsibility.
I give my full backing to any action undertaken by the Commission on this score.
Mr President, Commissioner Patten wonders why Africa' s fateful history keeps repeating itself - with good reason.
Millions of people are again threatened with starvation.
This is not just caused by extreme drought.
The blame lies mainly with the unusually irresponsible leaders who prioritise the fight for a dry piece of land over the suffering of their own people.
Surely it is absolutely appalling that the governments of poverty-stricken countries such as Ethiopia and Eritrea buy arms on a massive scale instead of building up sufficient food reserves.
The blinkered Ethiopian government, in particular, contributes through its obstinacy to the suffering of its own people.
How else can you explain the fact that Ethiopia rejected the offer to use the ports of Massawa and Assab?
As a result, aid is now unable to reach a large part of its own population.
The Organisation of African Unity and the European Union must exert maximum pressure on the governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea to settle their dispute in Algiers, and aid workers must gain safe access to the population without delay.
An Ethiopian Minister has said that the international community does not spring into action until the skeletons appear on television.
He failed to mention that these macabre images are not only due to a lack of rain but mainly to a lack of proper leadership.
I am pleased that Commissioner Patten has addressed the criticism to the effect that European aid is inadequate.
Despite this, I would like to ask him what lessons he has learnt from how Europe responded this time round.
It is difficult not to despair in the face of the misery in the Horn of Africa.
We should nonetheless not lose hope.
Nature can only destroy where people fail.
After all, war and mismanagement are down to people.
Africa' s fateful history does not have to repeat itself, provided that people' s lives take priority over the feuds among its shameless leaders.
Mr President, Commissioner, it is terrible and disappointing for mankind that every now and again we hear these cries of pain from Africa begging for food and water, in the 21st century.
Why do we still allow this to happen?
Do we not have a conscience?
Every day the European Union provides less funding, less aid, in global terms, to the poor countries of Africa.
So how can we be surprised at this situation?
How can it be that we have warehouses full of surplus food which we are obliged to destroy when it rots away pointlessly or when it does not meet the conditions for consumption which we demand?
There are reasons to justify this, but none of them justifies the death of a single person from starvation.
It is not true that we show solidarity.
No.
All we do is try to put the fire out with occasional aid, without a clear or decisive policy for prevention although we know perfectly well that famine in Africa, and in the third world in general, happens periodically.
I hope that these thousands of tonnes of food aid provided do not silence the media and that they continue to report on the tragedy in Africa.
I am not saying anything new.
It has been said a million times and it will be said again, but today I am speaking from the heart and I feel Africa' s pain as if it were my own.
When will we have a Marshall Plan for Africa?
To this end, I propose that there be set up a prestigious and independent committee of international experts to assess the situation together with the international organisations and to implement a series of urgent proposals and initiatives for food and health aid, acting immediately, planning for the future and putting all our humanitarian weaponry into the hands of the non-governmental organisations.
Mr President, the situation in the Horn of Africa, and particularly in Ethiopia, is reaching a level of drama rarely exceeded.
It requires from the international community, and particularly the European Union, a corresponding level of attention and aid in order to prevent an unparalleled human catastrophe.
Action is already being taken, like the food aid which the European Union is providing, as mentioned just now by Commissioner Patten.
Yet we cannot relax.
We also have to overcome all the difficulties on the ground in getting food and medicine to the starving and dying people and children, and as quickly as possible.
We must therefore firmly stress to the governments in the region, bearing in mind the political and military situation, that they must allow and ensure rapid movement and access by the international organisations to the areas where these people are gathered.
They must also guarantee that this aid reaches those for whom it is really intended.
It is essential that these international organisations, such as the World Health Organisation, UNICEF and the FAO in particular, act together and with all the speed and efficiency which the situation demands.
They must deliver the food and medical aid but they must also take steps to re-establish the primary sector which is decisive in this type of economy, in order to guarantee a sustainable and medium-term solution.
This may be achieved by sending technicians and experts who can set up projects in this area.
The gravity of the situation and the need for our solidarity with these people to result in exceptional and priority action lead me finally to ask the Commission, and particularly Commissioners Patten and Nielson, to keep us regularly and closely informed about how the situation is developing and especially the measures which they intend to use or are developing to ease this situation.
Mr President, the Ethiopian government has blamed the international community for not being sufficiently alert in its aid efforts to feed its hungry population.
The donors, including the European Union, are said not to have kept their promises.
I share the Commissioner' s view that the reproach made by Addis Ababa is misplaced to say the least.
Misplaced because this statement is made by a government which has been embroiled in an absurd war over borders with its neighbour, Eritrea, for two years now.
Hundreds of millions of dollars, desperately needed for social provisions and increasing food production, have already been pumped into the war machine and, at the time when the Ethiopian Minister for Foreign Affairs was heaping abuse on the international community, reports were circulating that his government had bought a military aircraft from the Russian Republic.
It is high time that the Ethiopian government faced up to its responsibility and made every effort to end the war with Eritrea.
It could then focus its attention on the economic and social development of the country and so be able to prevent famines such as these.
But also, and I would like to make this quite clear, the aid industry should stop blaming the international community unilaterally and, in this way, stop providing the local regime with an alibi.
Emergency aid is absolutely necessary and must be increased, but development aid to both warring governments must be combined with accepting and implementing the OAU peace agreement.
As a token of goodwill, the Ethiopian leader could in the meantime begin by accepting the offer of a humanitarian corridor from his Eritrean colleague, or could the pride and ego of one man get in the way once again of the interests of millions of his people?
Mr President, famine and Ethiopia: these are two words sadly etched in our memories.
In the Horn of Africa, which has become the site of every conceivable scourge, 16 million victims of famine, of which 8 million are in Ethiopia, are awaiting aid.
In Ogaden, the most hard-hit region in south-east Ethiopia, there has been no rain for three years, to the point that the notion of dry seasons and wet seasons is now devoid of all meaning.
So of course we have to react, and do so quickly, and unfortunately we know all too well that the price of our procrastination and delays is paid in human lives.
At the same time, let me thank the Council and the Commission for what they have already done and for the information they gave us a short while ago.
Of course the 800 000 tonnes of emergency aid promised by the international community must be delivered as soon as possible.
But at the same time, the countries in the region must do their utmost to facilitate this delivery: by opening up the ports, supply routes and infrastructures.
Nonetheless, in a region torn apart by a rearguard conflict, this crisis leaves a particularly bitter taste, because every penny paid to buy a gun, to buy ammunition, aggravates an already precarious economic, social and nutritional situation.
We must demand that Eritrea and Ethiopia freeze their military activities so that all the assets, all the logistical and human capabilities of these countries are put at the service of their peoples.
The sound of guns has for far too long drowned out the cries of the hungry.
That is why we must appeal to the reason of the Ethiopian and Eritrean leaders and call on them to put an end to the conflict, to reach rapid agreement on the technical arrangements for a ceasefire under the OAU peace plan.
But at this moment, of course, we must simply listen to the appeals of the suffering people.
Mr President, misery and death in Ethiopia were on our screens four years ago.
The cameramen left but misery and death did not leave Ethiopia.
Starvation and death continue today.
The population of Ethiopia pray for rain.
Sadly they see only a rain of bullets.
People crave water, food and medicine.
Sadly all they see is their land and their homes blown to pieces by the tanks and planes our governments supply to the Ethiopian and Eritrean politicians.
These politicians are hungry for power: politicians who argue over territorial boundaries whilst their people die.
These politicians fly their national flags on their parliaments and presidential palaces, but sadly the only flag their people see is the flag of death.
Famine, disease and death remain the hallmarks of these countries.
Hunger for power must not be allowed to override the hunger for life.
Mr Patten has listed a number of measures the EU has taken to help.
Such help has been received with gratitude, but let us put it into perspective.
Sixteen million people are starving today; 15 000 tonnes have been delivered.
I accept the difficulties of the logistics but that means less than a kilo per person.
No time limit is given, in other words it is a kilo that has to last forever.
These measures are palliative.
They only relieve the symptoms; they do not cure the disease.
The EU must take the lead in curing this serious problem and the only way to do it is firstly to stop arms reaching all the warring parties and make sure we use our influence with those who supply them; and secondly teach these people how to grow food and harvest, store, package and process it so that they can be independent and self-reliant, not beggars for life.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, today' s debate was very important as a way of demonstrating the commitment and attention which this House gives to humanitarian issues, particularly the one discussed today.
Commissioner Patten' s words made clear not only an objective awareness of the work already carried out but also an absolute awareness that this situation is intolerable and that the European Commission will be determined on this issue, that it will take specific action and also closely monitor future developments.
As for the Council, I should like to say that there is great interest in ensuring that situations of this kind can be permanently followed and monitored in close coordination with the Commission.
It is important that an objective awareness is created within the European Union that humanitarian issues must be dealt with in an increasingly committed manner and that the European Union and its Member States must, within the relevant international organisations, ensure priority attention for these issues.
The summit between the European Union and the African countries was held just a few days ago.
Its extensive agenda offered an opportunity for what we hope is the first in a series of organised dialogues between Europe and the African countries.
Specifically we want to try and establish a more integrated and coordinated vision of all the issues now affecting the African continent about which we are concerned.
This must be made clear.
These issues do matter to the European continent for a whole range of reasons, even ones which relate to the very safety and stability desired for the European continent.
Dialogue with the African authorities is essential, as is dialogue with the sub-regional authorities.
It is vital to guarantee coherent action in preventing conflicts and creating rapid intervention mechanisms for these situations.
Without this collective and organised dialogue, there can be no hope.
The problems cannot be solved through ad hoc actions and one-off interventions.
If we cannot organise the international community within the global international organisations and within the more regional organisations, we will not have any response to all the crises which are systematically affecting the weakest countries in particular.
The European Union has, in this respect, a particular responsibility the tradition addressing this type of problem could almost be said to be part of its civilisation.
The EU has an awareness and a responsibility which today' s debate has clearly demonstrated.
Thank you very much Minister.
I would like to inform you that pursuant to Rule 37 (2) of the Rules of Procedure, I have received five motions for resolutions.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday.
Stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe
The next item is the report (A5-0069/2000) by Mr Lagendijk, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe (COM(1999) 235 - C5-0124/1999/2126(COS))
Mr President, in the time allocated to me, I would mainly like to focus on the Funding Conference of the Stability Pact which has just been held, because it is more beneficial, in my view, to focus attention on this than on the text of my report which, of course, was written for the Conference.
I would like to make a general comment regarding the Conference.
It is safe to say that it was a huge success, not only in financial terms but also due to the fact that the emphasis was most definitely on projects which link up the different regions.
In fact, this was one of the central themes of the report and the main thrust of the Stability Pact.
Indeed, regional development is one of the Stability Pact' s key points.
It was good to see all-round commitment most definitely present at all the desks at the Conference.
It was also a success - and I do not simply say this to flatter the Commissioner - because it was clear that the European Union or the European Commission took the lead at long last.
In my opinion, it had been taking a back seat for a little too long.
This concludes my general comments on the Funding Conference.
Further to this Conference, I would like to single out five key points from my report.
First of all, the funding.
Everyone was waiting with bated breath for the moment when the Commissioner would produce the amount.
He finally came up with EUR 530 million.
That was very smart creative accounting, I must say, because, of that EUR 530 million, 50% was old, pre-2000 money from the Obnova and Phare programmes and 30% was taken from the same programmes for the year 2000.
In the final analysis, therefore, there was little new money in it.
This is not a reproach to the Commission but an observation, and one which will, of course, create even more bad feeling, bearing in mind that another EUR 5.5 billion is still to be found.
This is an amount which was quoted by the European Investment Bank at one time, which was later taken over by Commission President Prodi and in respect of which it is still completely unclear, to me in any case, how this is to be raised in the coming year.
I would, therefore, like to ask the Commissioner how the first year, the year 2001, is likely to take shape?
How are the preparations for the Stability Pact budget coming along?
What is his reaction to the ever increasing protests, both in terms of loudness and number, coming, for example, from the Council or the Member States, to the effect that those 5.5 billion intended for the western Balkans, by way of pre-accession aid for Bulgaria and Romania, have been pitched far too high and that, in terms of absorption capacity, for example, a much lower amount would be far more realistic?
I am in favour of retaining the figure of 5.5 billion for the time being.
I am only very curious as to how the Commission hopes to raise all this money.
A request had also been made to spread the projects and planning for this Conference over all the desks: democracy, reconstruction and safety, in the knowledge that, at the end of the day, a bridge is more expensive than a training centre or mine-clearance programme.
Unfortunately, I have to note that, looking at all the figures after the Conference, the emphasis has been shifted quite considerably towards reconstruction.
Of 4.2 billion, 80% has been set aside for reconstruction, 17% for democracy and only 3% for safety.
I would call on the Commission, and Europe has more or less pledged to use the same scale, to take the 3 to 4% really seriously and expand it.
I would just remind you of a tragic report in the paper this morning about three children who stepped onto a mine near Sarajevo yesterday and were killed.
A mine-clearance programme is part of safety, is of key importance and should not be overlooked.
Thirdly, I would like to comment on the appeal in the report, backed by the General Affairs Council, to lift trade restrictions for the countries asymmetrically and, if necessary, unilaterally, the underlying idea being that, in time, trade will be just as important as subsidies.
What is the progress here?
What does the Commission intend to do to lift these unilateral trade restrictions in the short term?
Fourthly, the NGOs.
Regrettably, very little attention has been paid to the role of NGOs, especially the local NGOs, both in terms of preparation and implementation.
This is all the more unfortunate if one considers the level of knowledge regarding the Stability Pact in the region.
I am convinced that it is vital to introduce local NGOs in order to improve the quality of the programmes but also to raise the awareness of the Stability Pact, and the exact plans, in that region.
Finally, the distribution of tasks.
Who will ensure that all these tasks are carried out promptly and efficiently?
I would like to give the Commissioner a word of advice.
Last week, he was accused of wanting to saw the legs from under Commission President Prodi' s chair.
If you are having a go at chair legs, could you take those of Mr Solana' s chair?
In my view, he has been given a leading role in the Balkans for no good reason.
It would seem far more logical to give this leading role to the European Commission, notably Commissioner Patten, to implement this Stability Pact promptly and efficiently.
.
(PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I must start by congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Lagendijk, on his excellent and important report.
The debate caused by this could not have come at a better time.
As you know, the Special European Council held in Lisbon reiterated the strategic priority for the European Union of ensuring peace and stability in South-Eastern Europe and, as such, this is an issue which is on the EU' s immediate agenda and permanently on our political agenda.
The European Union is by far the body which has contributed the most aid to this region.
Between 1991 and 1999, the total aid from the EU to South-Eastern Europe, including that from the EU as a whole and the Member States individually, was in excess of EUR 19.3 billion.
The EU is furthermore the main trading partner of all the countries in this region.
It has allowed valuable trade concessions and, as you know, several thousand soldiers, police officers and civilian workers from the EU are active in the region, particularly in Kosovo.
We read with great interest the rapporteur' s conclusions on the stabilisation and association process for South-Eastern Europe.
The assessment of the solidity and possible deficiencies of this process certainly provides points for discussion and I will try to comment on some of these.
The Lisbon European Council confirmed that our overall objective remains the greatest possible integration of the countries in the region within Europe' s political and economic system.
The Stabilisation and Association Agreements constitute a central point of this policy.
As the rapporteur quite rightly notes, these new agreements will not enter into force immediately as we firstly have to prepare, negotiate and conclude each one.
As a result, the rapporteur concludes that it will be necessary to create a type of medium-term stabilisation and regional development programme.
I am not necessarily convinced that this is the most appropriate way of tackling the problem.
The general stabilisation process for the area cannot, by any stretch of the imagination, be reduced to just agreements.
Clearly these are, shall we say, the most visible and most well-known feature of this process, but other important instruments are required such as preferential trade agreements, direct aid from the European Union and political dialogue.
Most of the countries already benefit from trade preferences and the Lisbon Special European Council confirmed that the Stabilisation and Association Agreements should be preceded by greater asymmetric trade liberalisation thereby specifically favouring these countries in their bilateral trade with EU countries.
The idea underlying the stabilisation and association process is sufficiently broad and flexible to ensure a constant project in this area.
With regard to the agreements, the fact that it is taking some time to prepare these should not, in our opinion, jeopardise the whole stabilisation process.
This has not been the EU' s experience in equivalent regional processes in the past.
As with other comprehensive agreements, we therefore hope to be able to establish interim agreements covering the period between the signature and ratification of these agreements, bearing in mind that normally almost twenty months pass between these two events.
It is also worthwhile to remember that we already have contractual relations in the form of trade and cooperation agreements with Albania and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The new agreements, which will be more comprehensive and also more demanding on our partners given that they include elements of political conditionality which obviously form part of the Union' s current approach in this area, will specifically replace the existing agreements in these two cases.
They will concentrate much more on regional cooperation than the current agreements and will include provisions on cooperation in the area of justice and home affairs, an area which is of great importance to the Europe of the future.
Negotiations have already begun with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement.
The Albanian Government recently indicated its reaction to the viability study on the opening of negotiations, which was prepared by the European Commission, and the Council will very shortly analyse this report.
Following internal political changes, the European Commission is also to prepare a viability study for Croatia which the Council hopes to be able to analyse immediately before or after the summer.
Bearing in mind the request made by the local authorities, Bosnia-Herzegovina was sent a guide whose use will help towards preparing a viability study on negotiations for an agreement of the same type.
This work is moving forward at a good pace given, of course, that in this specific case, we must be careful and not create excessive expectations, as the reality of the situation there does not allow us to be overly optimistic in this respect.
I should like to refer briefly to the new regulation.
As we agree with the European Parliament about the need to create a uniform legal basis for support to the region, the Council is waiting for a Commission proposal on a Council regulation which will replace the support granted to the region by the Phare and Obnova programmes.
The recommendations to be made will form a valuable contribution to the debates which we will start within the Council on this issue.
I note in particular that the report highlights that the reconstruction of the region must not be regarded as merely physical and economic but must also be aimed at the social infrastructure, civil society and the public institutions.
These are the main objectives of our reconstruction strategy for the area which does not just involve a merely physical dimension but also an overall stabilisation dimension.
The rapporteur also refers briefly to the Stability Pact on which we have been cooperating with these five countries and with the countries involved in the enlargement process.
The recent regional financing conference which was organised jointly by the European Commission and the World Bank, in close cooperation with the Special Coordinator for the Stability Pact, gave significant impetus to the Pact' s objective of reviving the reform processes and stimulating regional cooperation.
It proved that the Stability Pact mechanism has already gained a certain maturity and can and must advance.
We believe that reciprocal commitment is the key to the Pact' s success and I feel that this point was made very clear in the recent discussions at the Commission and World Bank conference.
The commitment of the countries in the region to implement institutional policy reforms and to create an environment allowing economic progress is a fundamental element in this Pact.
In return, the international community is supporting the reform commitments and the donors and financial institutions have promised or mobilised a total of EUR 2.4 billion.
Of this amount, the European Union alone, that is, the Commission and Member States combined, have promised or mobilised EUR 1.08 billion.
The international community has financed in particular a quick-start package of EUR 1.8 billion announced at the conference and has made available the necessary financing to accelerate the preparation and implementation of projects and initiatives in the short-term package.
However, the conference was only one initial step in a long process.
The European Union is committed to acting as leader and guaranteeing the coherent management of this whole support process.
It has also pledged to closely monitor and support the regional reform processes in a way which corresponds to the efforts made by each country so that these can be rewarded with advances in the development of new instruments.
This will allow economic and social development and progress in line with European standards.
With the exception of Belgrade, all the governments in the region have stated that they will start on the road to reform.
I must clarify, however, that the Council considers that, without Serbia, our common efforts will be incomplete.
A democratic and cooperative Serbia, at peace with its neighbours, will be welcomed within the European family.
We must be aware that overall stability in this region can never be complete when one country in the region represents a factor of instability.
This message about Serbia must be received by the respective civil society.
Our support for Montenegro and for the stabilisation efforts being made in this country by the respective government must also be reconfirmed.
To conclude, we also note that the rapporteur intends that the mandate of the European Reconstruction Agency should not be limited to Kosovo.
In the meeting of 20 March, the Council invited the Commission to work on a proposal and to present this to the Council with a view to including Montenegro in the Agency' s mandate.
Discussions are also ongoing about the possible extension of the EIB' s activities.
Finally, the Council has invited the Secretary-General and High Representative, under the authority of the Council presidency and in full cooperation with the Commission, to ensure the coherence of the policies for the Western Balkans.
At the last General Affairs Council, an initial commentary was given on these ideas which specifically stem from the presentation given by Commissioner Patten and Mr Solana.
We are sure that in future meetings of the General Affairs Council this issue will be followed with close attention and by effective steps towards its realisation.
Mr President, first of all I would like to offer my sincere thanks to Mr Lagendijk for his report.
I can give it my full support, and I am delighted that a Christian Democrat can fully support a green report, because that would suggest we are going down the right track together and have shared the same experiences.
This debate is taking place at an opportune moment today, as has already been mentioned.
The donor conference had a positive outcome, at least on paper.
Money is to be poured into projects that will at last be able to give the pact a face.
It has been something of a mirage so far: the outcome was intangible.
Work is now to begin at last, and the costly palaver is over.
It is in fact a shame that the coordinator' s apprenticeship had to last so long.
Experts on the region have long been familiar with the projects to be undertaken there, which have now been defined by the European Union and the European Investment Bank.
We could have, and in fact should have, made a start on them in the autumn.
However, I would also like to take the decisions reached by the Council of Ministers to task at this point, and say that establishing a reconstruction agency in Thessaloniki and a coordinator in Brussels, and then not allowing the two to cooperate, shows what little inclination there is to promote efficiency.
There can be no stability without reconstruction, and vice versa.
We must now swiftly regain lost ground.
EUR 1.8 billion for the next twelve months can be used to set one or two things in train, so that the people in the region are at last able to see that we are serious when we make our grandiose statements about securing stability in the region.
But this will not be possible without reconstruction and functioning institutions, and we need to work quickly to achieve both.
Every euro that actually goes towards the projects and does not get caught up in the imbroglio of excessive activities and organisations, or even disappear on account of corruption, will be a euro well spent.
We must be on our guard here.
However, the wars in the region were more expensive in every respect than all the necessary measures will prove to be.
The idea of having a Stability Pact is a sound one because it is geared primarily towards cross-border measures, and thus to prevention of conflicts.
Many local politicians and governments have grasped this and have already created a cross-border, regular working level.
In implementing this instrument with rigour the European Union will be able to establish a successful and exemplary policy.
However, all parties involved in the Stability Pact will need a great deal of stamina.
It takes time and continuity to establish and consolidate stability.
The recipient countries face the particular challenge of reforming their administration and their institutions, so as to create the right conditions for foreign investment and to enable them to become ever less dependent on external aid.
However, stability in the region depends to a large extent in most spheres on the eradication of criminal power structures and the construction of structures befitting a state under the rule of law, as is the case in Bosnia for example.
Elections are no panacea.
One cannot vote democracy into being.
Take last Sunday' s elections in the Republika Srpska in Bosnia.
The parties of Karadzic and Kraijnik gained the most support.
The return of the refugees is precisely what is needed to help restore normality and democracy, and that is why the refugee merry-go-round of Bosnia and Croatia, for example, must be set in motion without delay within the context of the Stability Pact.
This will cost money.
Mine clearance, job creation, schools and preventive health care must go hand in hand with repatriation.
Unfortunately, the High Representatives in Bosnia have also wasted a great deal of time.
They have tolerated, or even promoted, parallel structures for too long.
We have not made nearly as much progress as we could have done when it comes to bridging the ethnic divide, which was created by the war, and, I am sorry to say, perpetuated by Dayton to some extent.
Efforts to initiate and undertake judicial reform, in Bosnia for example, are in a state of disarray.
The court judgements are not even being implemented.
Instead of maintaining a protectorate for decades, more commitment should be given to establishing the nation state of Bosnia Herzegovina.
Turning once again to the idea of a Stability Pact: as with European unification, the key is to motivate social groupings and their various interests, as well as States, to work towards a common goal.
If we are to stabilise South-Eastern Europe, then the institutions concerned with the economy, culture, and educational policy that are either present or to be created in the respective States, must be encouraged to cooperate ever more closely with each other and with their European counterparts.
We must now seize the opportunity and quickly create examples that will show the Serbs in Yugoslavia that it would be better if they were to rid themselves of the dictator Milosevic and then tread the path to Europe along with their neighbours.
Mr President, the report on the stabilisation and association process for the countries in eastern Europe we are debating today attempts, and I believe successfully so, to formulate a stable political framework with which to address the Balkan tragedy.
Now is not the time to pass judgement past events and situations.
Today, let us take it that with this report we are taking a step towards the future and creating the platform for a first successful substantive European Union policy, in a way the first successful action of the CFSP.
Here, however, we must pay attention to certain issues.
So what are these issues?
It is an open secret that interests are being expressed in the Balkans by many sides and many people, who often do not have common strategic aims.
In all circumstances this must be stopped by non-negotiable political answers given in every direction.
So what are they?