# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
[2.4.7 [2.4.2, 2.4.9] Formulation and communication of conditional interpretative declarations
A conditional interpretative declaration must be formulated in writing.
Formal confirmation of a conditional interpretative declaration must also be made in writing.
A conditional interpretative declaration must be communicated in writing to the contracting States and contracting organizations and other States and international organizations entitled to become parties to the treaty.
A conditional interpretative declaration regarding a treaty in force which is the constituent instrument of an international organization or a treaty which creates an organ that has the capacity to accept a reservation must also be communicated to such organization or organ.
]
2.4.8 Late formulation of a conditional interpretative declaration
A State or an international organization may not formulate a conditional interpretative declaration concerning a treaty after expressing its consent to be bound by the treaty except if none of the other Contracting Parties objects to the late formulation of the conditional interpretative declaration.
2.4.9 Modification of an interpretative declaration
Unless the treaty provides that an interpretative declaration may be made or modified only at specified times, an interpretative declaration may be modified at any time.
2.4.10 Limitation and widening of the scope of a conditional interpretative declaration
The limitation and the widening of the scope of a conditional interpretative declaration are governed by the rules respectively applicable to the partial withdrawal and the widening of the scope of reservations.
2.5 Withdrawal and modification of reservations and interpretative declarations
2.5.1 Withdrawal of reservations
Unless the treaty otherwise provides, a reservation may be withdrawn at any time and the consent of a State or of an international organization which has accepted the reservation is not required for its withdrawal.
2.5.2 Form of withdrawal
The withdrawal of a reservation must be formulated in writing.
2.5.3 Periodic review of the usefulness of reservations
States or international organizations which have made one or more reservations to a treaty should undertake a periodic review of such reservations and consider withdrawing those which no longer serve their purpose.
In such a review, States and international organizations should devote special attention to the aim of preserving the integrity of multilateral treaties and, where relevant, give consideration to the usefulness of retaining the reservations, in particular in relation to developments in their internal law since the reservations were formulated.
2.5.4 [2.5.5] Formulation of the withdrawal of a reservation at the international level
Subject to the usual practices in international organizations which are depositaries of treaties, a person is competent to withdraw a reservation made on behalf of a State or an international organization if:
(a) That person produces appropriate full powers for the purposes of that withdrawal; or
(b) It appears from practice or other circumstances that it was the intention of the States and international organizations concerned to consider that person as competent for such purposes without having to produce full powers.
By virtue of their functions and without having to produce full powers, the following are competent to withdraw a reservation at the international level on behalf of a State:
(a) Heads of State, heads of Government and Ministers for Foreign Affairs;
(b) Representatives accredited by States to an international organization or one of its organs, for the purpose of withdrawing a reservation to a treaty adopted by that organization or body;
(c) Heads of permanent missions to an international organization, for the purpose of withdrawing a reservation to a treaty between the accrediting States and that organization.
2.5.5 [2.5.5 bis, 2.5.5 ter] Absence of consequences at the international level of the violation of internal rules regarding the withdrawal of reservations
The determination of the competent body and the procedure to be followed for withdrawing a reservation at the internal level is a matter for the internal law of each State or the relevant rules of each international organization.
A State or an international organization may not invoke the fact that a reservation has been withdrawn in violation of a provision of the internal law of that State or the rules of that organization regarding competence and the procedure for the withdrawal of reservations as invalidating the withdrawal.
2.5.6 Communication of withdrawal of a reservation
The procedure for communicating the withdrawal of a reservation follows the rules applicable to the communication of reservations contained in guidelines 2.1.5, 2.1.6 [2.1.6, 2.1.8] and 2.1.7.
2.5.7 [2.5.7, 2.5.8] Effect of withdrawal of a reservation
The withdrawal of a reservation entails the application as a whole of the provisions on which the reservation had been made in the relations between the State or international organization which withdraws the reservation and all the other parties, whether they had accepted the reservation or objected to it.
The withdrawal of a reservation entails the entry into force of the treaty in the relations between the State or international organization which withdraws the reservation and a State or international organization which had objected to the reservation and opposed the entry into force of the treaty between itself and the reserving State or international organization by reason of that reservation.
2.5.8 [2.5.9] Effective date of withdrawal of a reservation
Unless the treaty otherwise provides, or it is otherwise agreed, the withdrawal of a reservation becomes operative in relation to a contracting State or a contracting organization only when notice of it has been received by that State or that organization.
Model clauses
A. Deferment of the effective date of the withdrawal of a reservation
A Contracting Party which has made a reservation to this treaty may withdraw it by means of notification addressed to [the depositary].
The withdrawal shall take effect on the expiration of a period of X [months] [days] after the date of receipt of the notification by [the depositary].
Earlier effective date of withdrawal of a reservation
A Contracting Party which has made a reservation to this treaty may withdraw it by means of a notification addressed to [the depositary].
The withdrawal shall take effect on the date of receipt of such notification by [the depositary].
C. Freedom to set the effective date of withdrawal of a reservation
A Contracting Party which has made a reservation to this treaty may withdraw it by means of a notification addressed to [the depositary].
The withdrawal shall take effect on the date set by that State in the notification addressed to [the depositary].
2.5.9 [2.5.10] Cases in which a reserving State or international organization may unilaterally set the effective date of withdrawal of a reservation
The withdrawal of a reservation takes effect on the date set by the withdrawing State or international organization where:
(a) That date is later than the date on which the other contracting States or international organizations received notification of it; or
(b) The withdrawal does not add to the rights of the withdrawing State or international organization, in relation to the other contracting States or international organizations.
2.5.10 [2.5.11] Partial withdrawal of a reservation
The partial withdrawal of a reservation limits the legal effect of the reservation and achieves a more complete application of the provisions of the treaty, or of the treaty as a whole, to the withdrawing State or international organization.
The partial withdrawal of a reservation is subject to the same formal and procedural rules as a total withdrawal and takes effect on the same conditions.
2.5.11 [2.5.12] Effect of a partial withdrawal of a reservation
The partial withdrawal of a reservation modifies the legal effect of the reservation to the extent of the new formulation of the reservation.
Any objection made to the reservation continues to have effect as long as its author does not withdraw it, insofar as the objection does not apply exclusively to that part of the reservation which has been withdrawn.
No objection may be made to the reservation resulting from the partial withdrawal, unless that partial withdrawal has a discriminatory effect.
2.5.12 Withdrawal of an interpretative declaration
An interpretative declaration may be withdrawn at any time by the authorities competent for that purpose, following the same procedure applicable to its formulation.
2.5.13 Withdrawal of a conditional interpretative declaration
The withdrawal of a conditional interpretative declaration is governed by the rules applying to the withdrawal of reservations.
2.6.1 Definition of objections to reservations
“Objection” means a unilateral statement, however phrased or named, made by a State or an international organization in response to a reservation to a treaty formulated by another State or international organization, whereby the former State or organization purports to exclude or to modify the legal effects of the reservation, or to exclude the application of the treaty as a whole, in relations with the reserving State or organization.
2.6.2 Definition of objections to the late formulation or widening of the scope of a reservation
“Objection” may also mean a unilateral statement whereby a State or an international organization opposes the late formulation of a reservation or the widening of the scope of a reservation.
Text of the draft guidelines and commentaries thereto adopted by the Commission at its fifty-seventh session
The texts of draft guidelines with commentaries thereto adopted by the Commission at its fifty-seventh session are reproduced below.
2.6 Formulation of objections to reservations
Commentary
(1) Five provisions of the 1969 and 1986 Vienna Conventions are relevant to the formulation of objections to treaty reservations:
Article 20, paragraph 4 (b), mentions “in passing” the potential authors of an objection; Article 20, paragraph 5, gives ambiguous indications as to the period in which an objection may be formulated; Article 21, paragraph 3, confirms the obligation imposed by article 20, paragraph 4 (b), on the author of an objection to state whether the latter therefore opposes the entry into force of the treaty between the author of the objection and the author of the reservation; Article 23, paragraph 1, requires that, like reservations themselves, objections be formulated in writing and communicated to the same States and international organizations as reservations; and Article 23, paragraph 3, states that an objection made previously to confirmation of a reservation does not itself require confirmation.
(2) Each of these provisions should be retained and, where necessary, clarified and supplemented in this section of the Guide to Practice, which should nevertheless give a preliminary definition of the word “objection”, which is not defined in the Vienna Conventions - a gap that needs to be filled.
This is the aim of draft guidelines 2.6.1 to 2.6.x.
2.6.1 Definition of objections to reservations
“Objection” means a unilateral statement, however phrased or named, made by a State or an international organization in response to a reservation to a treaty formulated by another State or international organization, whereby the former State or organization purports to exclude or to modify the legal effects of the reservation, or to exclude the application of the treaty as a whole, in relations with the reserving State or organization.
Commentary
(1) The aim of draft guideline 2.6.1 is to provide a generic definition applicable to all the categories of objections to reservations provided for in the 1969 and 1986 Vienna Conventions.
For this purpose, the Commission has taken as a model the definition of reservations provided in article 2, paragraph 1 (d), of the Vienna Conventions and reproduced in guideline 1.1 of the Guide to Practice, adapting it to objections.
(2) This definition contains five elements:
The first concerns the nature of the act (“a unilateral statement”); The second concerns its name (“however phrased or named”); The third concerns its author (“made by a State or an international organization”); The fourth concerns when it should be made (when expressing consent to be bound); and The fifth concerns its content or object, defined in relation to the objective pursued by the author of the reservation (“whereby it purports to exclude or to modify the legal effect of certain provisions of the treaty in their application to that State or international organization”).
(3) However, the Commission considered that the definition of objections should not necessarily include all these elements, some of which are specific to reservations and some of which deserve to be further clarified for the purposes of the definition of objections.
(4) It appeared, in particular, that it would be better not to mention the moment when an objection can be formulated; the matter is not clearly resolved in the Vienna Conventions, and it would be preferable to examine it separately and seek to respond to it in a separate draft guideline.
(5) Conversely, two of the elements in the definition of reservations should certainly be reproduced in the definition of objections, which, like reservations, are unilateral statements whose wording or designation is unimportant if their object makes it possible to characterize them as objections.
(6) With regard to the first element, the provisions of the Vienna Conventions leave not the slightest doubt: an objection emanates from a State or an international organization and can be withdrawn at any time.
However, this does not resolve the very sensitive question of which categories of States or international organizations can formulate an objection.
(7) At this stage, the Commission does not consider it necessary to include in the definition the detail found in article 20, paragraph 4 (b), of the Vienna Convention of 1986, which refers to a “contracting State” and a “contracting international organization”.
There are two reasons for this:
On the one hand, article 20, paragraph 4 (b), settles the question of whether an objection has effects on the entry into force of the treaty between the author of the reservation and the author of the objection; however, it leaves open the question of whether it is possible for a State or an international organization that is not a contracting party in the meaning of article 2 (f) of the Convention to make an objection; the possibility that such a State or organization might formulate an objection cannot be ruled out, it being understood that the objection would not produce the effect provided for in article 20, paragraph 4 (b), until the State or organization has become a “contracting party”.
Moreover, article 21, paragraph 3, does not reproduce this detail and refers only to “a State or an international organization objecting to a reservation”, without further elaboration; this aspect deserves to be studied separately; On the other hand, the definition of reservations itself gives no information about the status of a State or an international organization that is empowered to formulate a reservation; it would not seem helpful to make the definition of objections more cumbersome by proceeding differently.
(8) With regard to the second element, it is sufficient to recall that the law of treaties, as enshrined in the 1969 Vienna Convention, is wholly permeated by the notion that the intentions of States take precedence over the terminology which they use to express them.
This is apparent from the definition given in the Convention of the term “treaty”, which “means an international agreement whatever its particular designation”.
Likewise, a reservation is defined therein as “a unilateral statement, however phrased or named”, and the Commission used the same term to define interpretative declarations.
The same should apply to objections: here again, it is the intention which counts.
The question remains, however, as to what this intention is: this problem is at the heart of definition proposed in draft guideline 2.6.1.
(9) At first sight, the word “objection” has nothing mysterious about it.
In its common meaning, it designates a “reason which one opposes to a statement in order to counter it”.
From a legal perspective, it means, according to the Dictionnaire de droit international public, the “opposition expressed by a subject of law to an act or a claim by another subject of law in order to prevent its entry into force or its opposability to the first subject”.
The same work defines “objection to a reservation” as follows: “Expression of rejection by a State of a reservation to a treaty formulated by another State, where the aim of the reservation is to oppose the applicability between the two States of the provision or provisions covered by the reservation, or, if such is the intention stated by the author of the objection, to prevent the entry into force of the treaty as between those two States”.
(10) This latter clarification has its basis in article 21, paragraph 3, of the 1969 and 1986 Vienna Conventions, which envisages that the author of the objection may indicate whether it opposes the entry into force of the treaty between it and the author of the reservation.
This possibility is reflected in the last phrase of the definition in draft guideline 2.6.1, according to which, in making an objection, the author may seek to “exclude the application of the treaty as a whole, in relations with the reserving State or organization”.
In such a case, the intention of the author of the unilateral statement to object to the reservation is in no doubt.
(11) This might not be true of all categories of reactions to a reservation, which might show misgivings on the part of their authors without amounting to an objection as such.
(12) As the court of arbitration which settled the dispute between France and the United Kingdom concerning the delimitation of the continental shelf in the Mer d'Iroise case stated in its decision of 30 June 1977:
“Whether any such reaction amounts to a mere comment, a mere reserving of position, a rejection merely of the particular reservation or a wholesale rejection of any mutual relations with the reserving State under the treaty consequently depends on the intention of the State concerned.”
In this case, the court did not expressly take a position on the nature of the United Kingdom's “reaction”, but it “acted as if it were an objection”, namely, by applying the rule laid down in article 21, paragraph 3, of the 1969 Vienna Convention, which, however, was not in force between the parties.
(13) The award has been criticized in that regard, but it appears indisputable that the wording of the British statement in question clearly reflects the intention of the United Kingdom to object to the French reservation.
The statement reads as follows:
“The Government of the United Kingdom are unable to accept reservation (b).”
The refusal to accept a reservation is precisely the purpose of an objection in the full sense of the word in its ordinary meaning.
(14) As the French-British court of arbitration noted, it can happen that a reaction to a reservation, even if critical of it, does not constitute an objection in the sense of articles 20 to 23 of the Vienna Conventions.
The reaction may simply consist of observations, in which a State or an international organization announces its (restrictive) interpretation of the reservation or the conditions under which it considers it to be valid.
For example, “in 1979, the United Kingdom, Germany and France reacted to the reservation made by Portugal to the protection of property rights contained in Article 1 of the Protocol to the ECHR [European Convention on Human Rights].
By making this reservation, Portugal intended to exclude the sweeping expropriation and nationalization measures, which had been adopted in the wake of the Carnations Revolution, from any challenge before the European Commission and Court of Human Rights.
The reacting States did not formally object to the reservation made by Portugal, but rather made declarations to the effect that it could not affect the general principles of international law which required the payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation in respect of the expropriation of foreign property.
Following constitutional and legislative amendments, Portugal withdrew this reservation in 1987”.
(15) The following examples can be interpreted in the same way:
The communications whereby a number of States indicated that they did not regard “the statements concerning paragraph (1) of article 11 [of the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations] made by the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Mongolian People's Republic as modifying any rights or obligations under that paragraph”; the communications could be seen as interpretations of the statements in question (or of the provision to which they relate) rather than as true objections, particularly in contrast with other statements formally presented as objections; The communication of the United States of America regarding the first reservation of Colombia to the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 20 December 1988, in which the United States Government says that it understands the reservation “to exempt Colombia from the obligations imposed by article 3, paragraphs 6 and 9, and article 6 of the Convention only insofar as compliance with such obligations would prevent Colombia from abiding by article 35 of its Political Constitution (regarding the extradition of Colombian nationals by birth), to the extent that the reservation is intended to apply other than to the extradition of Colombian nationals by birth, the Government of the United States objects to the reservation”; this is an example of a “conditional acceptance” rather than an objection strictly speaking; or The communications of the United Kingdom, Norway and Greece concerning the declaration of Cambodia on the Convention on the International Maritime Organization.
(16) Such “quasi-objections” have tended to proliferate in recent years with the growth of the practice of the “reservations dialogue”.
What the dialogue entails is that States (for the most part European States) inform the reserving State of the reasons why they think the reservation should be withdrawn, clarified or modified.
Such communications may be true objections, but they may - and often do - open a dialogue that might indeed lead to an objection, although it might also result in the modification or withdrawal of the reservation.
The reaction of Finland to the reservations made by Malaysia on its accession to the Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989 clearly falls into the first category and undoubtedly constitutes an objection:
“In its present formulation the reservation is clearly incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention and therefore inadmissible under article 51, paragraph 2, of the [said Convention].
Therefore the Government of Finland objects to such reservation.
The Government of Finland further notes that the reservation made by the Government of Malaysia is devoid of legal effect.”
(17) Whether or not the reaction of Austria to the same reservations, a reaction also thoroughly reasoned and directed toward the same purpose, can be considered an objection is more debatable; Austria's statement of 18 June 1996 contains no language expressive of a definitive rejection of the reservations of Malaysia and suggests instead a waiting stance:
“Under article 19 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which is reflected in article 51 of the [Convention on the Rights of the Child], a reservation, in order to be admissible under international law, has to be compatible with the object and purpose of the treaty concerned.
A reservation is incompatible with the object and purpose of a treaty if it intends to derogate from provisions the implementation of which is essential to fulfilling its object and purpose.
“The Government of Austria has examined the reservation made by Malaysia to the [Convention].
Given the general character of these reservations a final assessment as to its admissibility under international law cannot be made without further clarification.
“Until the scope of the legal effects of this reservation is sufficiently specified by Malaysia, the Republic of Austria considers these reservations as not affecting any provision the implementation of which is essential to fulfilling the object and purpose of the [Convention].
“Austria, however, objects to the admissibility of the reservations in question if the application of this reservation negatively affects the compliance of Malaysia … with its obligations under the [Convention] essential for the fulfilment of its object and purpose.
“Austria could not consider the reservation made by Malaysia as admissible under the regime of article 51 of the [Convention] and article 19 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties unless Malaysia …, by providing additional information or through subsequent practice, ensure[s] that the reservations are compatible with the provisions essential for the implementation of the object and purpose of the [Convention].”
Here again, rather than a straightforward objection, the statement can be considered a conditional acceptance (or conditional objection) with a clear intent (to induce the reserving State to withdraw or modify its reservation) but with uncertain legal status and effects, if only because the conditions for accepting or rejecting the reservation are not susceptible to an objective analysis and no particular time limit is set.
(18) Such statements pose problems comparable to those raised by communications in which a State or an international organization “reserves its position” regarding the validity of a reservation made by another party, particularly with regard to its validity ratione temporis.
For example, there is some doubt as to the scope of the statement of the Netherlands to the effect that the Government of the Netherlands “reserves all rights regarding the reservations made by the Government of Venezuela on ratifying [the 1958 Geneva Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone] in respect of article 12 and article 24, paragraphs 2 and 3”.
The same could be said of the statement of the United Kingdom to the effect that it was “not however able to take a position on [the] purported reservations [of the Republic of Korea to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights] in the absence of a sufficient indication of their intended effect, in accordance with the terms of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties and the practice of the Parties to the Covenant.
Pending receipt of such indication, the Government of the United Kingdom reserve their rights under the Covenant in their entirety”.
Similarly, the nature of the reactions of several States to the limitations that Turkey had set on its acceptance of the right of individual petition under former article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of the Council of Europe is not easy to determine.
These States, using a number of different formulas, communicated to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe that they reserved their position pending a decision by the competent organs of the Convention, explaining that “the absence of a formal and official reaction on the merits of the problem should not … be interpreted as a tacit recognition … of the Turkish Government's reservations”.
It is hard to see these as objections; rather, they are notifications of provisional “non-acceptance” associated with a waiting stance.
In contrast, an objection involves taking a formal position seeking to prevent the reservation from having the effects intended by its author.
(19) It does not follow that reactions, of the type as those mentioned above, which the other parties to the treaty may have with respect to the reservations formulated by a State or an international organization, are prohibited or even that they produce no legal effects.
However, such reactions are not objections within the meaning of the Vienna Conventions and their effects relate to the interpretation of the treaty or the unilateral acts constituted by the reservations, or else they form part of the “reservations dialogue” that the other parties to the treaty try to start up with the author of the reservation.
These uncertainties clearly illustrate the value of using precise and unambiguous terminology in the description of reactions to a reservation, in the wording and in the definition of the scope which the author of an objection intends to give to it.
(20) As to the first point - the description of the reaction - the most prudent solution is certainly to use the noun “objection” or the verb “object”.
Such other terms as “opposition/oppose”, “rejection/reject”, and “refusal/refuse” must also, however, be regarded as signifying objection.
Unless a special context demands otherwise, the same is true of expressions like “the Government of … does not accept the reservation …” or “the reservation formulated by … is impermissible/unacceptable/inadmissible”.
Such is also the case when a State or an international organization, without drawing any express inference, states that a reservation is “prohibited by the treaty”, “entirely void” or simply “incompatible with the object and purpose” of the treaty, which is extremely frequent.
In these last cases, this conclusion is the only one possible given the provisions of article 19 of the 1969 and 1986 Vienna Conventions: in such cases, a reservation cannot be formulated and, when a contracting party expressly indicates that this is the situation, it would be inconceivable that it would not object to the reservation.
(21) The fact remains that in some cases States intend their objections to produce effects other than those expressly provided for in article 21, paragraph 3, of the Vienna Conventions.
The question that then arises is whether, strictly speaking, these can be called objections.
(22) This provision envisages only two possibilities:
Either “the provisions to which the reservation relates do not apply as between the reserving State or organization and the objecting State or organization to the extent of the reservation”, which is the “minimum” effect of an objection; Or, if the State or international organization formulating an objection to a reservation clearly states that such is its intention, in accordance with the provisions of article 20, paragraph 4 (b), the treaty does not enter into force between itself and the reserving State or organization; this is generally known as the “maximum” effect of an objection.
(23) However, there is in practice an intermediate stage between the “minimum” and “maximum” effects of the objection, as envisaged by this provision, since there are situations in which a State wishes to enter into treaty relations with the author of the reservation while at the same time considering that the effect of the objection should go beyond what is provided for in article 21, paragraph 3.
(24) Similarly, the objecting State may intend to produce what is described as a “super-maximum” effect, consisting in the determination not only that the reservation objected to is not valid but also that, as a result, the treaty as a whole applies ipso facto in the relations between the two States.
This was the case, for example, with Sweden's objection of 27 November 2002 to the reservation which Qatar made when acceding to the Optional Protocol of 25 May 2000 to the Convention on the Rights of the Child:
“This objection shall not preclude the entry into force of the Convention between Qatar and Sweden.
The Convention enters into force in its entirety between the two States, without Qatar benefiting from its reservation.”
(25) The Commission is aware that the validity of such objections has been questioned.
However, it sees no need to take a position on this point for the purpose of defining objections: the fact is that the authors intend their objection to produce such effects, intermediate or “super-maximum” effect, and this is all that matters at this stage.
Just as the definition of reservations does not prejudge their validity, so, in stating in draft guideline 2.6.1 that, by objecting, the “State or organization purports to exclude or to modify the legal effects of the reservation”, the Commission has endeavoured to take a completely neutral position with regard to the validity of the effects that the author of the objection intends its objection to produce.
This is a matter to be taken up in the consideration of the effects of objections.
(26) This being so, despite the contrary opinion of some writers, no rule of international law requires a State or an international organization to state its reasons for an objection to a reservation.
Except where a specific reservation is expressly authorized by a treaty, the other contracting parties are always free to reject it and even not to enter into treaty relations with its author.
A statement drafted as follows:
“The Government … intends to formulate an objection to the reservation made by … ”
is as valid and legally sound as a statement setting forth a lengthy argument.
There is, however, a recent but unmistakable tendency to specify and explain the reasons justifying the objection in the eyes of the author, and the Commission envisages adopting a guideline that encourages States to do so.
(27) The Commission should also point out that it is aware that the word “made”, in the third clause of the proposed definition (“a unilateral statement made by a State or an international organization”) is open to discussion: taken literally, it might be understood as meaning that the objection produces effects per se without any other condition having to be met; yet objections, like reservations, must be permissible.
The word “made” was chosen for reasons of symmetry, because it appears in the definition of reservations.
On the other hand, it seemed preferable to the Commission to indicate that the objection was made “in response to a reservation to a treaty formulated by another State or international organization”, as a reservation only produces effects if it is “established with regard to another party in accordance with articles 19, 20 and 23”.
2.6.2 Definition of objections to the late formulation or widening of the scope of a reservation
“Objection” may also mean a unilateral statement whereby a State or an international organization opposes the late formulation of a reservation or the widening of the scope of a reservation.
Commentary
(1) Under draft guidelines 2.3.1 to 2.3.3, the contracting parties may also “object” not only to the reservation itself but also to the late formulation of a reservation.
(2) In its commentary on draft guideline 2.3.1, the Commission wondered whether it was appropriate to use the word “objects” to reflect the second hypothesis and noted that, given the possibility for a State to accept the late formulation of a reservation but object to its content, some members “wondered whether it was appropriate to use the word `objects' in draft guideline 2.3.1 to refer to the opposition of a State not to the planned reservation, but to its late formulation.
Nevertheless, most members took the view that it was inadvisable to introduce the distinction formally, since in practice the two operations are indistinguishable”.
(3) However, while it is true that there appears to be no precedent in which a State or an international organization, without objecting to the late formulation of a reservation, nevertheless objected to it, this hypothesis cannot be excluded.
Guideline 2.6.2 draws attention to this distinction.
(4) The members of the Commission who had expressed their opposition to the inclusion of the practice of the late formulation of reservations in the Guide to Practice reiterated their opposition to its inclusion.
chapter xi
fragmentation of international law: difficulties arising from the diversification and expansion of international law
Introduction
Following its consideration of a feasibility study that had been undertaken on the topic entitled “Risks ensuing from fragmentation of international law” at its fifty-second session (2000), the Commission decided to include the topic in its long-term programme of work.
At its fifty-fourth session (2002), the Commission included the topic in its programme of work and established a Study Group.
It also decided to change the title of the topic to “Fragmentation of international law: difficulties arising from the diversification and expansion of international law”.
In addition, the Commission agreed on a number of recommendations, including on a series of studies to be undertaken, commencing with a study by the Chairman of the Study Group on the question of “The function and scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'”.
At its fifty-fifth session (2003), the Commission appointed Mr. Martti Koskenniemi as Chairman of the Study Group.
The Study Group set a tentative schedule for work to be carried out during the remaining part of the present quinquennium (2003-2006), distributed among members of the Study Group work on the other studies agreed upon in 2002, and decided upon the methodology to be adopted for that work.
The Study Group also held a preliminary discussion of an outline produced by the Chairman of the Study Group on the question of the “Function and scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'”.
At its fifty-sixth session (2004), the Commission reconstituted the Study Group.
It held discussions on the study on the “Function and scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'”, as well as discussions on the outlines prepared in respect of the other remaining studies.
Consideration of the topic at the present session
At the current session, the Study Group was reconstituted and it held 8 meetings on 12, 17 and 23 May, on 2 June, on 12, 18, 27 July and on 3 August 2005.
It had before it the following: (a) a memorandum on regionalism in the context of the study on “the function and scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of self-contained regimes”; (b) a study on the interpretation of treaties in the light of “any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties” (article 31 (3) (c) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties), in the context of general developments in international law and concerns of the international community; (c) a study on the application of successive treaties relating to the same subject matter (article 30 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties); (d) a study on the modification of multilateral treaties between certain of the parties only (article 41 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties); and (e) a study on hierarchy in international law: jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, as conflict rules.
The Study Group also had an informal paper on the “Disconnection Clause”.
At its 2859th, 2860th and 2864th meetings, on 28 and 29 July and on 3 August 2005, the Commission held an exchange of views on the topic on the basis of a briefing by the Chairman of the Study Group on the status of work of the Study Group.
At its 2865th meeting, on 4 August 2005, the Commission took note of the Report of the Study Group.
C. Report of the Study Group
General comments and the projected outcome of the Study Group's work
Following the pattern of the previous year, the Study Group commenced its discussions with a general review of the topical summary of the discussion held in the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly during its fifty-ninth session, prepared by the Secretariat (A/CN.4/549, section E).
The Study Group took note of the broad endorsement of its work thus far in the deliberations of the Sixth Committee.
The Group confirmed its wish to complete its task on the basis of the schedule, programme of work, and methodology agreed upon during the 2003 session of the Commission (A/58/10, paras.
The Study Group reaffirmed its approach to focus on the substantive aspects of fragmentation in the light of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, while leaving aside institutional considerations pertaining to fragmentation.
Taking note of the deliberations in the Sixth Committee, it reiterated its intention to attain an outcome that would be concrete and of practical value especially for legal experts in foreign offices and international organizations.
Its work should thus contain critical analyses of the experience of fragmentation in various international organs and institutions and it should yield an outcome that will be helpful in providing resources for judges and administrators coping with questions such as conflicting or overlapping obligations emerging from different legal sources.
This will require a description of the actual problems in their social context.
The Study Group reaffirmed its intention to prepare, as the substantive outcome of its work, a single collective document consisting of two parts.
One part would be a relatively large analytical study on the question of fragmentation, composed on the basis of the individual outlines and studies submitted by individual members of the Study Group during 2003-2005 and discussed in the Group.
This would consist of a description and analysis of the topic from the point of view of, in particular, the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
The other part would consist of a condensed set of conclusions, guidelines or principles emerging from the studies and the discussions in the Study Group.
This would be a concrete, practice-oriented set of brief statements that would work, on the one hand, as the summary and conclusions of the Study Group's work and, on the other hand, as a set of practical guidelines to help thinking about and dealing with the issue of fragmentation in legal practice.
A draft of both documents would be submitted by the Study Group for adoption by the Commission in 2006.
Discussion of a memorandum on “regionalism” in the context of the Study on the “Function and scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'”
The Study Group continued its substantive discussion on the study of the function and scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of “self-contained regimes” with a review of a memorandum on Regionalism by its Chairman.
It was noted in the memorandum that the expression “regionalism” did not figure predominantly in treatises of international law and in the cases in which it was featured it rarely took the shape of a “rule” or a “principle”.
It was often raised in discussions concerning the universality of international law, in the context of its historical development and the influences behind its substantive parts.
It only arose in rare cases in a normative sense as a claim about regional lex specialis.
There were at least three distinct ways in which “regionalism” was usually understood, namely: (a) as a set of distinct approaches and methods for examining international law; (b) as a technique for international law making; and (c) as the pursuit of geographical exceptions to universal rules of international law.452.
The first - regionalism as a set of approaches and methods for examining international law - was the most general and broadest sense.
It was used to denote particular orientations of legal thought or historical and cultural traditions.
Such is the case with the “Anglo-American” tradition or the “continental” tradition of international law, or “Soviet” doctrines or “Third World Approaches” to international law.
Although it is possible to trace the sociological, cultural and political influence that particular regions have had on international law, such influences do not really address aspects of fragmentation as coming under the mandate of the Study Group.
These remain historical or cultural sources or more or less continuing political influences behind international law.
There is a very strong presumption among international lawyers that, notwithstanding such influences, the law itself should be read in a universal fashion.
There is no serious claim that some rules should be read or used in a special way because they emerged as a result of a “regional” inspiration.
Very often regional particularity translates itself or becomes apparent as a functional one: a regional environmental or a human rights regime, for example, may be more important because of its environmental or human rights focus than as a regional regime.
This type of differentiation does not need further separate treatment since it already forms the gist of the study on the “Function and scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'” that was exhaustively debated in the Study Group last year.
The second type of regionalism - a regional approach to international law-making - conceives regions as privileged forums for international law-making because of the relative homogeneity of the interests and actors concerned.
It is sometimes suggested, for example, that international law should be developed in a regional context, since its implementation would thus be more efficient and equitable and the relevant rules would be understood and applied in a coherent manner.
Regionalism in this sense is often propounded by sociological approaches to international law.
No doubt it is sometimes advisable to limit the application of novel rules to a particular region.
Much of international law has developed in this way, as the gradual extension of originally regional rules to areas outside the region.
However, this sociological or historical perspective, too, falls largely outside the focus of the Study Group.
Moreover, the legislative concern in such cases is also often more significant by virtue of the nature of the rules being propounded (that is to say, as rules about “trade” or “environment”) than owing to whatever regional linkage is being proposed.
The third situation - regionalism as the pursuit of geographical exceptions to universal rules of international law - seems more relevant in this context.
It could be analysed: (a) in a positive sense, as a rule or a principle with a regional sphere of validity in relation to a universal rule or principle; or (b) in a negative sense, as a rule or a principle that imposes a limitation on the validity of a universal rule or principle.
In the former case, the rule in question would be binding only on the States of the particular region, while in the latter sense, States concerned would be exempted from the application of an otherwise universal rule or principle.
As far as this second (“negative”) sense is concerned, it does not seem to have any independence from the more general question, debated by the Study Group last year, of the possibility and consequences of (a regional) lex specialis: the conditions under which a regional rule may derogate from a universal one seem analogous with or identical to the problems dealt with last year.
It is undoubted that States in a region may, by treaty or otherwise, establish a special law applicable in their mutual relations.
In this regard, the “positive sense” merely describes a truism.
However, there is a stronger claim to the effect that there may come to existence also types of regional law that are binding on all the States of the region, or other States in their relations with the States of the region, independently of the consent of the latter.
Such a claim was dealt with, albeit inconclusively, by the International Court of Justice in the Asylum case as well as in the Haya de la Torre case, where Colombia contended inter alia that a “regional law” had emerged on diplomatic protection, with the purpose of deviating from the general law.
Such law was applicable, in the view of Colombia, even on States of the region that did not accept it.
In his dissenting opinion, Judge Alvarez asserted that such rule was not only “binding upon all States of the New World” and “binding upon all the States of the New World” though it “need not be accepted by all [of them]” but also on all other States “in matters affecting America”.
However, the Court did not pronounce itself on the conceptual possibility of the existence of rules binding automatically on States of a region and binding other States in their relationship with those States.
It treated the claim by Colombia as a claim about customary law and dismissed it on account that Colombia had failed to produce evidence of its existence.
However, it is very difficult to accept - and there are no uncontested cases on this - that a regional rule might be binding on States of a region, or other States, without the consent of the latter.
Apart from other considerations, there are no unequivocal ways of determining the membership of particular States in geographical regions.
Attention was also drawn to two specific issues in the context of regionalism as the pursuit of geographical exceptions to universal rules, which may still require separate treatment, namely: (a) the question of universalism and regionalism in the context of human rights law; and (b) the relationship between universalism and regionalism in the context of the collective security system under the Charter of the United Nations.
The former - universalism and regionalism in human rights - raised philosophical questions of cultural relativism which fall outside the scope of the Study.
In any case, regional human rights regimes may also be seen as the varying, context-sensitive implementation and application of shared standards, and not as exceptions to general norms.
This would imply that such matters would fall under the more general question of the relationship between the general and the special law in the study on the function and scope of the lex specialis.
The latter - collective security under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations -raised the question of the priority of competence between regional agencies and arrangements and the Security Council in taking enforcement action.
In view of Article 52 (2) of the Charter, any action by such agencies or arrangements may not be considered an “exception” to the competence of the Security Council.
Chapter VIII of the Charter should therefore be seen as a set of functional provisions that seek the most appropriate level of dealing with particular issues under notions of “subsidiarity”.
The Study Group expressed support for the general orientation of the memorandum.
While members noted that “regionalism” generally fell under the problem of lex specialis, some still felt that this was not all that could be said about it.
In some fields such as trade, for example, regionalism was influencing the general law in such great measure that it needed special highlighting.
Especially practices by the European Union as well as States of the Latin American region were emphasized.
Although the opinion was expressed that a study on the role and nature of European law would be worthwhile, most members felt that this could not be accomplished in the time available.
It was pointed out that human rights law, for example, had always been fragmented into different compartments: political rights, economic rights, rights of the third generation, and so on.
It was agreed, however, that the Study Group should not embark upon a discussion of problems of cultural relativism in human rights.
In regard to security issues, the opinion was expressed that although the principle of non-intervention was more entrenched in the Western hemisphere than elsewhere, there might be a need to mention recent activities of regional organizations such as the African Union in peacekeeping and peace enforcement.
However, others expressed the view that the regional approaches under Chapter VIII of the Charter did not emerge as “fragmentation” but concerned the application of specific Charter provisions.
The Study Group held a separate discussion, on the basis of a paper by one of its members, Mr. C.P. Economides, of the so-called “disconnection clause” that had been inserted in many multilateral conventions, according to which in their relations inter se certain of the parties to the multilateral convention would not apply the rules of the convention but specific rules agreed among themselves.
This clause had often been inserted at the request of the members of the European Union.
In particular, three types of such clauses had typically been made.
As a general rule, the exclusion of the provisions of the relevant treaty was complete; and in exceptional cases, it was partial, or optional.
The objective of such clauses was to ensure that European law takes precedence over the provisions of the multilateral convention in the relations among States members of the Community and between those States and the Community itself.
The clause had no effect on the rights and obligations of States not members of the Community or of the Community itself, or States members of the Community towards them.
Some members felt that the proliferation of such clauses was a significant negative phenomenon.
The opinion was even expressed that such clauses might be illegal inasmuch as they were contradictory to the fundamental principles of treaty law.
Others, however, observed that whatever their political motives or effects, such clauses were still duly inserted in the relevant conventions and their validity thus followed from party consent.
It was difficult to see on what basis parties might be prohibited from consenting to them.
The Study Group agreed, however, that such clauses might sometimes erode the coherence of the treaty.
It was important to ensure that they would not be used to defeat the object and purpose of the treaty.
Nonetheless, it was felt impossible to determine their effect in abstracto.
It was also pointed out that in some situations the result may not be as problematic, particularly if the obligations assumed by the parties under the disconnection clause were intended to deal with the technical implementation of the provisions of the multilateral convention or are more favourable than those of the regime from which it departs.
On the basis of the discussion, the Study Group agreed that “regionalism” should not have a separate entry in the final substantive report.
Rather, various aspects of the memorandum and the debate would be used as examples in the overall schema of the topic, especially in connection with the lex specialis rule.
Mention of regionalism as a factor contributing to fragmentation should also be included in the introduction of the final report.
It should be borne in mind, however, that its role was not only negative.
It was often useful as a form of implementing general law (as in the UNCLOS for instance).
The question of the disconnection clause as a special treaty technique used by the European Union would be dealt with in the context of the analyses of understanding various relationships between the general law and the special law in the study on the “Function and scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'”.
Discussion on the Study on the interpretation of treaties in the light of “any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties” (article 31 (3) (c) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties), in the context of general developments in international law and concerns of the international community
The Study Group also discussed a revised paper by Mr. Mansfield on “The interpretation of treaties in the light of `any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties' (article 31 (3) (c) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties), in the context of general developments in international law and concerns of the international community.” It was recalled that according to article 31 (3) (c) of the Vienna Convention, treaties were to be interpreted within the context of “any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties”.
The provision thus helped to place the problem of treaty relations in the context of treaty interpretation.
It expressed what could be called a principle of “systemic integration”, that is to say, a guideline according to which treaties should be interpreted against the background of all the rules and principles of international law - in other words, international law understood as a system.
The negotiation of individual treaties usually took place as separate diplomatic and practical exercises, conducted by experts in the particular field of regulatory substance covered by the treaty.
It was the objective of article 31 (3) (c) to connect the separate treaty provisions that followed from such exercises to each other as aspects of an overall aggregate of the rights and obligations of States.
As an interpretative tool, the principle expresses the nature of a treaty as an agreement “governed by international law”.
The provision was not a panacea in reducing fragmentation, however.
Indeed, article 31 (3) (c) was not equipped as a technique to resolve conflicts or overlaps between rules of international law - it merely calls upon lawyers to interpret treaties so as to ensure consistency with their normative environment.
As such, the provision takes its place alongside a wide set of provisions in the Vienna Convention and pragmatic techniques of conflict-resolution.
In the past, article 31 (3) (c) has not often been resorted to.
Indeed, the article has been sometimes criticized for providing little guidance as to when and how it is to be used; what to do about overlapping treaty obligations; whether it took account also of customary rules and whether the “relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties” referred to the law in force at the conclusion of the treaty or otherwise.
However, recent practice showed a considerably increased recourse to the provision.
It has been resorted to, for example, by the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal, the European Court of Human Rights, Arbitral Tribunals established pursuant to multilateral agreements, the Appellate Body within the WTO Dispute Settlement Understanding, as well as the International Court of Justice.
In order to “operationalize” article 31 (3) (c) it was suggested to: (i) reinstate the central role of general international law in treaty interpretation; (ii) locate the relevance of other conventional international law in this process; and (iii) shed light on the position of treaties in the progressive development of international law over time (“inter-temporality”).
In this connection, the revised report by Mr. Mansfield offered a series of propositions for consideration.
First, according to the principle of “systemic integration”, attention should, in the interpretation of a treaty, also be given to the rules of customary international law and general principles of law that are applicable in the relations between the parties to a treaty.
This principle could be articulated as a negative as well as a positive presumption.
(a) Negatively in that entering into treaty obligations, the parties would be assumed not to have intended to act inconsistently with customary rules or with general principles of law; and
(b) Positively in that parties are taken “to refer to general principles of international law for all questions which [the treaty] does not itself resolve in express terms or in a different way”.
The importance of custom and general principles is highlighted whenever a treaty provision is unclear or open-textured or when the terms used in the treaty have a recognized meaning in customary international law, to which the parties can therefore be taken to have intended to refer.
The process may on occasion involve extensive investigation of sources outside the treaty in order to determine the content of the applicable rule of custom or general principle (as in Al-Adsani and Oil Platforms).
The significance of rules of customary international law and general principles of law in this process is in the fact that they perform a systemic or constitutional function in describing the operation of the international legal order.
Second, where another treaty is applicable in the relations between the parties this raises the question of whether it is necessary that all the parties to the treaty, being interpreted, are also parties to the treaty relied upon as the other source of international law for interpretation purposes?
Four answers to this question may be contemplated.
(a) That all parties to the treaty under interpretation should also be parties to any treaty relied upon for its interpretation.
This is a clear but very narrow standard.
The resulting problems might be alleviated by making a distinction between using the other treaty for the purposes of interpretation or application.
In any case, such other treaty may always be used as evidence of a common understanding between the parties; (b) That the parties in the dispute are also parties to the other treaty.
This approach would broaden the range of treaties potentially applicable for interpretation purposes.
However, it would run the risk of inconsistent interpretations depending on the happenstance of the particular treaty partners in dispute;
(c) That the rule contained in a particular treaty be required to possess the status of customary international law.
This approach has the merit of rigour but it might be inappropriately restrictive in regard to treaties which have wide acceptance in the international community (including by the disputing States) but are not in all respects stating customary international law (such as UNCLOS);
(d) That although complete identity of treaty parties would not be required, the other rule relied upon could be said to have been implicitly accepted or tolerated by all parties to the treaty under interpretation.
The third problem left open by the formulation of article 31 (3) (c) concerned inter-temporality, that is, in regard to the other rules of international law in the interpretation of a treaty, is the interpreter limited to international law applicable at the time the treaty was adopted or may subsequent treaty developments, too, be taken into account?
Here a distinction might be made between subsequent treaties that may affect the application of the treaty to be interpreted (the process of the actualization or contemporization of the latter treaty) and those that may affect the interpretation of the treaty itself, that is to say, cases where the concepts in the treaty are themselves “not static but evolutionary”.
Although there was support for the principle of contemporaneity (that is, that only provisions contemporaneous to the treaty under interpretation should be taken account of), it could not be excluded a priori that the parties might intend the interpretation and application of a treaty to follow subsequent developments.
However, a safe guide to a decision on the matter may not be found in the imputed intention of the parties alone.
Rather, the interpreter must find concrete evidence of the parties' intentions in this regard in the material sources referred to in articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention, namely: in the terms themselves; the context; the object and purpose of the treaty; and, where necessary, the travaux.
The Study Group welcomed the revised paper by Mr. Mansfield, endorsing in general terms the adoption of an interpretative approach to article 31 (3) (c) that may be of practical use to judges and administrators.
The approach taken to achieve systemic integration was felt to be consistent with the approach taken by the Group in its discussion of the Chairman's report on the lex specialis and the question of “self-contained regimes” the previous year.
Some members still felt that there was, perhaps, a need for a grounding of such a principle in the Vienna Convention itself.
Accordingly, the Study Group preferred to refer, instead of “principle”, to the “objective” of systemic integration.
According to this objective, whatever their subject matter, treaties are a creation of the international legal system and their operation is predicated upon that fact.
The Study Group accepted that there was a need to operationalize article 31 (3) (c).
However, it was also widely felt that the relationship between paragraphs (a) and (b) of article 31 (3) and its paragraph (c) needed to be clarified.
Article 31 (3) (c) was not to be used outside of the general context of article 31.
Some doubt was also expressed regarding the possibility to go very far in determining rules of treaty interpretation.
Such interpretation was a rather “artistic” activity that could scarcely be grasped by firm rules or processes.
The Study Group highlighted the flexibility built into article 31 (3) (c).
It accepted that the rules referred to in article 31 (3) (c) included not only other treaty rules but also rules of customary law and general principles of law.
Concerning the role of custom and general principles it was noted that in addition to the situations mentioned in paragraph 471 above, custom and general principles may be relevant also where the treaty regime collapses.
If several rules from different sources (treaty, custom, general principles) might be applicable, the view, also expressed last year, was reiterated that though there was no formal hierarchy between the legal sources, lawyers tended to look first at treaties, then customary rules and then general principles in seeking answers to interpretative problems.
Regarding other applicable conventional international law, the Study Group felt that it did not need to take a definite position on the four solutions suggested in paragraph 472 above.
The task for determination rested upon the judge or the administrator on the basis of the nature of the treaty under interpretation and the concrete facts in each case.
It was also suggested that a fifth solution might be considered, namely that all relevant rules of international law applicable in relations between the parties be taken into account and given whatever weight might be appropriate under the circumstances.
Regarding inter-temporality, there was support for the principle of contemporaneity as well as the evolutive approach.
Again the Study Group felt it should not make a choice between the various positions.
It saw its role as limited to indicating the possible options available to the judge or administrator charged to answer the question of whether the reference to “other relevant rules” in article 31 (3) (c) was limited to rules in force when the treaty was adopted or could be extended to also cover subsequent treaties.
Discussion of the Preliminary Report on “Hierarchy in international law: jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, as conflict rules”
The Study Group also considered a revised report by Mr. Z. Galicki on “Hierarchy in international law: jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, as conflict rules”.
The report outlined relevant aspects to be considered with respect to the concept of hierarchy in international law, gave a brief description of jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, and the nature of obligations under Article 103 of the Charter, and practical examples in which some of these categories have been addressed, as well as raised issues concerning possible relationships between them.
The report also considered the potential impact of the three categories as conflict rules on the process of fragmentation of international law, particularly on other norms of international law; and highlighted the connection of this study with the other studies related to fragmentation of international law.
In the main, it was suggested that the concept of hierarchy in international law should be approached and discussed by the Study Group from the point of view of hierarchy of norms and obligations, without a priori excluding other possible concepts of hierarchy.
It was also pointed out that the concept of hierarchy in international law was developed especially by doctrine.
It was also noted that norms of jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, and obligations under the Charter of the United Nations (Article 103 of the Charter) should be treated as three parallel and separate categories of norms and obligations, taking into account their sources, their substantive content, territorial scope, and practical application.
All three categories were also characterized by certain weaknesses: (a) norms of jus cogens lacked a definitive catalogue and the concept as such was not entirely uncontested; (b) obligations erga omnes were often of a very general nature, both in substance and in their application, and they involved “the legal interests of all States”, which may develop over time; (c) unlike norms of jus cogens and obligations erga omnes, obligations under Article 103 of the Charter were formally limited to States that are members of the United Nations.
Although the three categories raised a wide range of theoretical and practical questions, it was reiterated that the Study Group should only examine them as “conflict rules” in the context of difficulties arising from the diversification and expansion of international law.
The objective should be to come up with guidelines of a general character, bearing in mind the difficulty of identifying hierarchical structures between norms.
The report further highlighted the close connection between the study on hierarchy in international law and the other four studies.
The conclusions by the Study Group on this study would thus depend on the conclusions emerging from the other studies, and the former would in return have consequences for the results of the latter.
In this connection, it was suggested that conclusions could be further developed around a number of clusters concerning (a) the general concept of hierarchy in international law; (b) the acceptance and rationale of hierarchy in international law; (c) the relationship between the various norms under consideration; and (d) the relationship between hierarchy and fragmentation of international law.
As regards the relationship between the various norms under consideration, the paper by Mr. Galicki suggested the necessity to recognize the principle of harmonization.
In the ensuing discussion, it was noted that the current study was the most abstract and academic one among the five studies identified.
It was therefore necessary to bear in mind the views expressed in the Sixth Committee and to proceed in as concrete a fashion as possible.
In this connection, it was stressed that the Study Group should focus on hierarchy and other possible relationships between norms of international law in the context of fragmentation.
It should seek to employ the technique, followed in the other studies, of setting the subject of legal reasoning within an international legal system in relation to the three categories, as conflict rules.
It was considered essential to study how hierarchy served as a tool to resolve conflicts, the acceptance and rationale of the hierarchy in relation to practical examples concerning the three categories, as well as the context in which hierarchy operated to set aside an inferior rule and the consequences of such setting aside.
While there was no hierarchy as such between sources of international law, general international law recognized that certain norms have a peremptory character.
Certain rules were recognized as superior or having a special or privileged status because of their content, effect, scope of application, or on the basis of consent among parties.
The rationale of hierarchy in international law found its basis in the principle of the international public order, and its acceptance is reflected in examples of such norms of jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, as well as treaty-based provisions such as Article 103 of the Charter.
The notion of public order is a recognition of the fact that some norms are more important or less important than others.
Certain rules exist to satisfy the interests of the international community as a whole.
Some members of the Study Group, however, felt that the metaphor of hierarchy in international law was not analytically helpful, and that it needed to be contextualized within specific relationships between norms of international law.
It was stressed that hierarchy operated in a relational and contextual manner.
It was clearly understood that, while norms of jus cogens and obligations arising under Article 103 of the Charter addressed aspects of hierarchy, obligations erga omnes were more concerned with the scope of application of norms, rather than hierarchy.
The qualification of norms as erga omnes did not imply any hierarchy.
In exploring such relationships, the Study Group could also survey other provisions in multilateral treaty regimes of a hierarchical nature similar to Article 103, as well as take into account the special status of the Charter of the United Nations in general.
Inasmuch as obligations erga omnes did not implicate normative hierarchy, it was suggested that this would be better addressed under the title “norms with special status in international law”.
The concept of jus cogens has been widely accepted by the doctrine and finds reflection in the Vienna Convention.
The Commission has previously resisted the effort of compiling a catalogue of norms of jus cogens and decided “to leave the full content of this rule to be worked out in State practice and in the jurisprudence of international tribunals”.
On this basis, the Study Group agreed that it would not seek to produce a catalogue of norms of jus cogens.
While hierarchy may solve conflicts of norms, it was acknowledged that conflicts between norms of jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, and obligations under Article 103 of the Charter could also emerge.
In regard to the complex relationship between obligations erga omnes and norms of jus cogens, it was observed that while all jus cogens obligations had an erga omnes character, the reverse was not necessarily true.
This had also been the view of the Commission in its Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts.
The Study Group would retain such a position.
It was also noted that the recent ICJ advisory opinion Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory was pertinent to this relationship.
As regards the relationship between norms of jus cogens and obligations under Article 103, some Members highlighted its complex nature, while others stressed the absolute priority of the former over the latter.
The Study Group identified the need to address the effects of the operation of norms of jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, and obligations under Article 103 of the Charter (or similar treaty provisions).
Norms of jus cogens were non-derogable and the effect of this operation was to produce the invalidity of the inferior norm.
By contrast, obligations erga omnes related to the opposability of the obligations to all States, in particular to the right of every State to invoke their violation as a basis for State responsibility.
It was also observed that a distinction should be made between the invalidity of the inferior rule that resulted from the presence of jus cogens and the inapplicability of the inferior rule resulting from the operation of Article 103.
Some members of the Study Group doubted that the principle of harmonization had a particular role to play in the relationship between norms of jus cogens and other norms.
The Study Group nevertheless recognized that the principle of harmonization should be seen as a cross-cutting interpretive principle, applicable also in hierarchical relations to the extent possible.
Programme, procedures and working methods of the Commission and its documentation
At its 2832nd meeting, held on 3 May 2005, the Commission established a Planning Group for the current session.
The Planning Group held four meetings.
It had before it section H of the topical summary of the discussion held in the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, entitled “Other decisions and conclusions of the Commission”, and General Assembly resolution 59/41 (paras.
6, 7, 8, 13, 14 and 17), on the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-sixth session.
At its 2859th meeting on 28 July 2005, the Commission took note of the report of the Planning Group.
Cost-saving measures
The Commission, having considered paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution 59/41, budgetary constraints and the requirements of the programme of work of the Commission for the current session resulting from unforeseeable circumstances, decided that it should start the second part of the fifty-seventh session on 11 July 2005, thereby reducing the duration of the session by one week.
Documentation
The Commission considered the issue of timely submission of reports by Special Rapporteurs.
It recalled that if the dates for the submission of reports as originally indicated by the Special Rapporteurs were not observed, the availability of reports might be jeopardized, which could have far-reaching consequences for the programme of work of the Commission.
Bearing in mind the principles governing the submission of documents in the United Nations as well as the heavy workload of the relevant services of the Organization, the Commission wishes to emphasize the importance it attaches to the timely submission of reports by Special Rapporteurs, with a view to their processing and to their distribution sufficiently in advance to allow members to study the reports.
Working Group on the long-term programme of work
The Working Group on the long-term programme of work was reconstituted with Mr. Pellet as Chairman.
The Working Group held two meetings and its Chairman reported orally to the Planning Group on 25 July 2005.
The Working Group intends to submit a full report together with the topics that it proposes for inclusion in the long-term programme of work at the end of the quinquennium.
New topic for inclusion in the current programme of work of the Commission
At its 2865th meeting, on 4 August 2005, the Commission decided that the topic “the obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)”, which is already included in the Commission's long-term programme of work, be included in the programme of work of the Commission, in accordance with the decision taken by the Commission at its fifty-sixth session (A/59/10, para.
At the same meeting, the Commission decided to appoint Mr. Zdzislaw Galicki, Special Rapporteur for the topic “the obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)”.
Honoraria
The Commission reiterated once more the views it had expressed in paragraphs 525 to 531 of its Report on the work of its fifty-fourth session (A/57/10), in paragraph 447 of its Report on the work of its fifty-fifth session (A/58/10) and in paragraph 369 of its Report on the work of its fifty-sixth session (A/59/10).
The Commission reiterates that General Assembly resolution 56/272 of 27 March 2002 concerning the question of honoraria especially affects Special Rapporteurs, in particular those from developing countries, as it comprises the support for their necessary research work.
Date and place of the fifty-eighth session of the Commission
The Commission decided that the fifty-eighth session of the Commission be held at Geneva from 1 May to 9 June and from 3 July to 11 August 2006.
C. Cooperation with other bodies
The Inter-American Juridical Committee was represented at the present session of the Commission by Ms. Ana Elizabeth Villalta Vizcarra, member of the Committee who addressed the Commission at its 2847th meeting on 1 June 2005.
An exchange of views followed.
At its 2851st meeting on 14 July 2005, Judge Jiuyong Shi, President of the International Court of Justice, addressed the Commission and informed it of the Court's recent activities and of the cases currently before it.
An exchange of views followed.
The Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization was represented at the present session of the Commission by its Secretary-General, Mr. Wafik Z. Kamil, who addressed the Commission at its 2853rd meeting on 19 July 2005.
An exchange of views followed.
The European Committee on Legal Cooperation and the Committee of Legal Advisers on Public International Law were represented at the present session of the Commission by Mr. Guy de Vel, Director-General for Legal Affairs of the Council of Europe, who addressed the Commission at its 2860th meeting on 29 July 2005.
An exchange of views followed.
On 27 May 2005, an informal exchange of views was held between members of the Commission and members of the European Society of International Law on the topic of Responsibility of international organizations.
On 13 July 2005, an informal exchange of views was held between members of the Commission and members of the legal services of the International Committee of the Red Cross on topics of mutual interest.
On 4 August 2005, an informal exchange of views was held between members of the Commission and members of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights on issues of mutual interest, and in particular on the topic “Reservations to Treaties”.
Representation at the sixtieth session of the General Assembly
The Commission decided that it should be represented at the sixtieth session of the General Assembly by its Chairman, Mr. Djamchid Momtaz.
Moreover, at its 2865th meeting, on 4 August 2005, the Commission requested Mr. Ian Brownlie, Special Rapporteur on the topic “Effects of armed conflicts on treaties”, to attend the sixtieth session of the General Assembly under the terms of paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 44/35.
E. International Law Seminar
Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 59/41, the forty-first session of the International Law Seminar was held at the Palais des Nations from 11 July to 29 July 2005, during the present session of the Commission.
The Seminar is intended for advanced students specializing in international law and for young professors or government officials pursuing an academic or diplomatic career or posts in the civil service in their country.
Twenty-four participants of different nationalities, mostly from developing countries, were able to take part in the session.
The participants in the Seminar observed plenary meetings of the Commission, attended specially arranged lectures, and participated in working groups on specific topics.
The Seminar was opened by the Chairman of the Commission, Mr. Djamchid Momtaz.
Mr. Ulrich von Blumenthal, Senior Legal Adviser of the United Nations Office at Geneva, was responsible for the administration, organization and conduct of the Seminar.
The following lectures were given by members of the Commission: Mr. Victor Rodriguez-Cedeño: “Unilateral Acts”, in cooperation with Ms. Maria Isabel Torres Cazorla; Mr. John Dugard: “Diplomatic Protection”; Mr. Djamchid Momtaz: “Advisory opinion of ICJ of 9 July 2004”; Mr. P.S. Rao: “International Liability of acts not prohibited by International law”; Mr. Chusei Yamada: “Shared Natural Resources”; Mr. M. Koskenniemi: “Fragmentation of International Law”; Mr. Giorgio Gaja: “Responsibility of international organizations”.
Lectures were also given by Mr. Arnold Pronto, United Nations Office of Legal Affairs: “The Work of the ILC”; Mr. Vincent Cochetel, UNHCR: “International Refugee Law - Recent Developments”; Mr. Yves Renouf, Legal Adviser WTO: “The WTO Dispute Settlement System”; Mr. Markus Schmidt, OHCHR: “The Work of the Human Rights Committee”.
Study visits were organized to CERN and to Palais Wilson.
Each Seminar participant was assigned to one of two working groups on “Unilateral Acts” and “Diplomatic Protection”.
The special rapporteurs of the Commission for these subjects, Mr. Victor Rodriguez Cedeño and Mr. John Dugard, provided guidance for the working groups.
The groups presented their findings to the Seminar.
Each participant was also assigned to submit a written summary report on one of the lectures.
A collection of the reports was compiled and distributed to all participants.
Participants were also given the opportunity to make use of the facilities of the United Nations Library, which extended its opening hours during the event.
The Republic and Canton of Geneva offered its traditional hospitality to the participants with a guided visit of the Alabama and Grand Council Rooms followed by a reception.
Mr. Djamchid Momtaz, Chairman of the Commission, Mr. Sergei Ordzhonikidze, Director-General of the United Nations Office at Geneva, Mr. Ulrich von Blumenthal, Director of the Seminar, and Mr. Scott Sheeran, on behalf of the participants, addressed the Commission and the participants at the close of the Seminar.
Each participant was presented with a certificate attesting to his or her participation in the forty-first session of the Seminar.
The Commission noted with particular appreciation that the Governments of the Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Mexico, New Zealand, Sweden and Switzerland had made voluntary contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Law Seminar.
The financial situation of the Fund allowed to award a sufficient number of fellowships to deserving candidates from developing countries in order to achieve adequate geographical distribution of participants.
This year, full fellowships (travel and subsistence allowance) were awarded to 10 candidates and partial fellowship (subsistence only) to 6 candidates.
Of the 927 participants, representing 157 nationalities, who have taken part in the Seminar since 1965, the year of its inception, 557 have received a fellowship.
The Commission stresses the importance it attaches to the sessions of the Seminar, which enables young lawyers, especially those from developing countries, to familiarize themselves with the work of the Commission and the activities of the many international organizations, which have their headquarters in Geneva.
The Commission recommends that the General Assembly should again appeal to States to make voluntary contributions in order to secure the holding of the Seminar in 2006 with as broad participation as possible.
The Commission noted with satisfaction that in 2005 comprehensive interpretation services were made available to the Seminar.
It expresses the hope that the same services will be provided for the Seminar at the next session, within existing resources.
See Chap.
XII, para.
Mr. J.C. Baena Soares, Mr. E. Candioti, Mr. Z. Galicki, Mr. P.C.R.
Kabatsi, Mr. T.V. Melescanu, Mr.
A. Pellet, Mr. P.S. Rao and Mr. C. Yamada.
Mr. I. Brownlie, Mr. C.J.R.
Dugard, Mr. G. Gaja, Mr. M. Kamto, Mr.
A. Pellet, Mr. P.S. Rao, Mr. V. Rodríguez Cedeño and Mr. C. Yamada.
A/CN.4/551 and A/CN.4/551/Corr.1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), para.
A/CN.4/555 and A/CN.4/555/Add.1.
Article 16 reads as follows:
A State which aids or assists another State in the commission of an internationally wrongful act by the latter is internationally responsible for doing so if:
(a) That State does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the internationally wrongful act; and
(b) The act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that State.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), p. 47.
See article 17 of the articles on Responsibility for Internationally Wrongful Acts which reads as follows:
A State which directs and controls another State in the commission of an internationally wrongful act by the latter is internationally responsible for that act if:
(a) That State does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the internationally wrongful act; and
(b) The act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that State.
Ibid.
See article 18 of the articles on Responsibility for Internationally Wrongful Acts which reads as follows:
A State which coerces another State to commit an act is internationally responsible for that act if:
(a) The act would, but for the coercion, be an internationally wrongful act of the coerced State; and
(b) The coercing State does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the act.
Ibid.
Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/57/10 and Corr.1), para.
Ibid., para.
Draft article 1 reads as follows:
Article 1 [Article 1]
Scope of the present Convention
The present Convention applies to:
(a) Utilization of transboundary aquifers and aquifer systems;
(b) Other activities that have or are likely to have an impact upon those aquifers and aquifer systems;
(c) Measures of protection, preservation and management of those aquifers and aquifer systems.
Draft article 2, incorporating A/CN.4/551/Corr.1, reads as follows:
Article 2 [Article 2]
Use of terms
For the purposes of the present Convention:
(a) “Aquifer” means a permeable [water-bearing] geological formation underlain by a less permeable layer and the water contained in the saturated zone of the formation;
(b) “Aquifer system” means a series of two or more aquifers [, each associated with specific geological formations,] that are hydraulically connected;
(c) “Transboundary aquifer” or “transboundary aquifer system” means, respectively, an aquifer or aquifer system, parts of which are situated in different States;
(d) “Aquifer State” means a State Party to the present Convention in whose territory any part of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system is situated;
(e) “Recharging aquifer” means an aquifer that receives a non-negligible amount of contemporary water recharge;
(f) “Non-recharging aquifer” means an aquifer that receives a negligible amount of contemporary water recharge.
Draft article 3 reads as follows:
Article 3
Bilateral and regional arrangements
For the purpose of managing a particular transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, aquifer States in whose territories such an aquifer or aquifer system is located are encouraged to enter into a bilateral or regional arrangement among themselves.
Such arrangement may be entered into with respect to an entire aquifer or aquifer system or any part thereof or a particular project, programme or use except insofar as the arrangement adversely affects, to a significant extent, the use by one or more other aquifer States of the water in that aquifer or aquifer system, without their express consent.
Any State in whose territory such an aquifer or aquifer system is located is entitled to participate in the negotiation and to become a party to arrangements when such arrangements are likely to prejudice their positions vis-à-vis that aquifer or aquifer system.
Parties to an arrangement referred to in paragraph 1 shall consider harmonizing such arrangement with the basic principles of the present Convention.
Where those parties consider that adjustment in application of the provisions of the present Convention is required because of the characteristics and special uses of a particular aquifer or aquifer system, they shall consult with a view to negotiating in good faith for the purpose of concluding an arrangement beneficial to all the parties.
In the absence of an agreement to the contrary, the present Convention applies to the aquifer or aquifer system referred to in paragraph 1 only to the extent that its provisions are compatible with those of the arrangement referred to in the same paragraph.
Draft article 5 reads as follows:
Article 5 [Article 3]
Equitable and reasonable utilization
Aquifer States shall, in their respective territories, utilize a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system in a manner such that the benefits to be derived from such utilization shall accrue equitably to the aquifer States concerned.
Aquifer States shall, in their respective territories, utilize a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system in a reasonable manner and, in particular:
(a) With respect to a recharging transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, shall take into account the sustainability of such aquifer or aquifer system and shall not impair the utilization and functions of such aquifer or aquifer system;
(b) With respect to a non-recharging transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, shall aim to maximize the long-term benefits derived from the use of the water contained therein.
They are encouraged to establish a development plan for such aquifer or aquifer system, taking into account the agreed lifespan of such aquifer or aquifer system as well as future needs of and alternative water sources for the aquifer States.
In the application of paragraphs 1 and 2, aquifer States concerned shall, when the need arises, enter into consultation in a spirit of cooperation.
Draft article 6 reads as follows:
Article 6
Factors relevant to equitable and reasonable utilization
Utilization of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system in an equitable and reasonable manner within the meaning of article 5 requires taking into account all relevant factors and circumstances, including:
(a) The natural condition of the aquifer or aquifer system;
(b) The social and economic needs of the aquifer States concerned;
(c) The population dependent on the aquifer or aquifer system in each aquifer State;
(d) The effects of the utilization of the aquifer or aquifer system in one aquifer State on other aquifer States concerned;
(e) The existing and potential utilization of the aquifer or aquifer system;
(f) The development, protection and conservation of the aquifer or aquifer system and the costs of measures to be taken to that effect;
(g) The availability of alternatives, of comparable value, to a particular existing and planned utilization of the aquifer or aquifer system.
The weight to be given to each factor is to be determined by its importance in comparison with that of other relevant factors.
In determining what is reasonable and equitable utilization, all relevant factors are to be considered together and conclusion reached on the basis of the whole.
Draft article 7 reads as follows:
Article 7 [Article 4]
Obligation not to cause harm
Aquifer States shall, in utilizing a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system in their territories, take all appropriate measures to prevent the causing of significant harm to other aquifer States.
Aquifer States shall, in undertaking other activities in their territories that have or are likely to have an impact on a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, take all appropriate measures to prevent the causing of significant harm through that aquifer or aquifer system to other aquifer States.
Where significant harm nevertheless is caused to another aquifer State, the aquifer States whose activities cause such harm shall, in the absence of agreement to such activities, take all appropriate measures, having due regard for the provisions of articles 5 and 6, in consultation with the affected State to eliminate or mitigate such harm and, where appropriate, to discuss the question of compensation.
Draft article 8 reads as follows:
Article 8 [Article 5]
General obligation to cooperate
Aquifer States shall cooperate on the basis of sovereign equality, territorial integrity, mutual benefit and good faith in order to attain reasonable utilization and adequate protection of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system.
In determining the manner of such cooperation, aquifer States are encouraged to establish joint mechanisms or commissions, as deemed necessary by them, to facilitate cooperation on relevant measures and procedures in the light of experience gained through cooperation in existing joint mechanisms and commissions in various regions.
Draft article 9 reads as follows:
Article 9 [Article 6]
Regular exchange of data and information
Pursuant to article 8, aquifer States shall, on a regular basis, exchange readily available data and information on the condition of the transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, in particular that of a geological, hydrogeological, hydrological, meteorological and ecological nature and related to the hydrochemistry of the aquifer or aquifer system, as well as related forecasts.
In the light of uncertainty about the nature and extent of some transboundary aquifer or aquifer systems, aquifer States shall employ their best efforts to collect and generate, in accordance with currently available practice and standards, individually or jointly and, where appropriate, together with or through international organizations, new data and information to identify the aquifer or aquifer systems more completely.
If an aquifer State is requested by another aquifer State to provide data and information that is not readily available, it shall employ its best efforts to comply with the request, but may condition its compliance upon payment by the requesting State of the reasonable costs of collecting and, where appropriate, processing such data or information.
Aquifer States shall employ their best efforts to collect and, where appropriate, to process data and information in a manner that facilitates its utilization by the other aquifer States to which it is communicated.
Draft article 10 reads as follows:
Article 10
Monitoring
For the purpose of being well acquainted with the conditions of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system:
Aquifer States shall agree on harmonized standards and methodology for monitoring a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system.
They shall identify key parameters that they will monitor based on an agreed conceptual model of the aquifer or aquifer system.
These parameters shall include extent, geometry, flow path, hydrostatic pressure distribution, quantities of flow and hydrochemistry of the aquifer or aquifer system.
Aquifer States shall undertake to monitor such parameters referred to in paragraph 1 and shall, wherever possible, carry out these monitoring activities jointly among themselves and in collaboration with the competent international organizations.
Where, however, monitoring activities are not carried out jointly, aquifer States shall exchange the monitored data.
Draft articles 16 and 17 read as follows:
Article 16
Assessment of potential effects of activities
When an aquifer State has reasonable grounds for believing that a particular planned activity in its territory may cause adverse effects on a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, it shall, as far as practicable, assess the potential effects of such activity.
Article 17
Planned activities
Before an aquifer State implements or permits the implementation of planned activities which may have a significant adverse effect upon other aquifer States, it shall provide those States with timely notification thereof.
Such notification shall be accompanied by available technical data and information, including any environmental impact assessment, in order to enable the notified States to evaluate the possible effects of the planned activities.
If the notifying State and the notified States disagree on the effect of the planned activities, they shall enter into consultations and, if necessary, negotiations with a view to arriving at an equitable resolution of the situation.
They may utilize an independent fact-finding body which may be able to make an impartial assessment of the effect of the planned activities.
Draft articles 4, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 read as follows:
Article 4
Relation to other conventions and international agreements
When the States Parties to the present Convention are parties also to the Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses, the provisions of the latter concerning transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems apply only to the extent that they are compatible with those of the present Convention.
The present Convention shall not alter the rights and obligations of the States Parties which arise from other agreements compatible with the present Convention and which do not affect the enjoyment by other States Parties of their rights or the performance of their obligations under the present Convention.
…
Article 11 [Article 7]
Relationship between different kinds of utilization
In the absence of agreement or custom to the contrary, no utilization of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system enjoys inherent priority over other utilization.
In the event of a conflict between utilization of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, it shall be resolved with special regard being given to the requirements of vital human needs.
Article 12
Protection and preservation of ecosystems
Aquifer States shall protect and preserve ecosystems within a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system.
They shall also ensure adequate quality and sufficient quantity of discharge water to protect and preserve outside ecosystems dependent on the aquifer or aquifer system.
Article 13
Protection of recharge and discharge zones
Aquifer States shall identify recharge zones of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system and, within these zones, shall take special measures to minimize detrimental impacts on the recharge process and also take all measures to prevent pollutants from entering the aquifer or aquifer system.
Aquifer States shall identify discharge zones of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system and, within these zones, shall take special measures to minimize detrimental impacts on the discharge process.
When such recharge or discharge zones are located in the territories of States other than aquifer States, aquifer States should seek the cooperation of the former States to protect these zones.
Article 14
Prevention, reduction and control of pollution
Aquifer States shall, individually and, where appropriate, jointly, prevent, reduce and control the pollution of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system that may cause significant harm to other aquifer States or to their environment.
In the light of uncertainty about the nature and extent of some transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems, aquifer States are encouraged to take a precautionary approach.
Article 15
Management
Aquifer States shall undertake to establish plans and implement these plans for the proper management of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system in accordance with the provisions of the present Convention.
They shall, at the request by any of them, enter into consultations concerning the management of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system, which may include the establishment of a joint management mechanism.
Draft articles 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25 read as follows:
Article 18
Scientific and technical assistance to developing States
States shall, directly or through competent international organizations, provide scientific, educational, technical and other assistance to developing States for the protection and management of a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system.
Such assistance shall include, inter alia:
(a) Training of their scientific and technical personnel;
(b) Facilitating their participation in relevant international programmes;
(c) Supplying them with necessary equipment and facilities;
(d) Enhancing their capacity to manufacture such equipment;
(e) Providing advice on and developing facilities for research, monitoring, educational and other programmes;
(f) Minimizing the effects of major activities affecting transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems;
(g) Preparing environmental impact assessments.
Article 19
Emergency situations
An aquifer State shall, without delay and by the most expeditious means available, notify other potentially affected States and competent international organizations of any emergency situation originating within its territory that causes, or poses an imminent threat of causing, serious harm to other States and that results suddenly from natural causes or from human conduct.
An aquifer State within whose territory an emergency situation originates shall, in cooperation with potentially affected States and, where appropriate, competent international organizations, immediately take all practicable measures necessitated by the circumstances to prevent, mitigate and eliminate harmful effects of the emergency situation.
Where water is critical to alleviate an emergency situation, aquifer States may derogate from the provisions of the articles in parts II to IV of the present Convention to the extent necessary to alleviate the emergency situation.
Article 20
Protection in time of armed conflict
Transboundary aquifers or aquifer systems and related installations, facilities and other works shall enjoy the protection accorded by the principles and rules of international law applicable in international and non-international armed conflict and shall not be used in violation of those principles and rules.
Article 21
Data and information vital to national defence or security
Nothing in the present Convention obliges an aquifer State to provide data or information vital to its national defence or security.
Nevertheless, that State shall cooperate in good faith with other aquifer States with a view to providing as much information as possible under the circumstances.
Draft articles 22 to 25 containing the final clauses read as follows:
Article 22
Signature
The present Convention shall be open for signature by all States from … until at United Nations Headquarters in New York.
Article 23
Ratification, acceptance, approval or accession
The present Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance, approval or accession by States.
The instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 24
Entry into force
The present Convention shall enter into force on the day following the date of deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
For each State that ratifies, accepts or approves the Convention or accedes thereto after the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the day after the deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
Article 25
Authentic texts
The original of the present Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized thereto, have signed this Convention.
DONE at New York, this ____ day of _____ two thousand ______.
Report of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, A more secure world: our shared responsibility, document A/59/565, para.
The Corfu Channel case (United Kingdom v.
Albania), merits I.C.J.
Reports, 1949, p. 4.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/55/10), para.
Ibid., annex.
Ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), para.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1155, p. 331.
Para.
44 of document A/CN.4/552 citing the views of Herbert W. Briggs, The Law of Nations: Cases, documents and Notes, 2nd ed.
(London: Stevens, 1953), p. 943.
See the discussion on draft article 5, below.
Draft article 1 reads as follows:
Scope
The present draft articles apply to the effects of an armed conflict in respect of treaties between States.
Yearbook of the Institute of International Law, vol. 61 (II) (1986), at pp. 278-283.
See Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organizations or between International Organizations, vol. II (United Nations publication, Sales No.
See the discussion on draft article 10, below.
Draft article 2 reads as follows:
Use of terms
For the purposes of the present draft articles:
(a) “Treaty” means an international agreement concluded between States in written form and governed by international law, whether embodied in a single instrument or in two or more related instruments, and whatever its particular designation;
(b) “Armed conflict” means a state of war or a conflict which involve armed operations which by their nature or extent are likely to affect the operation of treaties between States parties to the armed conflict or between States parties to the armed conflict and third States, regardless of a formal declaration of war or other declaration by any or all of the parties to the armed conflict.
Article 2 (1) (a).
Article 2 (1) (a).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1946, p. 3.
Ibid.
Further reference was made to the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict of 14 May 1954, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 249, p. 240, which made provision for the situation of occupation.
Case IT-94-1, Prosecutor v. Duško Tadić a/k/a “DULE”, Appeals Chamber, 2 October 1995 (1994-1995), 1 ICTY JR 352, at para.
See also 35 I.L.M.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, p. 3.
Draft article 3 reads as follows:
Ipso facto termination or suspension
The outbreak of an armed conflict does not ipso facto terminate or suspend the operation of treaties as:
(a) Between the parties to the armed conflict;
(b) Between one or more parties to the armed conflict and a third State.
See the discussion on draft article 10, below.
Draft article 4 reads as follows:
The indicia of susceptibility to termination or suspension of treaties in case of an armed conflict
The susceptibility to termination or suspension of treaties in case of an armed conflict is determined in accordance with the intention of the parties at the time the treaty was concluded.
The intention of the parties to a treaty relating to its susceptibility to termination or suspension shall be determined in accordance:
(a) With the provisions of articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties; and
(b) The nature and extent of the armed conflict in question.
Draft article 5 reads as follows:
Express provisions on the operation of treaties
Treaties applicable to situations of armed conflict in accordance with their express provisions are operative in case of an armed conflict, without prejudice to the conclusion of lawful agreements between the parties to the armed conflict involving suspension or waiver of the relevant treaties.
The outbreak of an armed conflict does not affect the competence of the parties to the armed conflict to conclude treaties in accordance with the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
Reports, 1996, p. 226 at 240, para.
Draft article 6 reads as follows:
Treaties relating to the occasion for resort to armed conflict
A treaty, the status or interpretation of which is the subject matter of the issue which was the occasion for resort to armed conflict, is presumed not to be terminated by operation of law, but the presumption will be rendered inoperable by evidence of a contrary intention of the contracting parties.
(2002), p. 1057.
Draft article 7 reads as follows:
The operation of treaties on the basis of necessary implication from their object and purpose
In the case of treaties the object and purpose of which involve the necessary implication that they continue in operation during an armed conflict, the incidence of an armed conflict will not as such inhibit their operation.
Treaties of this character include the following:
(a) Treaties expressly applicable in case of an armed conflict;
(b) Treaties declaring, creating, or regulating permanent rights or a permanent regime or status;
(c) Treaties of friendship, commerce and navigation and analogous agreements concerning private rights;
(d) Treaties for the protection of human rights;
(e) Treaties relating to the protection of the environment;
(f) Treaties relating to international watercourses and related installations and facilities;
(g) Multilateral law-making treaties;
(h) Treaties relating to the settlement of disputes between States by peaceful means, including resort to conciliation, mediation, arbitration and the International Court of Justice;
(i) Obligations arising under multilateral conventions relating to commercial arbitration and the enforcement of awards;
(j) Treaties relating to diplomatic relations;
(k) Treaties relating to consular relations.
See the discussion on draft article 5, above.
Draft article 8 reads as follows:
Mode of suspension or termination
In case of an armed conflict the mode of suspension or termination shall be the same as in those forms of suspension or termination included in the provisions of articles 42 to 45 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
Draft article 9 reads as follows:
The resumption of suspended treaties
The operation of a treaty suspended as a consequence of an armed conflict shall be resumed provided that this is determined in accordance with the intention of the parties at the time the treaty was concluded.
The intention of the parties to a treaty, the operation of which has been suspended as a consequence of an armed conflict, concerning the susceptibility of the treaty to resumption of operation shall be determined in accordance:
(a) With the provisions of articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties; and
(b) With the nature and extent of the armed conflict in question.
Draft article 10 reads as follows:
Legality of the conduct of the parties
The incidence of the termination or suspension of a treaty shall not be affected by the legality of the conduct of the parties to the armed conflict according either to the principles of general international law or the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
The texts of articles 7, 8 and 9 of the resolution of the Institute of International Law are reproduced in the first report of the Special Rapporteur, A/CN.4/552, para.
Draft article 11 reads as follows:
Decisions of the Security Council
These articles are without prejudice to the legal effects of decisions of the Security Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Draft article 12 reads as follows:
Status of third States as neutrals
The present draft articles are without prejudice to the status of third States as neutrals in relation to an armed conflict.
Draft article 13 reads as follows:
Cases of termination or suspension
The present draft articles are without prejudice to the termination or suspension of treaties as a consequence of:
(a) The agreement of the parties; or
(b) A material breach; or
(c) Supervening impossibility of performance; or
(d) A fundamental change of circumstances.
Draft article 14 reads as follows:
The revival of terminated or suspended treaties
The present draft articles are without prejudice to the competence of parties to an armed conflict to regulate the question of the maintenance in force or revival of treaties, suspended or terminated as a result of the armed conflict, on the basis of agreement.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/55/10), para.
Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/57/10 and Corr.1), paras.
Ibid., paras.
Ibid., para.
For the first report of the Special Rapporteur see A/CN.4/532.
For the second report of the Special Rapporteur, see A/CN.4/541.
Draft articles 1 to 3 were provisionally adopted at the fifty-fifth session (2003) and draft articles 4 to 7 were provisionally adopted at the fifty-sixth session (2004).
For the text of draft articles 1 to 7 see section C below.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10, and corrigendum (A/57/10 and Corr.1), paras.
464 and 488 and ibid., Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/58/10), para.
For comments from Governments and international organizations see A/CN.4/545, A/CN.4/547 and A/CN.4/556.
Draft article 8 reads as follows:
Existence of a breach of an international obligation
There is a breach of an international obligation by an international organization when an act of that international organization is not in conformity with what is required of it by that obligation, regardless of its origin and character.
The preceding paragraph also applies in principle to the breach of an obligation set by a rule of the organization.
Draft article 9 reads as follows:
International obligation in force for an international organization
An act of an international organization does not constitute a breach of an international obligation unless the international organization is bound by the obligation in question at the time the act occurs.
Draft article 10 reads as follows:
Extension in time of the breach of an international obligation
The breach of an international obligation by an act of an international organization not having a continuing character occurs at the moment when the act is performed, even if its effects continue.
The breach of an international obligation by an act of an international organization having a continuing character extends over the entire period during which the act continues and remains not in conformity with the international obligation.
The breach of an international obligation requiring an international organization to prevent a given event occurs when the event occurs and extends over the entire period during which the event continues and remains not in conformity with that obligation.
Draft article 11 reads as follows:
Breach consisting of a composite act
The breach of an international obligation by an international organization through a series of actions and omissions defined in aggregate as wrongful, occurs when the action or omission occurs which, taken with the other actions or omissions, is sufficient to constitute the wrongful act.
In such a case, the breach extends over the entire period starting with the first of the actions or omissions of the series and lasts for as long as these actions or omissions are repeated and remain not in conformity with the international obligation.
Draft article 12 reads as follows:
Aid or assistance in the commission of an internationally wrongful act
An international organization which aids or assists a State or another international organization in the commission of an internationally wrongful act by the State or the latter organization is internationally responsible for doing so if:
(a) That organization does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the internationally wrongful act; and
(b) The act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that organization.
Draft article 13 reads as follows:
Direction and control exercised over the commission of an internationally wrongful act
An international organization which directs and controls a State or another international organization in the commission of an internationally wrongful act by the State or the latter organization is internationally responsible for that act if:
(a) That organization does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the internationally wrongful act; and
(b) The act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that organization.
Draft article 14 reads as follows:
Coercion of a State or another international organization
An international organization which coerces a State or another international organization to commit an act is internationally responsible for that act if:
(a) The act would, but for the coercion, be an internationally wrongful act of the coerced State or international organization; and
(b) The coercing international organization does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the act.
Draft article 15 reads as follows:
Effect of the preceding articles
Articles 12 to 14 are without prejudice to the international responsibility of the State or international organization which commits the act in question, or of any other State or international organization.
Draft article 16 reads as follows:
Decisions, recommendations and authorizations addressed to member States and international organizations
An international organization incurs international responsibility if:
(a) It adopts a decision binding a member State or international organization to commit an act that would be internationally wrongful if taken by the former organization directly; and
(b) The act in question is committed.
An international organization incurs international responsibility if it authorizes a member State or international organization to commit an act that would be internationally wrongful if taken by the former organization directly, or if it recommends such an act, provided that:
(a) The act fulfils an interest of the same organization; and
(b) The act in question is committed.
The preceding paragraphs apply also when the member State or international organization does not act in breach of one of its international obligations and therefore does not incur international responsibility.
For the commentary to this article, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/58/10), pp. 34-37.
Ibid., pp. 38-45.
Ibid., pp. 45-49.
For the commentary to this chapter, see ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), pp. 100-103.
For the commentary to this article, see ibid., pp. 104-109.
The location of paragraph 2 may be reconsidered at a later stage with a view to eventually placing all definitions of terms in article 2.
The location of paragraph 4 may be reconsidered at a later stage with a view to eventually placing all definitions of terms in article 2.
For the commentary to this article, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), pp. 110-115.
Ibid., pp. 116-120.
Ibid., pp. 120-122.
For the commentary to this chapter, see section C.2 below.
For the commentary to this article, see ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
For the commentary to this chapter, see section C.2 below.
For the commentary to this article, see ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
The square bracket refers to the corresponding article in the third report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/553).
For the commentary to this article, see section C.2 below.
The square bracket refers to the corresponding article in the third report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/553).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), pp. 46-47.
Ibid., p. 124, with the related commentary, pp. 124-133.
Ibid., para.
(3) of the commentary to article 12, p. 126.
The theory that the “rules of the organization” are part of international law has been expounded particularly by Matteo Decleva, Il diritto interno delle Unioni internazionali (Padova: Cedam, 1962) and G. Balladore Pallieri, “Le droit interne des organisations internationales”, Recueil des cours de l'Académie de droit international de La Haye, vol. 127 (1969-II), p. 1.
For a recent reassertion see Patrick Daillier and Alain Pellet, Droit international public (Nguyen Quoc Dinh), 7th ed.
(Paris: L.G.D.J., 2002), pp. 576-577.
Among the authors who defend this view: Lazar Focsaneanu, “Le droit interne de l'Organisation des Nations Unies”, Annuaire français de droit international, vol. 3 (1957), p. 315, Philippe Cahier, “Le droit interne des organisations internationales”, Revue générale de droit international public, vol. 67 (1963), p. 563, and Julio A. Barberis, “Nouvelles questions concernant la personnalité juridique internationale”, Recueil des cours de l'Académie de droit international de La Haye, vol. 179 (1983-I), p. 145 at pp. 222-225.
The distinction between international law and the internal law of international organizations was upheld also by Rudolf Bernhardt, “Qualifikation und Anwendungsbereich des internen Rechts internationaler Organisationen”, Berichte der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Völkerrecht, vol. 12 (1973), p. 7.
As a model of this type of organization one could cite the European Community, for which the European Court of Justice gave the following description in Costa v.
E.N.E.L., in 1964:
“By contrast with ordinary treaties, the EEC Treaty has created its own legal system which, on the entry into force of the Treaty, became an integral part of the legal systems of the member States and which their courts are bound to apply.
By creating a Community of unlimited duration, having its own institutions, its own personality, its own legal capacity and capacity of representation on the international plane and, more particularly, real powers stemming from a limitation of sovereignty or a transfer of powers from the States to the Community, the member States have limited their sovereign rights, albeit within limited fields, and have thus created a body of law which binds both their nationals and themselves.”
Case 6/64, Judgment of 15 July 1964, E.C.R.
1964, p. 585 at pp. 1158-1159.
The International Law Association (ILA) stated in this regard: “The characterization of an act of an international organization as internationally wrongful is governed by international law.
Such characterization is not affected by the characterization of the same act as lawful by the international organization's internal legal order.” (Report of the Seventy-First Conference, Berlin, Final Report of the Committee on Accountability of International Organizations, Part Three, section one, adopted by resolution No.
This paragraph appears to start from the assumption that the rules of the international organization in question are not part of international law.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), para.
(11) of the commentary to article 12, p. 130.
Case C-316/91.
Judgment of 2 March 1994, E.C.R.
1994-I, p. 625 at pp. 660-661.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), p. 133, with the related commentary, at pp. 133-138.
A paragraph adopted by the ILA (supra, note 105) is similarly worded: “An act of an international organization does not constitute a breach of an international obligation unless the organization is bound by the obligation in question at the time the act occurs.”
Ibid., p. 138, with the related commentary, at pp. 138-145.
Ibid., p. 146, with the related commentary, at pp. 146-150.
Ibid., p. 47.
Decision of 9 February 1990, Application No.
13258/87, Decisions and Reports, vol. 64, p. 138.
Judgment of 15 November 1996, ECHR 1996-V, p. 1614.
Judgment of 18 February 1999, ECHR 1999-I, p. 251.
Decision of 10 March 2004, unpublished.
Decision of 8 April 1987, Communication No.
217/1986, Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/42/40), p. 185.
Ibid., p. 186 (para.
Supra, note 112.
Decision of 15 March 2005, WTO Panel Report, European Communities - Protection of Trademarks and Geographical Indications for Agricultural Products and Foodstuffs - Complaint by the United States (“EC - Trademarks and Geographical Indications (US)”), WT/DS174/R, adopted 20 April 2005, para.
Decision of 13 September 2001, unpublished, at para.
Unpublished decision at para.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), p. 155, with the related commentary, at pp. 155-160.
The ILA Berlin resolution (supra, note 105) stated: “There is also an internationally wrongful act of an international organization when it aids or assists a State or another international organization in the commission of an internationally wrongful act by that State or other international organization.” This text does not refer to the conditions listed in article 12 under (a) and (b).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), p. 160, with the related commentary (pp. 160-165).
Preliminary Objections, p. 33, para.
A similar view with regard to the relations between NATO and KFOR was held by Alain Pellet, “L'imputabilité d'éventuels actes illicites.
Responsabilité de l'OTAN ou des Etats membres”, in Christian Tomuschat (ed.
), Kosovo and the International Community: A Legal Assessment (The Hague: Kluwer Law International, 2002), p. 193, at p. 199.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), para.
(6) of the commentary to article 17, p. 163.
Ibid., para.
(7) of the commentary to article 17, p. 164.
Ibid.
Ibid., p. 165, with the related commentary, at pp. 165-168.
Ibid., para.
(2) of the commentary to draft article 18, p. 166.
A/C.6/59/SR.22, para.
A/CN.4/556, p. 46.
Supra, note 121, at para.
A/C.6/59/SR.22, para.
Unpublished letter.
“Opération Turquoise” was established by Security Council resolution S/RES/929 (1994).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), p. 168, with the related commentary (pp. 168-169).
See ibid., Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/51/10), para.
249 and annex II, addendum 1.
Ibid., Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/52/10), chap.
Ibid., para.
Ibid., paras.
The conclusions of the Working Group are contained in Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/53/10), para.
Ibid., Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/54/10), para.
The report of the informal consultations is contained in ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/55/10), para.
See ibid., Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/58/10), paras.
Ibid., para.
Document ILC (LV1)/DP/CRP.1, subsequently issued as the sixth report of the Special Rapporteur in document A/CN.4/546.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), para.
See Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion of 9 July 2004, at paras.
63-64, reproduced in document A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1; Case concerning Oil Platforms, Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports, 2003, p. 161 at pp. 176-178, paras.
27-30; La Grand (Germany v. United States of America), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports, 2001, p. 466 at pp. 488-489, paras.
61-63; Avena and other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States of America), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports, 2004, p. 12 at p. 38, paras. 45-47; Gabčíkovo-Nagymaros Project (Hungary v.
Slovakia), Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports, 1997, p. 7 at p. 76, para.
133; Arrest Warrant of 11 April 2000 (Democratic Republic of Congo v.
Belgium), Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports, 2002, p. 137, para.
35 (dissenting opinion of Judge ad hoc Van den Wyngaert); Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports, 1986, p. 259 at pp. 392-394, paras. 268-272 (dissenting opinion of Judge Schwebel).
See A/CN.4/546, para.
Reports, 1925, Series A, No. 5, at p. 12.
See Ben Tillett (Great Britain v.
Belgium), in Revue générale de droit international public, vol. 6, No. 46 (1899), and the Virginius (United States of America v.
Spain) in John Bassett Moore, A Digest of International Law (Washington: G.P.O., 1906), vol. 2, p. 895.
See A/CN.4/546, paras. 12-13.
See draft articles on diplomatic protection adopted by the Commission on first reading, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), para.
59, arts.
1 and 15.
See A/CN.4/546, para.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), para.
Mavrommatis Palestine Concession, P.C.I.J.
Reports, 1924, Series A, No. 2, p. 12 at para.
See supra, note 149, and A/CN.5/546, para.
Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports, 1992, p. 240 at p. 255, paras.
See also Preliminary Objections of the Government of Australia, December 1990, vol. I, part V, chap.
II, sect.
I, paras.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), para.
77, footnotes 722 and 726.
A/CN.4/506 and Corr.1 and Add.1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/53/10), para.
Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/55/10), para.
Ibid., annex.
Ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), para.
See, e.g., Convention on the Status of Refugees, 28 July 1951, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, p. 137, article 32, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 16 December 1966, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 999, p. 171, article 13.
“[A] legal act in which a State compels an individual or group of individuals who are nationals of another State to leave its territory” (A/CN.4/554, para.
See International Technical Products Corporation v.
Islamic Republic of Iran, 9 I.U.S.C.T.R.
(1985), p. 10.
Convention on Territorial Asylum, concluded by the Organization of American States on 28 March 1954, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1438, p. 127.
Adopted on 4 October 1967, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 606, p. 267.
Adopted on 18 December 1990, United Nations document A/RES/45/158, Annex.
Convention relating to the status of Stateless Persons, 28 September 1954, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 360, p. 117, and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, 30 August 1961, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 989, p. 175.
See, Boffolo case, U.N.R.I.A.A., vol. X (1903), p. 528.
See, Yeager v.
Iran, 17 I.U.S.C.T.R.
(1987), p. 92; 82 I.L.R., p. 179, at pp. 196-197.
A/CN.4/554 at para.
See, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, supra, note 164, article 13, the American Convention on Human Rights, concluded by the Organization of American States on 22 November 1969, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1144, p. 123, article 22 (6); and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, concluded by the Organization of African Unity on 27 June 1981, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1520, p. 217, article 12 (4).
See, Aumeeruddy-Cziffra v.
Mauritius, No.
35/1978, decision of 9 April 1981, United Nations document CCPR/C/12/D/35/1978.
See, e.g., Berrehab v.
The Netherlands, No.
3/1987/126/177 (judgment of 21 June 1988), ECHR Ser.
A, No. 138, and Slivenko v. Latvia [GC], No.
48321/99 (judgment of 9 October 2003), para.
113, ECHR 2002-II.
See, e.g., the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 10 December 1984, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, p. 85, article 3, and the American Convention on Human Rights, supra, note 174, article 22 (8).
See, e.g., Protocol No. 7 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, adopted by the Council of Europe on 22 November 1984, E.T.S.
See too the Declaration on the Human Rights of Individuals Who are not Nationals of the Country in which They Live, General Assembly resolution 40/144 of 13 December 1985, article 7.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/51/10), para. 249 and pp. 328-329.
Ibid., Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/52/10), para. 194 and paras. 196-210.
Ibid., paras. 212 and 234.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/53/10), paras. 192-200.
A/CN.4/500 and Add.1.
A/CN.4/500 and Add.1.
A/CN.4/525 and Add.1, Corr.1, Corr.2 (Arabic and English only) and Add.2.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/58/10), paras. 303-308.
A/CN.4/542 and Corr.1 (French only), Corr.2 and Corr.3.
The Grid included the following elements: (a) Date; (b) Author/Organ; (c) Competence of author/organ; (d) Form; (e) Content; (f) Context and Circumstances; (g) Aim; (h) Addressees; (i) Reactions of Addressees; (j) Reactions of third parties; (k) Basis; (l) Implementation; (m) Modification; (n) Termination/Revocation; (o) Legal scope; (p) Decision of a judge or an arbitrator; (q) Comments; (r) Literature.
Ibid.
Legal status of Eastern Greenland, P.C.I.J.
Reports, Ser. A/B, No. 43, p. 22 at p. 71; Nuclear Tests (Australia v.
France), I.C.J. Reports, 1974, p. 253 at pp. 266-267; Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v.
France), I.C.J.
Reports, 1974, p. 457 at pp. 471-472; Temple of Preah Vihear (Cambodia v.
Thailand), I.C.J.
Reports, 1962, p. 6 at 21.
Frontier Dispute (Burkina Faso v.
Mali), I.C.J.
Reports, 1986, p. 554.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/49/10), para. 382.
A/CN.4/470 and Corr.1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/50/10), para. 491.
See Yearbook … 1993, vol. II (Part Two), para. 286.
As of 31 July 2003, 33 States and 25 international organizations had answered the questionnaire.
A/CN.4/477 and Add.1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/51/10), para. 137.
Ibid., Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/52/10), para. 157.
Third report (A/CN.4/491 and Corr.1 (English only), Add.1, Add.2 and Corr.1, Add.3 and Corr.1 (A/F/R only), Add.4 and Corr.1, Add.5 and Add.6 and Corr.1); Fourth report (A/CN.4/499); Fifth report (A/CN.4/508, Add.1, Add.2, Add.3 and Add.4); Sixth report (A/CN.4/518 and Add.1-3); Seventh report (A/CN.4/526 and Add.1-3); Eighth report (A/CN.4/535 and Add.1) and Ninth report (A/CN.4/544).
For a detailed historical presentation, see Official Records, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), paras.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1 Freedom to formulate reservations
A State or an international organization may, at the time of signing, ratifying, formally confirming, accepting, approving or acceding to a treaty, formulate a reservation unless:
(a) The reservation is prohibited by the treaty;
(b) The treaty provides that only specified reservations, which do not include the reservation in question, may be made; or
(c) In cases not falling under subparagraphs (a) and (b), the reservation is incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.1 Reservations expressly prohibited by the treaty
A reservation is prohibited by the treaty if it contains a particular provision:
Prohibiting all reservations; Prohibiting reservations to specified provisions; Prohibiting certain categories of reservations.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.2 Definition of specified reservations
For the purposes of guideline 3.1, the expression “specified reservations” means reservations that are expressly authorized by the treaty to specific provisions and which meet conditions specified by the treaty.
A/CN.4/177, para.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.3 Reservations implicitly permitted by the treaty
Where the treaty prohibits the formulation of certain reservations, a reservation which is not prohibited by the treaty may be formulated by a State or an international organization only if it is compatible with the object and purpose of the treaty.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.4 Non-specified reservations authorized by the treaty
Where the treaty authorizes certain reservations without specifying them, a reservation may be formulated by a State or an international organization only if it is compatible with the object and purpose of the treaty.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.5 Definition of the object and purpose of the treaty
For the purpose of assessing the validity of reservations, the object and purpose of the treaty means the essential provisions of the treaty, which constitute its raison d'être.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.6 Determination of the object and purpose of the treaty
In order to determine the object and purpose of the treaty, the treaty as a whole must be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context.
For that purpose, the context includes the preamble and annexes.
Recourse may also be had in particular to the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, and to the title of the treaty and, where appropriate, the articles that determine its basic structure [and the subsequent practice of the parties].
Human Rights Committee, general comment No. 24 and Communication 845/1999, CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.6, Rawle Kennedy v.
Trinidad and Tobago; CCPR/C/69/D/845/1998, European Court of Human Rights, Loizidou v.
Turkey.
(Preliminary objections), ECHR 1996, Ser. A. vol. VI.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.13 Reservations to treaty clauses concerning dispute settlement or the monitoring of the implementation of the treaty
A reservation to a treaty clause concerning dispute settlement or the monitoring of the implementation of the treaty is not, in itself, incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty, unless:
The provision to which the reservation relates constitutes the raison d'être of the treaty; or The reservation has the effect of excluding its author from a dispute settlement or treaty implementation monitoring mechanism with respect to a treaty provision that the author has previously accepted, if the very purpose of the treaty is to put such a mechanism into effect.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.12 Reservations to general human rights treaties
To assess the compatibility of a reservation with the object and purpose of a general treaty for the protection of human rights, account should be taken of the indivisibility of the rights set out therein, the importance that the right which is the subject of the reservation has within the general architecture of the treaty, and the seriousness of the impact the reservation has upon it.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.11 Reservations relating to the application of domestic law
A reservation by which a State or an international organization purports to exclude or to modify the application of a provision of a treaty in order to preserve the integrity of its domestic law may be formulated only if it is not incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.7 Vague, general reservations
A reservation worded in vague, general language which does not allow its scope to be determined is incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty.
Reports, 1969, p. 3.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.8 Reservations to a provision that sets forth a customary norm
The customary nature of a norm set forth in a treaty provision does not in itself constitute an obstacle to the formulation of a reservation to that provision.
A reservation to a treaty provision which sets forth a customary norm does not affect the binding nature of the customary norm in question in relations between the reserving State or international organization and other States or international organizations which are bound by that norm.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.9 Reservations to provisions setting forth a rule of jus cogens
A State or an international organization may not formulate a reservation to a treaty provision which sets forth a peremptory norm of general international law.
The draft guideline reads as follows:
3.1.10 Reservations to provisions relating to non-derogable rights
A State or an international organization may formulate a reservation to a treaty provision relating to non-derogable rights provided that the reservation in question is not incompatible with the essential rights and obligations arising out of that provision.
In assessing the compatibility of the reservation with the object and purpose of the provision in question, account must be taken of the importance which the parties have conferred upon the rights at issue by making them non-derogable.
Advisory opinion of 8 September 1983 on Restrictions to the death penalty, Advisory Opinion OC-3/83, 1-A.C.H.R.
(Ser. A) No. 3 (1983).
Articles 21 (establishment), 19 (substance), 20 (opposition) and 23 (form) of the Vienna Convention.
For the commentary see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/58/10), p. 189.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/53/10), pp. 196-199.
The number between square brackets indicates the number of this draft guideline in the report of the Special Rapporteur or, as the case may be, the original number of a draft guideline in the report of the Special Rapporteur which has been merged with the final draft guideline.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/54/10), pp. 210-217.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/53/10), pp. 204-206.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 206-209.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 209-210.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/54/10), pp. 217-221.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 222-223.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/53/10), pp. 210-213.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/55/10), pp. 230-241.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/54/10), pp. 223-240.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 240-249.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 249-252.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 252-253.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 254-260.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 260-266.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 266-268.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 268-270.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 270-273.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 273-274.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 275-280.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 280-284.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 284-289.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/55/10), pp. 241-247.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 247-252.
For the commentary, see ibid., Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/54/10), pp. 289-290.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 290-302.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 302-306.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 306-307.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 308-310.
For the commentary, see ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/55/10), pp. 252-253.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 253-269.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 270-272.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/57/10), pp. 63-67.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 67-69.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 69-75.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 75-79.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 80-93.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 94-104.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 105-112.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 112-114.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), pp. 465-472.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 472-474.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 474-477.
Section 2.3 proposed by the Special Rapporteur deals with the late formulation of reservations.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 477-489.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 490-493.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 493-495.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 495-499.
For the commentary, see ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), pp. 269-274.
For the commentary, see ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/57/10), p. 115.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 115-116.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 117-118.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), pp. 499-501.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 501-502.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 502-503.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 503-505.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/57/10), pp. 118-119.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), pp. 505-506.
This draft guideline (formerly 2.4.7 [2.4.8]) was renumbered as a result of the adoption of new draft guidelines at the fifty-fourth session.
For the commentary see ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), pp. 275-277.
For the commentary, see ibid., pp. 277-278.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/58/10), pp. 190-201.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 201-207.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 207-209.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 210-218.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 219-221.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 221-226.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 227-231.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 231-239.
For the commentary to this model clause, see ibid., p. 240.
For the commentary to this model clause, see ibid., pp. 240-241.
For the commentary to this model clause, see ibid., pp. 241-242.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 242-244.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 244-256.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., pp. 256-259.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), pp. 279-280.
For the commentary to this draft guideline, see ibid., p. 280.
For the commentary, see section C.2 below.
For the commentary, see section C.2 below.
The Commission reserves the right to move these draft guidelines to chapter 1 (“Definitions”) when it puts the “finishing touches” to the Guide to Practice.
See also draft guideline 1.1.2.
See also draft guideline 1.1.1.
The Commission proposes to examine this question at its next session.
Cf. article 20, para.
4 (b), article 21, para.
3, and article 22, paras.
2 and 3 (b).
On this subject, see:  Roberto Baratta, Gli effetti delle riserve ai trattati (Milan, Giuffrè, 1999), p. 341, or Renata Szafarz, “Reservations to multilateral treaties”, 5 Polish Yearbook of International Law 1970, p. 313.
It does not follow, however, that, like a reservation, an objection cannot be formulated jointly by several States or international organizations.
This possibility will be considered at a later date.
Article 20, para.
4 (b), of the Vienna Convention of 1969 speaks only of the “contracting State”.
The appropriateness of describing a single word as a “term” may be questionable, but as this terminological inflection is enshrined in custom it does not seem advisable to question it.
Article 2, para.
See also, for example, the Judgment of 1 July 1994 of the International Court of Justice in the case concerning Maritime Delimitation and Territorial Questions between Qatar and Bahrain, I.C.J.
Reports, 1994, p. 112 at p. 120, para.
3: “international agreements may take a number of forms and be given a diversity of names”.
Article 2, para.
1 (d).
See draft guideline 1.2 and the commentary thereon in Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/54/10) (in particular, paras. (14) and (15)), pp. 230-235, and the examples of “renaming” (ibid., and in the commentary on draft guideline 1.3.2, “Phrasing and name”, ibid., pp. 260-266).
Grand Larousse encyclopédique, 15 vols. (Paris : La Rousse).
Jean Salmon, ed., Dictionnaire de droit international public (Brussels: Bruylant/AUF, 2001), p. 763.
Ibid., p. 764.
It need hardly be stated that this definition applies also to an objection formulated by an international organization.
Case concerning the delimitation of the Continental Shelf between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the French Republic, U.N.R.I.A.A., vol. XVIII, p. 3 at pp. 32-33, para.
Pierre-Henri Imbert, “La question des réserves dans la décision arbitrale du 30 juin 1977 relative à la délimitation du plateau continental entre la République française et le Royaume-Uni de Grande Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord”, AFDI 1978, p. 29 at p. 45.
Ibid.
See award, U.N.R.I.A.A., vol. XVIII, p. 162, para.
Jörg Polakiewicz, Treaty-Making in the Council of Europe (Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing, 1999), p. 106; footnotes omitted.
These statements, in which the parties concerned explained that they consider “that any difference of opinion regarding the size of a diplomatic mission should be settled by agreement between the sending State and the receiving State”, they expressly termed “reservations” (Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Secretary-General: Status as at 31 December 2004, ST/LEG/SER.E/23, United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.05.V.3 (hereinafter Multilateral Treaties )), vol. I, chap.
III.3, pp. 90-92.
Ibid., p. 93 (Australia); see also pp. 93-94 (Canada), p. 94 (Denmark), p. 94 (France), p. 95 (Malta), p. 96 (New Zealand) and p. 97 (Thailand, United Kingdom).
Ibid., statements by Greece (p. 95), Luxembourg (p. 95) and the Netherlands (pp. 95-96), or the United Republic of Tanzania (p. 97) or the more ambiguous statement by Belgium (p. 93).
See also, for example, the last paragraph of the communication of the United Kingdom concerning the reservations and declarations accompanying the instrument of ratification deposited by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (ibid., vol. II, chap.
XXIII.1, p. 360) or the reaction of Norway to the corrective “declaration” of France dated 11 August 1982 regarding the 1978 Protocol to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) (a declaration that clearly appears to be a reservation and to which Sweden and Italy had objected as such) stating that it considered it to be a declaration and not a reservation (Status of Multilateral Conventions and Instruments in Respect of Which the International Maritime Organization or Its Secretary-General Performs Depositary or Other Functions, J/7772, p. 81, note 1).
Multilateral Treaties , vol. I, chap.
VI.19, p. 450; italics added.
Colombia subsequently withdrew the reservation (ibid., p. 451, note 11).
Ibid., vol. II, chap.
XII.1, p. 9, note 12.
Ibid., vol. I, chap.
IV.II, pp. 318 - italics added.
The full text of this objection reads as follows:
“The reservation made by Malaysia covers several central provisions of the [said Convention].
The broad nature of the said reservation leaves open to what extent Malaysia commits itself to the Convention and to the fulfilment of its obligations under the Convention.
In the view of the Government of Finland reservations of such comprehensive nature may contribute to undermining the basis of international human rights treaties.
“The Government of Finland also recalls that the said reservation is subject to the general principle of the observance of the treaties according to which a party may not invoke its internal law, much less its national policies, as justification for its failure to perform its treaty obligations.
It is in the common interest of the States that contracting parties to international treaties are prepared to undertake the necessary legislative changes in order to fulfil the object and purpose of the treaty.
Moreover, the internal legislation as well as the national policies are also subject to changes which might further expand the unknown effects of the reservation.
“In its present formulation the reservation is clearly incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention and therefore inadmissible under article 51, paragraph 2, of the [said Convention].
Therefore the Government of Finland objects to such reservation.
The Government of Finland further notes that the reservation made by the Government of Malaysia is devoid of legal effect.
“The Government of Finland recommends the Government of Malaysia to reconsider its reservation to the [said Convention].”
For even clearer objections to the reservations of Malaysia, see the statements of Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and Sweden and the communications of Belgium and Denmark (ibid., pp. 317-322).
Malaysia subsequently withdrew part of its reservations (see ibid., note 27).
Ibid., pp. 317-318 - italics added.
See also the reaction of Sweden to Canada's reservation to the Espoo Convention of 25 February 1991, ibid., vol. II, chap.
XXVII.4, p. 468.
Multilateral Treaties , vol. II, chap.
XXI.1, pp. 268-269.
See also the examples given by Frank Horn, Reservations and Interpretative Declarations to Multilateral Treaties (The Hague:  T.M.C. Asser Institute, 1986), pp. 318 and 336 (Canada's reaction to France's reservations and declarations to the Convention on the Continental Shelf).
Multilateral Treaties , vol. I, chap.
IV.4, p. 192.
See also the communication of the Netherlands concerning the Australian reservations to article 10 of the Covenant (ibid., p. 189); on the other hand, the reaction of the Netherlands to the Australian reservations to articles 2 and 50 of the Covenant has more the appearance of an interpretation of the reservations in question (ibid., p. 189).
Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, Norway and Sweden.
Such limitations do not constitute reservations within the meaning of the Guide to Practice (cf. the second paragraph of draft guideline 1.4.6), but the example (given by Polakiewicz, supra, note 324, p. 107) is nonetheless striking by analogy.
Statement of Luxembourg.
The text of these different statements is reproduced in the judgement of 23 March 1995 of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Loizidou v. Turkey (Preliminary Objections) ECHR Ser.
A, vol. 310, p. 7 at pp. 12-13, paras. 18-24.
Commentary to the present guideline, paras.
See in this respect the “Model response clauses to reservations” appended to Recommendation No.
R (99) 13 adopted on 18 May 1999 by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe.
It should be noted that all the alternative wordings proposed in that document expressly utilize the word “objection”.
On the disadvantages of vague and imprecise objections, see Horn, supra, note 332, pp. 184-185; see also pp. 191-197 and 221-222.
See also the objection of Finland to the reservation by Malaysia to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, para.
(16) above.
See, for example, the objection of Guatemala to the reservations of Cuba to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 (Multilateral Treaties …, vol. I, chap.
III.3, p. 95).
See, for example, the objections of the Australian Government to various reservations to the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Multilateral Treaties …, vol. I, chap.
IV.1, p. 129) and of the Government of the Netherlands to numerous reservations to the Convention on the High Seas of 1958 (ibid., vol. II, chap.
XXI.2, p. 275).
See also the British objection to French reservation (b) to article 6 of the Geneva Convention on the Continental Shelf, para.
(13) above.
See, for example, the reaction of Japan to reservations made to the Convention on the High Seas of 1958 (Multilateral Treaties …, vol. II, chap.
XXI.2, p. 275) or that of Germany to the Guatemalan reservation to the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951 (ibid., vol. I, chap.
V.2, pp. 368-369).
See, for example, all the communications relating to the declarations made under article 310 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982 (Multilateral Treaties … vol. II, chap. XXI.6, pp. 312-314).
See, for example, the reactions of the European Community to the declarations of Bulgaria and the German Democratic Republic regarding the TIR Convention of 1975 (ibid., vol. I, chap. XI A.16, p. 598).
See, for example, the statement by Portugal concerning the reservations of Maldives to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women of 1979 (ibid., vol. I, chap.
IV.8, p. 263) and that by Belgium concerning the reservations of Singapore to the Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989 (ibid., vol. I, chap.
IV.11, p. 318).
Rosa Riquelme Cortado, Las Reservas a los Tratados: Lagunas y Ambigüedades del Régimen de Viena (Universidad de Murcia, 2004), pp. 279-280; Horn, supra, note 332, pp. 170-172.
See, for example, Canada's objection to Syria's reservation to the 1969 Vienna Convention: “ Canada does not consider itself in treaty relations with the Syrian Arab Republic in respect of those provisions of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties to which the compulsory conciliation procedures set out in the annex to that Convention are applicable” (Multilateral Treaties , vol. II, chap.
XXIII.1, p. 356).
For other examples and for a discussion of the permissibility of this practice, see below.
See also Richard W. Edwards, Jr., “Reservations to Treaties”, 10 Michigan Journal of International Law, 1989, p. 400.
See Bruno Simma, “Reservations to human rights treaties - some recent developments”, in Gerhard Hafner (ed.
), Liber Amicorum, Professor Ignaz Seidl-Hohenveldern: In Honour of His 80th Birthday (The Hague: Kluwer, 1998), p. 659 at pp. 667-668.
Riquelme Cortado, supra, note 345, pp. 300-305.
Multilateral Treaties …, vol. I, chap.
IV.11.C, p. 348; see also Norway's objection of 30 December 2002 (ibid., p. 348).
The argument for their validity can be based on the position adopted by the organs of the European Convention on Human Rights and general comment No. 24 of the Human Rights Committee (CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.6, 11 November 1994), but is hardly compatible with paragraph 10 of the preliminary conclusions of the International Law Commission on reservations to normative multilateral treaties including human rights, adopted in 1997 (see Yearbook … 1997, vol. II, Part Two, p. 57, para.
157) or with the principle par in parem non habet juridictionem.
“To attribute such an effect to the rejection of the reservations is not easy to reconcile with the principle of mutuality of consent in the conclusion of treaties” (arbitral award of 30 June 1977 in the Mer d'Iroise case, U.N.R.I.A.A., vol. XVIII, p. 42, para.
Cf. draft guideline 1.6 (“Scope of definitions”): “The definitions of unilateral statements included in the present chapter of the Guide to Practice are without prejudice to the permissibility and effects of such statements under the rules applicable to them” (see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No.
10  (A/54/10), pp. 308-310).
Liesbeth Lijnzaad (Reservations to UN-Human Rights Treaties - Ratify and Ruin?, Nijhoff, Dordrecht, 1994, p. 45) cites in this respect R. Kühner, Vorbehalte zu multilateralen völkerrechtlichen Vertrage (Berlin: 1986), p. 183 and Szafarz, supra, note 311, p. 309; where the last-mentioned author is concerned, this does not, however, appear to be her true position.
Practice demonstrates that States do not feel bound to state the reasons on which their objections are based; see, inter alia, Horn, supra, note 332, p. 131 and pp. 209-219.
See in this respect the arbitral award of 30 June 1977 in the Mer d'Iroise case: “Only if the Article had authorised the making of specific reservations could parties to the Convention be understood as having accepted a particular reservation in advance” (U.N.R.I.A.A., vol. XVIII, p. 32, para.
Pierre-Henri Imbert even thinks that an expressly authorized reservation can be objected to (Les réserves aux traités multilatéraux (Paris: Pedone, 1979), pp. 151-152).
Among the many examples, see the statement by Australia concerning the reservation of Mexico to the Convention on the High Seas of 1958 (Multilateral Treaties …, vol. II, chap. XXI.2, p. 274) and those by Belgium, Finland, Italy, Norway and the United Kingdom with respect to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination of 1966 (ibid., vol. I, chap.
IV.2, pp. 144-149).
For an example, see supra, note 330 above.
Article 21, para.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), p. 489, para.
(23), of the commentary on draft guideline 2.3.1.
Ibid., p. 478, para.
(2) of the commentary on draft guideline 2.3.1.
G. Hafner, “Risks Ensuing from Fragmentation of International Law”, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/55/10), annex.
Ibid. (A/55/10), para.
Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/57/10), paras.
(a) the interpretation of treaties in the light of “any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties” (article 31 (3) (c) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties), in the context of general developments in international law and concerns of the international community; (b) the application of successive treaties relating to the same subject matter (article 30 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties); (c) the modification of multilateral treaties between certain of the parties only (article 41 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties); and (d) hierarchy in international law: jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, as conflict rules.
The documents are available from the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
See generally, Hersch Lauterpacht, “The So-Called Anglo-American and Continental Schools of Thought in International Law”, B.Yb.I.L., vol. XII (1931), pp. 31-62.
See also, for example, Edwin D. Dickinson, “L'interprétation et l'application du droit international dans les pays anglo-américains”, 129 RCADI (1970), pp. 305-395.
Kazimierz Grzybowski, Soviet Public International Law: Doctrines and Diplomatic Practice (Leiden: A.W. Sijthoff, 1970); Tarja Långström, Transformation in Russia and International Law (The Hague: Nijhoff, 2002).
Antony Anghie and B.S. Chimni, “Third World Approaches to International Law and Individual Responsibility in International Conflicts”, in Steven R. Ratner and Anne-Marie Slaughter (eds.), The Methods of International Law (Washington D.C.: ASIL, 2004), pp. 185-210.
See generally Robert Jennings, “Universal International Law in a Multicultural World”, in Maarten Bos and Ian Brownlie (eds.), Liber Amicorum for the Right Honourable Lord Wilberforce (Oxford: Clarendon, 1987) pp. 39-51.
For distinctions of special regimes including on the basis of functional specialization, see the Preliminary report on the study on the “Function and Scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'”, ILC(LVI)/SG/FIL/CRD.1 and Add.1.
Georges Scelle, Cours de droit international public (Paris: Domat-Montchrestien, 1948), p. 253.
See also Hedley Bull, The Anarchical Society.
A Study of Order in World Politics (London: Macmillan, 1977) First edition, pp. 305-6.
Preliminary report by Mr. M. Koskenniemi, Chairman of the Study Group, on the study on the “Function and scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'”, supra, note 367.
See the “Observations du gouvernement du Colombie sur l'existence du droit international américain.
Réplique du gouvernement Colombien” (20 IV 50), Asylum case, I.C.J. Pleadings, 1950, vol. 13 (1), p. 316, at pp. 330-334.
Mémoire du gouvernement Colombien, Haya de la Torre case, I.C.J.
Pleadings, 1951, vol. 17, p. 17, at pp. 25-27.
Dissenting opinion, Judge Alvarez Asylum case.
Reports, 1950, p. 290, at pp. 293-294.
For example article 27 (1) of the European Convention on Transfrontier Television, Strasbourg, 1989, provides:
“In their mutual relations, Parties which are members of the European Community shall apply Community rules and shall not therefore apply the rules arising from this Convention except insofar as there is no Community rule governing the particular subject concerned.”
See also article 25 (2) of the Convention on Civil Liability for Damage resulting from Activities Dangerous to the Environment, Lugano, 1993.
Article 20 (2) of the Protocol on Civil Liability and Compensation for Damage Caused by the Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents on Transboundary Waters, Kiev, 2003, provides:
“In their mutual relations, Parties which are members of the European Community shall apply the relevant Community rules instead of articles 15 and 18.”
Article 13 (3) of the UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects, Rome, 1995, provides:
“In their relations with each other, Contracting States which are Members of organizations of economic integration or regional bodies may declare that they will apply the internal rules of these organizations or bodies and will not therefore apply as between these States the provisions of this Convention the scope of application of which coincides with that of those rules.”
See also Campbell McLachlan, “The principle of systemic integration and article 31 (3) (c) of the Vienna Convention”, 54 I.C.L.Q.
(2005), pp. 279-320.
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, article 2 (1) (a).
These include the other techniques being discussed by the Study Group.
See separate opinion of Judge Weeramantry in Case Concerning the Gabčikovo-Nagymaros Project (Hungary v.
Slovakia), I.C.J.
Reports, 1997, p. 7, at 114.
See also Hugh W.A. Thirlway, “The Law and Procedure of the International Court of Justice 1960-1989 (Part Three)”, B.Yb.I.L., vol. 62 (1991), p. 1, at p. 58.
Esphahanian v.
Bank Tejarat (1983) 2 I.U.S.C.T.R.
See also Case No.
A/18 (1984) 5 I.U.S.C.T.R.
251, at p. 260.
The provision was also relied upon in a dissent in Grimm v.
Iran, 2 I.U.S.C.T.R.
78, at p. 82 on the question of whether a failure by Iran to protect an individual could constitute a measure “affecting property rights” of his wife.
See also Amoco International Finance Corporation v.
Iran (1987-II) 15 I.U.S.C.T.R.
189, at p. 222.
Golder v. United Kingdom, ECHR 1975 Ser.
A No. 18 and Loizidou v.
Turkey, ECHR 1996 Ser.
A, vol. VI.
See also Fogarty v. United Kingdom, Application No.
37112/97, ECHR 2001, vol. XI, p. 157; McElhinney v.
Ireland, Application No.
31253/96, ECHR 2001, vol. XI, p. 37; Al-Adsani v. United Kingdom, Application No.
35763/97, ECHR 2001, vol. XI, p. 79; Banković v.
Belgium, ECHR 2001, vol. XII, p. 333.
Permanent Court of Arbitration: Dispute concerning access to information under article 9 of the OSPAR Convention: Ireland v. United Kingdom, Final Award 2 July 2003, 42 I.L.M.
See also: The International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea: the Mox Plant case (Ireland v. United Kingdom), Request for Provisional Measures Order, 3 December 2001, www.itlos.org; Permanent Court of Arbitration, Mox Plant (Ireland v. United Kingdom), Order No. 3 (24 June 2003), 42 I.L.M.
(2003), 1187.
See also Pope and Talbot Inc v. Canada before the NAFTA Tribunal, Award on the merits, 10 April 2001; award in respect of damages, 31 May 2002, 41 I.L.M.
(2002), 1347 and at www.worldtradelaw.net/nafta/chap11interp.pdf.
WTO Appellate Body Report, United States - Import Prohibition of Certain Shrimp and Shrimp Products (“US - Shrimp”), WT/DS58/AB/R, adopted 6 November 1998, DSR 1998:VII, 2755; WTO Appellate Body Report, European Communities - Measures Concerning Meat and Meat Products (Hormones) (“EC - Hormones”), WT/DS26/AB/R, WT/DS48/AB/R, adopted 13 February 1998, DSR 1998:I, 135.
Case concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States), I.C.J.
Reports, 2003, p. 161.
See also separate opinion of Judge Weeramantry in Case Concerning the Gabčikovo-Nagymaros Project (Hungary v.
Slovakia), I.C.J.
Reports, 1997, p. 88, at 114.
Georges Pinson No. 50, Franco-Mexican Commission (Verzijl President) AD 1927-8 No. 292: “Every international convention must be deemed tacitly to refer to general principles of international law for all questions which it does not itself resolve in express terms and in a different way.”
For example, as in the construction of the terms “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and security” in Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada.
Examples of customary rules include: the criteria of statehood (Loizidou); the law of State responsibility (which has influenced both the reach of human rights obligations (Loizidou, Issa v. Turkey) (Application No.
31831/96, 16 November 2004) - see also the reliance on the public international law rules of jurisdiction in Banković v.
Belgium 123 (supra, note 381, at pp. 351-352, paras.
59-60 - and the law of economic countermeasures in the WTO DSU); the law of State immunity; the use of force; and the principle of good faith (US - Shrimp).
This was the approach adopted by the GATT Panel Report, United States - Restrictions on Imports of Tuna (“USA - Tuna II”), DS29/R, 16 June 1994, unadopted, 33 I.L.M.
(1994) 839, at para. 5.19.
See, for example, the emphasis placed in US - Shrimp on the fact that, although the United States had not ratified UNCLOS, it had accepted during the course of argument that the relevant provisions for the most part reflected international customary law.
Pauwelyn supports this approach in the case of the WTO Covered Agreements.
See Joost Pauwelyn, Conflict of Norms in Public International Law - How WTO Law Relates to Other Rules of International Law (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), pp. 257-263.
The reference in the title to the Study of Mr. Mansfield to interpretation “in the context of general developments in international law and concerns of the international community” refers to inter-temporality, a problem which was not expressly resolved by the Commission at the time when it framed the Vienna Convention.
OSPAR Tribunal Arbitral Award in Mox Plant, p. 1138, para.
Robert Jennings and Arthur Watts (eds.), Oppenheim's International Law, 9th ed.
(London: Longman, 1992), at p. 1282.
The International Court of Justice has, on several occasions, accepted that this process may be permissible where the parties insert provisions into their treaty which by their terms or nature contemplate evolution.
This was done most recently in the Case Concerning the Gabčikovo-Nagymaros Project (Hungary v.
Slovakia), I.C.J.
Reports, 1997, p. 7, at 76-80.
See also the Separate Opinion of Judge Weeramantry, ibid., pp. 113-115.
See also, for example, Namibia (Legal Consequences), Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
Reports, 1971, p. 16, at p. 31; Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case (Greece v.
Turkey), I.C.J.
Reports, 1978, p. 3, at p. 32.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10).
For example, Barcelona Traction case, I.C.J.
Reports, 1970, p. 3, at p. 32; East Timor (Portugal v.
Australia), I.C.J.
Reports, 1995, p. 99, at p. 102; Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports, 1996, 595, at p. 616; Reservations to the Genocide Convention, I.C.J.
Reports, 1951, 15, at p. 23; Separate Opinion Judge Lauterpacht, Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)), I.C.J.
Reports, 1993, p. 407, at p. 440, para.
See also Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion, 9 July 2004, reproduced in document A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1.
See also http://www.icj-cij.org/icjwww/idocket/imwp/imwpframe.htm (last visited 13 July 2005).
For example, Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10).
Article 53 of the Vienna Convention: “A treaty is void if, at the time of its conclusion, it conflicts with a peremptory norm of general international law.
For the purpose of the present Convention, a peremptory norm of general international law is a norm accepted and recognized by the international community of States as a whole as a norm from which no derogation is permitted and which can be modified only by a subsequent norm of general international law having the same character.” Article 64 of the Vienna Convention: “If a new peremptory norm of general international law emerges, any existing treaty which is in conflict with that norm becomes void and terminates.”
Yearbook … 1966, vol. II, p. 172, at p. 248.
Article 40 (1) Articles on State Responsibility: “This Chapter applies to the international responsibility which is entailed by a serious breach by a State of an obligation arising under a peremptory norm of general international law.” Article 48 (1) (b): “… the obligation breached is owed to the international community as a whole”.
Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion, 9 July 2004, supra, note 396.
Study by the Chairman on “Function and Scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'”, supra, note 367.
This statement is recorded in the summary record of that meeting.
Idem.
Idem.
Idem.
The following persons participated in the forty-first session of the International Law Seminar:  Ms. Paula Cristina Aponte-Urdaneta (Colombia); Ms. Nicola Brown (Jamaica); Mr. Daniel Costa (USA); Mr. Eric De Brabandère (Belgium); Mr. Diallo Madou (Mali); Mr. Ekouevi Eucher Eklu-Koevanu (Togo); Ms. Amelia Emran (Malaysia); Ms. Ginette Goabin Y.A.
(Benin); Mr. Øyvind Hernes (Norway); Mr. Kumar Karki Krishna (Nepal); Mr. Lazarus Kpasaba Istifanus (Nigeria); Ms. Magdalena Lickova (Czech Republic); Ms. Norma Irina Mendoza Sandoval (Mexico); Ms. Loretta Mensa-Nyarko (Ghana); Mr. Makenga Mpasi (Congo); Ms. Maryam Norouzi (Iran); Mr. Eric Rabkin (Canada); Ms. Aušra Raisyté-Daukantiene (Lithuania); Mr. Shikhar Ranjan (India); Ms. Neni Ruhaeni (Indonesia); Mr. Scott Sheeran (New Zealand); Ms. Annika Elisabeth Tahvanainen (Finland); Mr. Knut Traisbach (Germany); Mr. Lijiang Zhu (China).
A Selection Committee, under the Chairmanship of Mr. Jean-Marie Dufour (President of the Geneva International Academic Network, GIAN), met on 20 April 2005 and selected 24 candidates out of 110 applications for participation in the Seminar.
x
xi