# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Mr President, the serious anomalies which have led to the withdrawal of one of the candidates, Mr Toledo, from the second round of the presidential elections, demonstrate that the Fujimori régime lacks any democratic safeguards, and there has been a dramatic deterioration in the living conditions of Peruvian society which should be resolved by democratic means.
Fujimori' s failure to take account of the condemnations of the OAS, and the warning of the European Union and other international bodies in relation to these elections, condemns that country to a form of isolation which will be to the detriment of the Peruvian people and will increase social and political tension.
For this reason, the European Union must firmly denounce these proceedings and, having recognised the extent to which democracy has deteriorated, promote a series of measures which will help to overcome the current situation and lead to the repetition of the elections with full safeguards in place.
This is the best way to help Peru and, therefore, the European Union must make an effort so that its influence in Latin America may counteract so many years of anomalies and suffering and favour harmonious economic development, democracy and the consolidation of human rights.
Mr President, I shall be brief, because almost everything has been said already, while I was waiting my turn.
The situation in Peru, like the situation in Paraguay, gives cause for concern.
Nevertheless, I must say that what we have witnessed in Peru is nothing new.
The President of Peru has for years been failing to play by the rules that we expect in a democracy.
So I would not just send a delegation of observers to Peru, but I would also recommend that the European Union, the Council and also this Parliament should pay more attention to the whole region.
We need more than just a resolution every now and again, we need to be constantly alert and critical, so that the people who are working for democracy are aware of our support.
Furthermore, I would like to point out that is not just the OAS, important as it is for Latin America, that has supported democracy in Latin America.
The European Union and this Parliament have in fact also played a key role here.
We have spent a great deal of money in this region and it would be gratifying if now and again people talked about the European Union' s contribution in Latin America, and not just about North America' s role.
This is not intended to be a chauvinistic remark, I am just making it so that justice is done towards us.
I hope that the European Parliament' s views on Peru will not go unheard in that country.
I know that a great many people set a lot of store by what this Parliament says.
Lastly, I would also like to mention that the longest standing relationship between the European Parliament and another parliament is with the Latin American Parliament - to which Peru also belongs - and that involves certain obligations.
I accordingly hope that we will obtain a large majority in favour of this resolution.
Mr President, the situation in Peru worries us.
President Fujimori took power with dangerous plans: to give absolute priority to supposed economic efficiency, claiming that a strong hold on power was required to manage it, and to overcome what he called 'party-ocracy' , subliminally blaming all the previous problems on the institutions of the democratic state.
Our fears were confirmed throughout Fujimori' s terms in office, and clear signs of authoritarianism were observed, which saw outrageous propaganda and systematic manipulation of the media.
Furthermore, the President' s disregard for the rule of law became evident.
It was under those circumstances that the elections of April and May were held and, as we feared, they turned out to be a farce, and were recognised and denounced as such by anyone looking on.
In summary, that is what our resolution says, and it is good and appropriate that the European Parliament' s voice should be heard in this respect, for our own dignity, and in order to demonstrate our interest in the democratic process in Latin America, but also in order to demonstrate our support, which the Peruvian democrats need and deserve.
While we are voting in favour of the resolution in question, I would like to point out two issues relating to its text.
Firstly, not just the mere fact that one of the candidates decided not to stand in the second round of the elections, but rather that that candidate was Alejandro Toledo, who is supported by all the opposition, and who in free elections would stand an extremely good chance of toppling Fujimori.
My second point is that I regret the fact that the resolution does not refer to the disappointing role played by the Organisation of American States throughout this process.
In fact, having denounced the irregularities of the campaign, demanded the postponement of the second round and withdrawn its observers, it does not seem consistent that it should remain silent with no further reaction or sanctions, contenting itself in reality with merely condemning the situation.
By taking this attitude, I believe that the OAS has discredited itself considerably.
I will end by expressing our solidarity with Alejandro Toledo, with the democrats and people of Peru, denouncing Fujimori as a sinister and autocratic personality, rejecting the position of those people who have reacted with silence and even at times with a certain complacency - which has been well publicised by the President to justify his tattered legitimacy - and reaffirming our commitment to rejecting this farce and to closely monitoring the events in Peru for the sake of the respect for democracy.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission has of course followed the whole election process in Peru, and with mounting concern.
In view of the numerous irregularities and technical problems, and the adherence to the date for the second ballot, the European Union decided to recall its observers from Peru.
As has already been mentioned, a similar decision was taken by the Organisation of American States.
In taking this step, the EU wished to express its conviction that the Peruvian election could not have the democratic legitimacy that it would have had in normal circumstances, and which this country urgently needed.
We must not simply express our regret about this step, we also need to consider what we can do to strengthen Peru' s democratic institutions.
The Commission considers that it needs to be made clear to Peru, and as forcefully as possible, that we insist on strict observance of the principles of democracy and of the rule of law, and that this applies all the more so at a time and in circumstances when the democratic systems of other countries in the region are also being weakened.
For example, we were discussing Paraguay just a few minutes ago.
In its statement of 9 June, the European Union stressed that it would support the OAS mission to Peru.
We expect this mission to express its findings in the clearest terms and to come up with unequivocal results.
We will be following the situation in Peru with the greatest vigilance and are prepared to rethink our relations with Peru against this background.
At the same time, the Commission attaches great importance to taking concrete measures to reinforce Peru' s democratic institutions and to promote political pluralism in that country, and will make proposals to that effect.
The debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance is closed.
As planned, Mr Turco' s report, which we debated this afternoon, will be put to the vote during voting time which begins in a few moments.
Mr President, looking around the Chamber at this moment I think it is obvious that after yesterday's vote when we abolished Fridays, the abolition of Thursday has already begun.
I hope colleagues will take note of this and try to revise that unwise decision as soon as possible.
(Applause)
Mr President, I would like to support the sentiments of the previous speaker, and also to suggest that votes taken on Thursday evenings should be taken into account when calculating the daily attendance allowance.
President, I would just like to tell my fellow Member that he might just as well have voted for the abolition of Thursday too.
I would simply like to thank all the honourable Members for providing such a clear demonstration on the subject of Friday' s vote of "whittling away" .
Mr President, it is a bit odd in such a small gathering to want to return to the decisions which were taken in an undemocratic manner yesterday.
In my opinion, it would be preferable if those who are now vigorously protesting against the absence of fellow Members were to do what is necessary to get these delegates to attend.
I can indeed see it happening that, if we do not have a quorum on Thursdays, we will need to discontinue the sittings on Thursdays.
If we want to deal with a serious agenda, then we need to attend.
Spread the word to your fellow delegates, persuade them to attend without biting their heads off.
If you do not mind, ladies and gentlemen, I shall interrupt this fascinating debate to move on to something which is equally fascinating, the vote on topical and urgent subjects.
Vote (continuation)
Mr President, before you take the final vote, Amendment No 3 to paragraph 28 is on the voting list as by the TDI Group.
I should like to make it absolutely clear that is not the case because our group would certainly not want to be seen to be supporting an amendment by the TDI Group.
Mr President, first of all, this technical amendment has been voted upon, and I do not see why we have to come back to it.
Let me point out that the rapporteur belongs to the TDI group and that consequently the honourable Member cannot complain.
That is exactly what was on my list.
The amendment has been voted upon as I announced it.
We now come to the final vote.
Mr President, I am merely trying to clarify - and this does not have to be done now, it can be done later - whether the amendment was tabled by the Technical Group of Independent Members or by the rapporteur.
This makes a difference and affects the way we vote.
I would be grateful if this could be clarified afterwards, because we voted on the assumption that this was not a TDI amendment, but an amendment tabled by the rapporteur.
I would like to make it quite clear that this amendment was tabled by the TDI group, and was voted by plenary.
Mr President, I would just like to say that, in my opinion, amendments should be accepted or rejected on the basis of their content and not on the basis of who has put their name to them.
They have already been voted upon.
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Mr President, on a point of order.
It is ridiculous for Members to say after the vote that they would not have voted in favour of an amendment because a particular group tabled that amendment.
Whether you agree with an amendment or not should be the basis of the decision.
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Tunisia (B5-0508/2000)
Mr President, I abstained from the vote on the report on Tunisia because I do not feel that this type of document serves much purpose.
Since we are discussing the protection of freedom and human rights, I would like to take this opportunity to say that a serious violation, or rather an attempt at violation of the right to freedom of speech took place today in the Parliament forecourt.
The victims were a group of young people with banners and flags who were demonstrating against globalisation and genetically modified organisms.
Water was thrown out of one of the Parliament offices - I do not know whether it was in a bucket or another container - by, it appears, a Member of Parliament, who then protested in the Chamber against the demonstration.
I repeat that this demonstration is a free expression of thought, even though I may not agree with the tone or expressions used.
This incident was recorded on film and I would ask the Presidency to watch it and adopt any necessary measures.
.
(FR) We voted for the joint motion for a resolution despite the fact that we neither approved of a number of the terms used, nor the silence pertaining to the French government' s responsibility with regard to the situation in Tunisia.
This is because this is the only means given us by parliamentary procedure through which we are able to express our protest against the dictatorship in Tunisia.
By protesting at this dictatorship, however, we are looking to denounce the support that it has been given by the French Government, just as many other dictatorships do and have done in the past, in the former colonial empire representing French imperialism in Africa.
We note the Jesuitism of the parties that have succeeded one another in government in France, which are voting here for a resolution to demand rights and freedoms in Tunisia.
When they are in power and when they have, therefore, the means to apply considerable pressure on the Tunisian regime, they do nothing, since, in fact, they do not give a hoot about the rights and liberties in this country, from the moment that its leaders secure order and, above all, from the moment that economic relations become smooth and profitable for France.
Marset Campos Report (A5-0133/2000)
Bordes (GUE/NGL).
(FR) Mr President, we are not against the planned aid for the poor countries of Central America, and that is why we have voted for the report, despite the inadequacy of the proposals.
We are, however, convinced that this aid will benefit the population only to a very limited extent, as there are no plans to control the allocation of these sums and consequently, there is nothing to guarantee that they are not, at least partly, misappropriated by the government, or even directly by the wealthy classes.
Furthermore, all aid, even the best controlled, will be absolutely no use at all as long as these countries continue to be plundered and their populations exploited by large western cartels.
Mr President, I voted for the Marset Campos report and I will tell you why, although I would first like to express my support for Mr Speroni' s speech.
If what he said is true, as I am sure it is since he is a truthful man, then I consider that this is a very serious incident.
With regard to my explanation of vote, I have to say that I am certainly in favour of assisting anyone who is in difficulty such as the population of Central America, but I wonder and I would ask you, Mr President, how it can be that the world' s poorest countries have to wait for a hurricane before they receive any assistance for their economy or their daily lives.
In my opinion, the European Parliament should ensure that aid is always available for the communities who need it, wherever their location in the world.
Schmitt Report (A5-0123)
Berthu (UEN).
(FR) President, the Commission working document 'Towards common standards on asylum procedures' is a short, fairly general text which, according to the introduction, is designed to launch a discussion following the adoption of the Amsterdam Treaty which, in its new Article 63, once again provides for the adoption of a whole series of joint European standards applicable to refugees and displaced persons.
We have good reason to be surprised at this introduction to the subject.
Why launch a discussion?
We had thought, quite logically, that all the discussions had taken place before the Treaty of Amsterdam was adopted and that the federalists knew where they were going.
In fact, on reading the Commission document and the report by the European Parliament, we see that this was not the case.
Yes, the need to harmonise asylum standards is broadly recommended by these texts.
But, first and foremost, the reasoning seems weak.
For example, it condemns the disparities in the way refugees are treated from one country to the next but does not provide examples.
There may be perfectly legitimate reasons for these disparities, relating to the special features of a country, its culture or its links with former colonies.
In reality, on closer inspection, there is only one serious reason - at least so it seems - for harmonising asylum standards: because abolishing internal border controls under the Treaty of Amsterdam, and that includes as far as third country nationals are concerned, demolishes the whole delicate legal balance and risks causing entirely uncontrolled secondary movements of refugees.
So, in fact, we are currently trying to solve a problem largely created by the Treaty of Amsterdam itself and, what is more, we are going to solve it to our disadvantage as it is clear that asylum standards cannot be harmonised from the bottom up - for who would dare? - but rather towards the top with all the in-draughts normally caused by this type of policy.
We risk being caught up in the system.
In order to escape, we can only invite the governments to exercise the utmost caution, retain as much power as possible, and interpret Article 63 of the Treaty of Amsterdam narrowly.
Mr President, this explanation of vote is also shared by Arlette Laguiller and Armonie Bordes.
The rapporteur' s succinct justification of his report expresses his misgivings on harmonisation with the fairly lax standards characterising the laws and common practice in some States, clearly showing the author' s desire to harmonise the right of asylum in the various countries of the European Union, but from the top.
All the more so, given that a number of passages attack asylum abuses, even though governments in almost every country in Europe restrict this right, sometimes excessively stringently.
This means that although, in some European countries, the application of this text could in theory improve the situation of asylum seekers, it would make it worse in others.
Consequently, we have abstained from voting on this report, but we did vote in favour of the few articles, and especially the amendments, that at least express the idea that the right of asylum should be extended, and we denounce the scandalous nature of the policies of most European States, in particular France, which refuse to recognise this right, especially in the case of refugees from Algeria given the abuses by fundamentalists and the army.
Mr President, here, at last, is a measure - fortunately not the only one - which is a credit to the European Union.
I am totally in favour of this measure, for it is a precise declaration to the Commission that the burden of providing asylum for those who are forced to abandon their own territory, their home, family, friends and all they have in the world must be shared equally between all 15 Member States of the European Union.
This is a completely new principle, a fact - and we hope that a directive will be produced to enshrine that principle - which makes of the European Union something tangible, something real.
This is a decisive factor and it particularly influenced my decision to vote for the motion.
Furthermore, I consider that it would be appropriate for the Commission to apply this decision retroactively and share the burden borne by those who accepted Kosovar refugees between the Member States of the European Union.
Mr President, I abstained in the vote because I do not consider that these texts serve much purpose.
However, I would like to take this opportunity to say that there may be somebody who is attempting to turn someone else into a refugee this year as well, some intolerant person who is convinced that his ideas should prevail.
We are against a Communist, dictatorial Europe which eradicates the identity of peoples by eliminating the differences between them.
Communism is not a question of the poor fighting against rich capitalists: it means achieving equality by means of blanket standardisation, dictating how things should be instead of establishing genuine equality, which is based on the diversity of individuals and peoples.
Communism and Europe in its current state represent equality expressed as the mobility of the power of society, which means that no changes need to be made to the current situation.
We, on the other hand, consider that there is a need for a great deal of change and that the Europe of peoples should mean freedom for all peoples, including the people of the Po Valley, and that those young people from the Po Valley also have the right to demonstrate without fear of insult or intimidation, because we want our flags to fly as well as the red flag.
The asylum issue is a major political issue concerning fundamental democratic rights, the safeguarding of the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual and the preservation of human dignity.
The problem of political asylum seekers must be examined in this light alone and efforts to harmonize asylum policy come what may and turn it into a means of chipping away at fundamental human rights, reinforcing suppressive, policing measures and rebuilding fortress Europe must be blocked.
It must not be used as a pretext for intensifying and strengthening the electronic filing systems created under Europol and Schengen, which target not only refugees but also the fundamental individual freedoms of the citizens of the EU themselves.
We must take all the legislative and other measures needed to respect the rights of asylum seekers, by strictly applying the provisions of the Geneva Convention.
We must respect and strengthen all the provisions on protecting and granting asylum to individuals or groups being persecuted in their countries by government, quasi-government or other groups on ideological, philosophical, political, religious, racial, cultural or other grounds by giving them guarantees and a dignified reception and living conditions.
Asylum seekers in the Member States of the EU must be treated in a dignified and humane manner.
We must also take proper account of all the parameters and peculiarities of their situation and of the dangers which threaten them should they return to their countries by introducing any protective measures required, even for those who do not satisfy the formal criteria for obtaining asylum, which criteria must be clearly defined in accordance with the principles of international law and fundamental human rights.
Arbitrary and violent deportation is a common occurrence because of the applicant' s difficulty in resorting to the judicial authorities for protection, and the phenomenon of group deportations is intolerable and violates conventions on and the principles of human rights.
We would like to highlight and draw attention to the fact that formulating even more harmonized criteria for granting asylum by gradually and effectively moving away from those laid down in the Geneva Convention and essentially replacing them with regulations such as those mentioned in the report, may have a negative and repressive impact.
In this sense, we deplore the so-called "policy of burden sharing" which conceals a blatant attempt to relieve certain powerful states in the EU from the "burden" of receiving large numbers of refugees and relocating them to other countries.
Finally, we firmly believe that the best and most fundamental way to address the refugee issue is to maintain the right conditions for peace and the social, economic and democratic development in every country in the world.
Until these conditions are guaranteed and while they are being undermined by major economic and military interests which destroy the structures, societies, rights and dignity of the people as they please and for their own benefit, then there will continue to be an ever rising tide of uprooted and persecuted individuals.
.
(FR) Although the number of asylum applications fell from 660 000 in 1993 to 227 000 in 1997, this is not because persecution has decreased but because it is more difficult to apply for a visa.
The Dublin Convention allows asylum applications to be made only in the first State entered by the refugee.
The aim of the Schmitt report is clear: "To re-enhance the reputation and substance of the right of asylum, the qualification procedure should be tightened up, and abuses resolutely curbed" .
Moreover, the States on the edges of the Schengen zone are considered to be "secure" .
They therefore become the border guards of fortress Europe.
How can we consider countries that carry out serious discrimination against gypsies (Romania and Slovakia) as sufficiently safe for Belgium to send anyone it judges undesirable en masse there.
Finally, the current concept of the refugee is far short of that stipulated by the Geneva Convention of 1951, "A refugee is any person who, owing to fear of being persecuted, is unable to avail himself of the protection of that country."
In fact, nowadays refugees have to provide more and more proof that their lives are under threat, which obviously is difficult, if not impossible.
For the European Union to finally apply the right of asylum, it would have to break with the obsessive practice of immigration control.
The more we respect freedom of movement, the more Europe will be worthy of those who seek refuge here.
.
(FR) The statistics concerning the exponential rise in asylum applications currently submitted every year in the European Union and the real situation are an unfortunate and tragic illustration of the importance of political asylum for each Member State of the European Union.
In its desire to "Communitise" and standardise refugee reception procedures, subject areas which are, by their very essence, matters of national sovereignty, Europe is dragging us along in its policy of small steps towards an area of social inequality, positive discrimination in favour of foreigners and high insecurity, where drugs, illegal immigrants, bogus asylum seekers entering the territory of a Member State for strictly economical reasons, terrorism and crime are free to move where they will.
For serious matters that affect the exercise of justice, the management of immigration into a country, public order or public freedom, the actions of the European Union can only and must merely be subsidiary and only concern truly transnational phenomena of criminality or public order problems.
Finally, this report, just like many others relating to immigration management, is unrealistic and highly populist.
Because in fact, wanting to systematically favour foreign nationals over national citizens, whatever the cost, by means of many and varied forms of aid, particularly regarding proof, accommodation, keeping families together or even financial, medical and educational aid, will only lead to rejection by the population of the receiving country.
This is why the Members of the National Front and I myself will vote against this report which jeopardises people' s rights and security and also democracy.
The creation of a legal penal system cannot be achieved in haste.
"Communitising" procedures for asylum, justice and internal public order within the Member States cannot be achieved without first consulting all the citizens concerned.
I bet that if they were to be consulted, our Eurocrats, those advocates of a centralised federal super-Europe would have to review their plans out of increased respect for democracy in the construction of Europe.
.
(FR) In any civilisation, asylum is a concrete example of charity towards those who, for many reasons, find themselves in difficulty, and nobody is contesting the validity of giving aid to those who are victims.
Reading Mr Schmitt' s report makes me think we are not talking about the same thing.
The Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs appears to believe that the disparities in the laws of the Member States actually conceal asylum rights that are non-existent or not often applied, as if we were living under totalitarian regimes and our nations had not been providing asylum for centuries.
This same committee discovers the laws of democracy when it suggests that the discrepancies from one country to the next are linked to the political context as much as to the content of the applications.
It is clear that, for a European Union that is naturally and deliberately cut off from everyday reality, the political will expressed by the citizens during elections is of no great interest, unless it conforms to Community doctrine.
This House does not want to improve the situation for asylum seekers.
The political will of this House is, in this field as in any other, to extend the scope of Community power to the detriment of the Member States, who are apparently unworthy of such power.
If the German people and their government wish to be the European Union country most welcoming to refugees, they are to be congratulated.
If the other countries do not match this, often because they simply do not wish to, then it is nothing to do with the European Parliament and the Commission.
Even the Socialist French Government "prefers" - and I quote - "a flexible approach enabling national characteristics of asylum procedure to be observed" .
So what about the recurring proposal that costs should be shared?
Either the Member States have their own policy, for which they are responsible and which they therefore finance, or the European Union "Communitises" this field and includes the costs in its budget.
If such and such a country finds its policy too expensive, let it change the policy.
We do not want a Community policy in the hands of the Commission, nor do we want the policy of another government: we want our people and their elected representatives to retain control over their own decisions and destiny.
Respect for human rights should be maintained internationally.
If people' s rights are infringed, it is the responsibility of surrounding countries to offer asylum to those who request protection from persecution.
The nations of the world have a shared responsibility for ensuring that all refugees receive a welcome fit for human beings.
No countries can argue their way out of responsibility when refugees seek asylum on their territory.
Practice in granting asylum varies from one EU country to another.
In general, however, policy on refugees has been tightened up throughout Europe in recent years.
Coordination of the Member States' responsibilities is necessary if countries are in practice to be able to pursue generous policies on refugees.
We therefore welcome the Commission' s working document in principle, together with Ingo Schmitt' s report on the drawing up of a common policy on asylum and refugees, but we emphasise that it ought not to be the least generous countries which set the standards.
We want to see a European policy on refugees which is better at distributing the overall burden between the countries of Europe on condition that the European, as well as the Swedish, policy on refugees will in future be more humane than they are at present.
Nor must we forget that refugees and immigrants have a positive influence on the Member States.
They often have experience and knowledge to contribute to society.
Moreover, immigration is especially important now, given the shortage of labour which is beginning to make itself ever more felt in the Member States.
With regard to Ingo Schmitt' s report, we want to emphasise that asylum applications ought always to be examined individually in the light of the individual applicant' s merits, as should also be the norm in the case of mass migrations.
What is more, it is important that refugees should in principle be entitled to the same social benefits as other people resident in the particular country dealing with the application for asylum.
This basic principle is established in the Geneva Convention and must be given due attention and complied with.
We also think it important that the current definition of refugee and asylum in the Geneva Convention be reviewed and extended so that they also include people who seek asylum on the grounds of gender and sexual orientation.
- (DE) In 1993 the Federal Republic of Germany watered down the right to political asylum in its constitution, thus sealing its borders against immigration by asylum-seekers.
Germany has virtually ceased to grant asylum.
Refugees are socially and legally marginalised or driven into the world of illegal immigrants.
The aim of the Schmitt report is to extend this degrading and inhumane system to the entire European Union.
It is precisely this system that is to serve as the basis for the "common standards on asylum procedures" .
The problems of asylum legislation are not addressed in the Schmitt report.
There is not a single word about inhumane pre-expulsion detention centres.
Nor is there a word of criticism about social discrimination against refugees, which in Germany takes place under the Law on Benefits for Asylum-Seekers.
Mr Schmitt' s report omits to mention that refugees suffer from discrimination in the job market.
In Germany, they are categorically forbidden to work.
The rapporteur does not even mention the invasions of personal privacy or violations of data protection rights that are part of daily life for asylum-seekers.
Thanks to "Eurodac" and the "Schengen Information System" , no other group of people is as closely monitored as refugees.
They have become the first "transparent people" .
Mr Schmitt' s report does not offer any potential solutions to all these problems.
Instead, the rapporteur complains that people "wrongfully lay claim" to the right of asylum in Europe.
Since the change in the right to asylum, many refugees no longer have any legal claim to asylum.
It was, and remains, totally legitimate to want to live somewhere other than your place of birth.
Framing this right and creating optimum conditions for it should be a key priority for this Parliament!
Instead, the statements in the report help to discredit and criminalise asylum-seekers.
With regard to accepting asylum-seekers, the Schmitt report demands "burden sharing" within the EU.
Asylum-seekers are accordingly denigrated as being a burden.
How can a humane asylum and refugee policy which meets the needs of refugees be based on a fundamental assumption of this kind?
Furthermore, the Schmitt report welcomes agreements whereby third countries would promise to readmit rejected asylum-seekers.
These are an instrument of a fortress Europe policy which has nothing in common with a humane refugee policy.
Such readmission agreements can lead to people seeking protection being pushed back to their countries of origin, and make it easier for EU Member States to refuse asylum.
Mr Schmitt' s report also supports the concepts of "safe third countries" and "safe countries of origin" .
These concepts are responsible for victims of political persecution failing to obtain asylum in Germany, that is to say whenever they enter via "safe third countries" or come from a "safe country of origin" .
These instruments obstruct fair and equitable asylum procedures, and they should therefore be rejected and abolished as quickly as possible.
The European Parliament must make proposals that take account of the interests of refugees and asylum-seekers in the European Union.
We must press for an end to the policy of "fortress Europe" , of the weakening of the right of asylum and of undermining the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.
Everyone seeking refuge in the EU must have access to a just and fair reception procedure.
Unfortunately, Mr Schmitt' s report goes in the opposite direction.
It reinforces the fortress Europe policy and advocates further restrictions on long-term protection of refugees and asylum-seekers.
I reject the extension of a fortress Europe and I accordingly reject the resolution on "common standards on asylum procedures" .
.
(FR) It should not be forgotten that certain Members of this House, within their own families, may have known asylum seekers.
Only sixty years ago, Italians, Spaniards, Germans, Austrians and others, persecuted by their fascist or Nazi governments, were able to benefit from the right of asylum.
It was our pride and our duty.
In France, our most famous asylum seeker was General de Gaulle, who was able to benefit from the right of asylum in England in order to prepare the resistance.
The main value of this report is that it wishes to unify the laws of the Member States on asylum procedure.
Laws and procedures should be harmonised before the Dublin Convention and the Eurodac system are implemented.
It would be unfair to authorise only a single asylum request for the countries of the European Union, given that it does not have the same chance of success from one State to another.
In my opinion, the standards set by the report are too low.
There are omissions and certain points are still unclear.
Persecution is not just political or caused by the States.
Thus, persecuted Afghan women who are stoned for not wearing the chador, should without exception benefit from the right of asylum.
Similarly, an Algerian journalist threatened with death by fundamentalists should be able to benefit from the right of asylum.
Certain States that persecute dissidents are considered to be great democracies.
This is why requests from Chechnya are not examined.
In order to grant the right of asylum, the States require proof of persecution.
But this is often difficult to provide, due to the persecution itself.
The report remains vague on this subject.
Finally, the procedure should take account of family ties, language, cultural affinity and the colonial history of asylum seekers' country of origin, in order to help them to cope with exile.
If there is abuse or people are turned away, it is because of the lack of coherent rules.
It would be unacceptable to be suspicious and restrict this great achievement in the history of humanity, which remains the only lifeline for freedom fighters worldwide.
I abstained on Amendment No 14.
The aim of this amendment is to "request that in every application of the Eurodac system, emphasis be strongly placed on data protection in order to protect asylum seekers from any abuse of the information gathered" .
This amendment admittedly aims to protect data on the information gathered.
But I am against the actual idea of systematically collecting information, as by Eurodac, as I am against the very idea of accelerated procedures, which can give rise to many forms of abuse.
Report Sörensen (A5-0126/2000)
Fatuzzo (PPE-DE).
(IT) Mr President, I welcome the Commission' s decision to adopt rules on compensating victims of crimes in the European Union.
As representative of the Pensioners' Party which sent me to Parliament, I would point out that the majority of victims of crime are elderly.
In Europe, it is no longer possible for the elderly to set foot out of doors, not only at night but during the day as well in some areas.
For this reason I am satisfied by this European Union initiative.
Moreover, it should be stressed that the State must pay victims compensation on behalf of those responsible and then claim damages directly from the criminals.
.
The UK Conservatives have always believed that more emphasis should be placed within the criminal law system on looking towards supporting the needs of victims of crime.
We therefore applaud those sentiments in the Sörensen report which support our view.
However, because the report also suggests changes in the structures of the voting procedure in the European institutions, and has serious resource implications, we cannot give it our overall support.
- (FR) Congratulations!
Once again, Europe has shown its great sense of responsibility in taking an interest in crime victims.
As highlighted in the report, the number of crime victims is constantly increasing.
What is the solution?
As far as the European Parliament is concerned, it is material, legal, medical, psychological and social assistance for crime victims.
For us, the Members of the National Front, it is different.
It is not the symptoms of the problem that must be treated, but the cause.
Giving support in this area is absolutely no use at all and merely enables the European governing bodies to ease their conscience.
The very origins of crime in Europe must be tackled at source, because then, and only then, will the number of victims be reduced and will we be able to carry out our duty to help them to the full.
However, we only need to make a simple observation to see that, throughout Europe, crime is increasing, people in urban and rural areas feel less and less safe, international terrorism, paedophilia, sex tourism, enforced prostitution and trafficking in women, money laundering, drug trafficking, illegal immigration and cross-border organised crime are ever increasing.
In the name of the sacrosanct principle of the freedom of movement of people, these are the people who are drugged, attacked or killed.
Your unrestricted freedom of movement within your unachievable area of freedom, justice and security, is neither necessary nor unavoidable.
On the contrary, it is by re-establishing our borders and refusing to grant the tenants of the ivory towers in Strasbourg and Brussels any power in the field of policing, justice or immigration, that the security of European citizens may be preserved and guaranteed.
So wake up and take responsibility!
Weeping over and counting crime victims in Europe will not save them or bring them back: what we need to do is make sure that people do not become victims, and to achieve that, we must find ways of ensuring our security, which you are incapable of doing.
First of all, learn to take responsibility, learn to govern.
Report Turco (A5-0138/2000)
Fatuzzo (PPE-DE).
(IT) Mr President, I voted for the Turco report although I would have preferred to vote against it for it resembles a final balance sheet and is, above all, a very tedious report on the allocation and use of the Structural Funds in 1998.
Personally, I am convinced that the European Union must completely change the way it allocates aid to those in need of its support.
In my view, the system of programmes and grids which has been used for twenty years to create new items in the outgoings section of the European Union balance sheet, needs to be completely revamped.
There is too much wastage and the desired objectives are not being achieved.
I feel that it is time to change the European Union' s system of expenditure.
.
(IT) The Union for a Europe of Nations Group agrees with Mr Turco' s report.
What is more, it is important to look more closely at certain aspects of the report which, although they are more concerned with the last period of aid programmes than with providing an analysis after the event, are just as important for the current period.
I therefore call for greater and more meaningful coordination between the Structural Fund initiatives, with particular reference to the ESF, and more tangible compatibility not only with the longstanding annual horizontal themes - for example the SMEs - but also with new solutions.
Furthermore, since employment is one of the three governing motifs of the new programming period, Parliament should be kept regularly informed of the quality and quantity of available jobs by means of the Commission reports on the use of the funds in question.
The information should include a balance sheet as well as forecasts.
One further aspect concerns another governing motif for the current period: regional and local development and related issues.
New actions based on local initiatives carried out in a partnership framework have recently been introduced to boost the profile of this motif.
It therefore becomes important not only to learn how to be efficient in implementing these guidelines but also to be aware of potential obstacles to their implementation, and always proceed in the knowledge that the Community also has an objective in terms of employment.
It will be important from this as well as other points of view to verify that these objectives and guidelines are consistent with those of the Member States, starting with their national annual employment plans.
The final point has to be the detection of fraud.
The Commission mentions this in its report but provides an overview, confining itself to general aspects and not providing a detailed evaluation, so to speak, of the frauds, still less revealing the means used to combat fraud in the past or those to be used in the future.
This last aspect is, in fact, an unambiguous indication of commitment and political determination.
Mr President, I asked to speak for personal reasons, because I was one of the people who raised the question today of the demonstration by the young people in our forecourt, at the beginning of the afternoon sitting.
Since the effect of Mr Speroni' s words was to discredit the people who raised the question, and seeing as I do not resort to methods other than speaking in this House, I would not like the serious nature of the incident which I condemned now to be played down, so to speak, or the situation to arise where the young people who were demonstrating in that manner are perceived as victims.
Mr Vice-President, I cannot repeat here what those young people were shouting because I feel that it would be unworthy of this Chamber to do so, but I would be quite willing to testify to what was said at any given moment.
Extremely serious remarks were made regarding the President of the Commission, the Republic of Italy - our country - and 25 April, which is the date of liberation of Italy from the Nazis.
I feel that the President of Parliament should set up an inquiry into this matter.
Moreover, I myself am a polite person and I did not even look out of the window: I came to the Chamber and condemned the incident.
I therefore feel that the matter should be examined in full.
I understand from what Mr Speroni said that it was he who invited the group and that he clearly shares and supports these values which I, on the other hand, consider to be reprehensible.
However, I do not want to sink into banalities and so I will limit myself to condemning this incident, which I consider is a serious matter for our institution.
Mr President, I would also like to speak for personal reasons in order to clear up some of the confusion.
First of all, I did not invite the group, and I have already told the press that I do not agree with all that the group said.
However, after the manner of Voltaire, I consider that anybody should be free to demonstrate his own ideas, especially in a place which represents the sovereignty of the people.
I realise that some language can be offensive, but when one is on the receiving end of a bucket of water one is quite likely to be somewhat free in one' s response.
I would stress that the incident was recorded on film, and it is clear from this film that the bad language aimed at the person who threw the water was delivered after the water had been thrown.
Furthermore, I am sure that we have all witnessed demonstrations, including demonstrations by other members of the party of the Member who has just spoken.
When, for example, his fellow party members demonstrated in front of Fiat against the owner of the firm, the language used certainly did not lack force, but nobody dared to suggest that the language used during a demonstration had to be suitable for a court reception.
I therefore maintain that it should be possible to express one' s opinions freely, even if this means giving offence.
Should the need arise, the offended party can always take the necessary action through the appropriate channels.
But freedom of speech must be upheld!
Allow me to point out that the President' s private office has been informed of these events and will, I can assure you, take all the necessary measures.
Mr President, I fail to understand why, at the start of the sitting, Mrs Napoletano referred to my party, Forza Italia, in connection with the incident which occurred in the Chamber.
I would like her to clarify her remarks because not only did we vote for President Prodi but we have neither agreed in the past nor agree now with the insults delivered in the forecourt in front of the Parliament building.
I fail to understand why Mrs Napoletano involved my party in the matter.
I am genuinely perplexed.
Please would she explain her reasons, for it is not our job to create bad feeling or pass judgement.
We are judging the behaviour of these young people because of the things they said, but I would like to know whether what Mr Speroni said is true, for if it is true that a Member of Parliament threw water over these people, the behaviour of the Member of Parliament is also reprehensible.
I therefore feel that it is for the Presidency to clarify the sequence of events.
Of course the language used is to be condemned, but we must make sure that we ascertain all the facts.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is neither the time nor the place to start this debate.
As I told you, the President has been informed of this matter and will take the necessary action.
I personally cannot give you any explanation at present.
Cohesion Fund (1998)
The next item is the report by Mr Ripoll y Martinez de Bedoya (A5-0140/2000) - Cohesion Fund (1998), on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Commission' s Annual Report on the Cohesion Fund 1998 (COM(1999)483 - C5-0326/1999 - 1999/2212(COS)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, as you all know, the objective of the Cohesion Fund is to contribute to economic and social cohesion and at the same time reduce regional and social disparities, through solidarity amongst the Member States.
Thanks to this fund, numerous countries of the European Union have had the opportunity to try to lessen the distance between themselves and the wealthier countries, and the results have been spectacular but insufficient.
The income per capita has increased from two thirds to three quarters of the Community average and the participation of the European funds in the growth of each of these four countries stood at an average of 0.5% per year.
However, we should point out two problems for the future.
Firstly, the incorporation of new countries, which means that the countries which currently benefit from the Cohesion Fund may find that they will no longer be in receipt of those Funds before they have achieved the objectives of real convergence.
In this respect, we should consider a series of programmes for the future which will allow the new Members to achieve convergence with the European Union while, at the same time, the four countries which receive Cohesion funds should continue to receive them so that they can achieve the true objectives of convergence, growth and the generation of full employment.
Secondly, another problem is the temptation of some wealthier countries to penalise those countries which, since they receive Cohesion Funds, have achieved nominal convergence on the basis of serious, responsible, sympathetic and rigorous structural and economic policies, but clearly still without achieving true convergence, by eliminating them, in this case, from the Cohesion Fund, which could give rise to two possible situations.
Firstly, they may opt for less rigorous and more inflationist policies in order not to lose those funds.
Secondly, growth and convergence with the other countries of the European Union may come to a halt in some countries.
It would therefore be good to distinguish, Commissioner, between true convergence and nominal convergence.
Lastly, I would like to take up a series of recommendations regarding the Cohesion Fund.
Firstly, we should make greater investment in the railways, ports and maritime transport.
Secondly, transport aimed at the integration of peripheral regions, islands and outlying areas should become a priority.
Thirdly, we should pay greater attention to sustainable means of transport.
Fourthly, we need to take more action in the field of reforestation and land reclamation.
Fifthly, we must tackle the problem of the treatment of residues and solid waste.
Lastly, as we pointed out previously, we need more investment in urban centres.
I would also like to point out that, tomorrow, four amendments will be presented, two of them approved in committee as well as two new ones which are before the House.
My position - the reasons for which I have explained in committee - is not to accept them, since in general terms they simply propose new criteria.
We are talking about the Cohesion Fund and the 1998 audit, on which there is a regulation and criteria which have already been approved for 2000-2006 and we do not believe that this is the moment to change the criteria with regard to eligibility and the distribution of those funds.
Mr President, honourable Members, Commissioner, today, eight years on from Maastricht, the Cohesion Fund has, without a shadow of doubt, made a positive contribution towards promoting the economic and social cohesion of the regions of the EU and has had clear results in tackling social and regional disparities.
Since I live in an area which benefits from the Fund, I can assure you that every one of my fellow countrymen is also aware of and acknowledges these results, not only because of the information and publicity campaigns, but mainly because the projects which have received funding belong to basic sectors which affect his quality of life, which he can see is improving.
We would therefore like to commend the Commission for its actions so far in implementing the objectives of the fund and we urge it to continue its efforts to ensure that the Fund is used properly and helps improve its efficiency in the new programme period still further.
We must, of course, stress that the environmental aid granted continues to concentrate on the water sector, despite the need in many other cases for other measures to preserve, protect and improve the quality of the environment and the rational utilization of natural resources as laid down in Article 174 of the Treaty, which refers to reafforestation, land reclamation, etc.
Considerable investment is still required in order to deal with the serious problem of treating solid waste and refuse, although we still need to adopt incentives for using the most modern, environmentally-friendly and efficient technology.
It is also worth our supporting the promotion of further investment in environmentally-friendly transport infrastructures and we insist on the need to continue developing joint transport systems.
In view of forthcoming enlargement, which presents a great challenge, I consider it essential that we take prompt action to ensure that funding under the Cohesion Fund continues, given that it intervenes in two sectors which are very important in helping to achieve the objective of economic and social cohesion in the European Union, which is the Fund' s very raison d' être.
The fact that it has so far worked highly effectively should be enough to convince us of the need to continue funding to recipient countries, provided they need continuing support and depending, aside from the nominal convergence of the economies of Member States, on real convergence of both the incomes and, more generally, the quality of life of European citizens in their regions.
I should like to close by thanking the rapporteur for his sterling work and his willingness to cooperate during the procedure to examine and supplement his report in committee and I should like to pass on to you this succinct and, to my mind, rather dramatic appeal by a farmer in my region.
As he said so very simply yet so very forcefully on hearing of the achievements of our Union: "Europe yes, but a Europe for all the Europeans of the Union" .
Mr President, I want to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on my own behalf and on behalf of the Greens, for this report provides a very good overview of how the Cohesion Fund has operated and of the work that was done in the course of 1998.
I am particularly pleased with developments, which tend towards increased investment in the railway sector, ports and marine transport.
Unfortunately, there is still quite a large imbalance in relation to the roads sector.
We have therefore tabled an amendment to the effect that investment in the roads sector should not represent more than a quarter of all investments in transport sector infrastructure so that it will be possible to comply with the guidelines for budget item B5-7, which deals with trans-European networks.
This is something which, in our view, is very important.
We should like, on the whole, to see a more balanced investment policy, aimed at increasing diversification and investment in the environment and, at the same time, reducing investment in the roads sector.
We also welcome the fact that the Committee accepted our proposal, which is now point 9, requiring that it should also be possible to use resources available for environmental projects for financing projects designed both to preserve and to carry out assessments of biological diversity.
Investment in methods of dealing with waste in as environmentally friendly ways as possible is discussed well enough in point 8.
We would nonetheless add something in the form of Amendment 3, which makes it clear that priority ought to be given to efforts to promote recycling and re-use.
Naturally, the amount of waste ought also to be reduced.
In addition to these environment-related amendments, we also have an amendment about the need to comply with the additionality principle.
We would ask the Commission to submit a report on the extent to which the additionality principle is respected when resources are obtained from the Cohesion Fund.
Mr President, I must congratulate the rapporteur and the Commission on their evaluation of the implementation of the Cohesion Fund in 1998.
The report now before us reveals some very positive results.
There is a clear trend towards real convergence without this having adversely affected the rigour of the budget policy.
Even when measured strictly the Cohesion Fund has clearly played an important socio­economic role in infrastructures with development potential.
We therefore expect a more refined evaluation by the Commission of the application of the funds.
We are delighted to note the increase in employment, the absence of fraud, the greatly increased monitoring and the proper implementation of the programmes.
However, certain issues must be raised.
I would draw the Commissioner' s attention to the need for greater coordination of European funds with the objectives of sustainable development within the EU and real balance between the regions.
These objectives require the promotion, as already mentioned, of alternative means of transport such as the railways, the sea and cabotage which will reduce congestion on the roads and stimulate the ports.
These objectives also require the role played by the Cohesion Fund to be integrated into a regional development strategy which aims to establish industries in small and medium-sized towns and in the rural areas which form four-fifths of the EU.
They also require integrated support from the Structural and Cohesion Funds for structures allowing technology to be distributed democratically, particularly by following the process decided in Lisbon and promoting investment leading to new businesses and jobs.
Finally, these objectives also require a civil and social dialogue and the participation of research bodies subordinated to this strategy.
The principle of cohesion considered in the Treaty must not come under threat during enlargement.
The Cohesion Fund must be reworked bearing in mind the positive results with the new socio-economic indicators which are expected to ensure that this experience of the cohesion countries is not lost either for current beneficiaries or for future ones.
I would ask the Commissioner to give his opinion in this respect.
Mr President, thank you for allowing me to speak, as I wanted to say a few words on this report, which is extremely important.
It concerns a subject which is of great interest to me personally, given the commitment of the European Union in favour of the countries which are furthest behind in development and which are catching up with the support of European solidarity.
Today, four countries are directly concerned by the objective of cohesion.
We are talking about a budget of almost EUR 17 billion for the period now beginning, 2000­2006.
But if we look back over the last ten years, including the year cited in this report, 1998, I would say to the Members here and to all those listening to us that the four countries that were the furthest behind, Ireland, Greece, Spain and Portugal, have gained ten points in ten years in relation to the Community average gross domestic product.
If there is one policy - and fortunately there are others - whose efficacy can be shown, it is the cohesion policy.
I would like to say this at a time when citizens and taxpayers sometimes wonder about the importance and usefulness or efficacy of the European Funds.
So the subject dealt with by Mr Ripoll y Martinez de Bedoya in his report is an extremely important one.
I would like to thank him for his clear-sightedness, precision and competence.
Furthermore, several speakers from all parties have thanked him.
The form of the report is just as important as its content.
With regard to content, ladies and gentlemen, on the subject of the investment allocated to transport, your rapporteur argues for a better balance in favour of sustainable transport, in particular in favour of railways.
He may be sure that the Commissioner for Regional Policy, who was once Minister for the Environment in his own country, is extremely supportive of this move and will oversee it personally, particularly in the programming of the Cohesion Fund for the next six years.
I share this concern.
It has also been highlighted by Mrs Schörling and Mrs Damião, and you may rest assured that I will endeavour to increase the tendency towards sustainable transport, in particular railways, that has been noted over the past few years.
But this tendency is not enough: I want to emphasise it further over the next six years.
With regard to the other investments that can contribute to the objective of sustainable transport, I am referring to ports and airports, the Commission - let me be frank - wants to see a certain amount of caution concerning air transport and certain forms of maritime transport.
In any case, we want to look into matters in detail and modify the rate of cofinancing to take account of the commercial nature of the activities and revenue generated, which is the least we can do.
Having said this, the tendency in favour of sustainable transport is one that the Commission will support with all its might.
With regard to the environmental aspect, your rapporteur highlights the need - as Mr Mastorakis also said so emphatically - to pay more attention to the serious problem of the treatment of solid waste and household refuse.
To date, the Fund has focused on three sectors which are the subject of Community directives: the treatment of drinking water, the treatment of waste water and the treatment of solid waste.
The priority was to allow the Member States to respect the deadlines set in implementation of the directive on waste water, and we are well aware that the problems that I have just mentioned, in particular the matter of waste or water treatment, are problematic in the countries concerned.
I have been able to see this personally in the Azores and I know that the situation is the same in the Greek islands, to use these two examples: these problems are particularly difficult in the case of remote, outermost or isolated island regions.
Also, with regard to the specific problems concerning the environment and thinking of islands in particular, I would like to express my wish to support investment in favour of renewable energy, and I have made this known to the Member States.
More specifically with regard to solid waste, 14% of the total budget appropriation was earmarked for its processing, which represents a significant increase in relation to the 1993-1997 period.
However, I share your rapporteur' s wish to use the most modern environmentally-friendly technologies for this purpose.
Earlier today, Mrs Schörling expressed the satisfaction of the Group of the Greens that an amendment to paragraph 9 proposed by her group had been approved.
This was not by chance, Mrs Schörling.
I deliberately wanted to record the Commission' s agreement to using the Cohesion Fund in favour of biodiversity and protecting nature, not just anyhow or for just anything.
This tendency has been realised in the approval of this amendment.
You will also see my continuing desire, under Objectives 1 and 2 and the Cohesion Fund, for part of the loans to be used to benefit biodiversity.
Having talked about content, I would like to say a word or two about form, and first of all reply to the comments of your rapporteur on the study on the socio-economic effects of the Cohesion Fund ordered by the Commission.
It seems to me that these comments are based on a misunderstanding, which I would like to clarify.
The five years cited by your rapporteur refer to the period between the commencement of the projects evaluated and the final evaluation.
The consultants chosen by the Commission first of all developed an evaluation methodology and then evaluated the projects concerned.
It is not unusual for a large project and the ex-post evaluation of its results to take five years to complete.
The Commission, which has just received this study, is currently analysing it, and in any case, it will be sent to you as soon as possible.
I would now like to bring up the issue of consistency between the Cohesion Fund and the Structural Funds as raised by your rapporteur.
I am particularly interested in this issue.
This is why the Structural Funds programmes currently being negotiated by the Commission with the Member States of cohesion include indicative sums for both Cohesion Fund aid and European Investment Bank aid.
The information requested by Parliament is available in the individual programming documents.
In addition, I would like to emphasise that the recent restructuring of the Directorate-General for Regional Policy brings together the geographical teams and power within the same units for Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund, so that Cohesion Countries, which are eligible for Structural Funds in most cases, will have the same contacts within this Directorate-General.
This seems to me to be a more consistent approach for these countries.
But consistency between the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund also means observing the specificity of these two instruments, in accordance, moreover, with the general regulation on the Structural Funds.
It would in fact be inappropriate to use the Cohesion Fund for the same purposes and in the same way as the Structural Funds.
From the point of view of financial management, it is not the right time to abandon the specificity of each instrument.
In any case, I am not in a position to alter the scope of the Cohesion Fund, which stems directly from the Treaty.
Mrs Schörling, you spoke of the matter of additionality.
Allow me, so as not to waste your time, to refer back to what I said earlier on the subject of Mr Turco' s report.
I clearly expressed my wish to verify additionality and what is true for Mr Turco' s report is also true for the Cohesion Fund.
I even said that the reality of this additionality would be one of the points which would enable me to validate or approve programmes and projects.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasise that the annual report is a particularly useful tool for the analysis, assessment and reflection that regularly takes place on the implementation of regional policy.
This report is even more useful in that it is comprehensive.
As I agree that there are advantages in releasing the annual report as soon as possible, I can assure you that my staff will do their best to speed up publication as much as possible in future.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is clear that our reflection is not only linked to these annual reports.
I can also assure you that beyond our regular meetings, the report on cohesion that I shall present to you at the end of this year will respond to a lot of the questions, criticisms and proposals raised by your rapporteur with regard to the pursuit of solidarity regarding countries benefiting from the Cohesion Fund, particularly in view of the perspective that concerns us all: enlargement.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Integrated control system for Community aid schemes
The next item is the report by Mr Casaca (A5-0137/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the proposal for a Council regulation on amending Regulation (EEC) 3508/1992 establishing an integrated administration and control system for certain Community aid schemes [(COM(1999) 517 - C5-0317/1999 - 1999/0207 (CNS)].
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the proposal before us represents a revolution in control systems and provides the technical bases for a revolution in the method of managing the common agricultural policy.
The proposed method is based on a modern geographic information system in which the cartographic information on holdings is digitised and integrated with the alphanumeric information needed to describe the holding and the aid received.
In terms of control, this method has enormous advantages and significantly reduces the possibility of fraud or any other irregularities.
In terms of managing the CAP, this will finally create a management infrastructure with the technical basis to transform a policy which until now has irrationally subsidised the richest countries, regions and farmers and encouraged surpluses and environmental damage.
The new system is geographically oriented, it will encourage sustainable agriculture and it will assist the regions and rural communities which are most in need.
This shows that there is the political will and discernment needed from the European institutions to put a new policy into practice.
In my opinion, the integration into the system of virtually all the sectors financed by the CAP should be sought.
The recent Court of Auditors report on classical swine fever shows that, even in areas where the geographic information initially seems less important, this is actually decisive and may form a fundamental instrument in rationalising the common agricultural policy.
It seems to me that there is therefore every advantage in immediately integrating into the system three sectors which are not included in the Commission proposal.
These are oil, flax and hemp and tobacco.
For the first, this involves integrating the existing specific geographic information system into the general system.
For the second, we know that the Commission has already proposed the integration of this sector into arable crops but we do not know when and if the Commission proposal will be approved.
As for the third, its integration is the most necessary and urgent.
The fact that tobacco is not at the moment subsidised per hectare but by quantity produced in no way affects the possibility of this being immediately integrated into the system and even less so the advantages which this offers.
The application of a geographic control system will ensure that subsidised tobacco is actually produced on the holdings for which the aid is claimed.
Furthermore, it would be absurd for the extensive information which the Commission requires from each holding in order to clear the accounts not to be integrated into the new system.
In this respect, the Commission should reduce its requirements to what is necessary and reasonable.
It must realise firstly that the CAP is placing an increasing and hidden administrative burden on national and regional authorities.
Secondly, farmers should not be required to spend more time filling in forms than milking cows or tilling the earth.
We do not want to turn farmers into bureaucrats.
Although it is necessary to fight fraud, we must also prevent the complexity of the system causing a multiplication of minor formal irregularities and farmers being unfairly penalised.
The simplification of the legislation applying the CAP is an absolute priority.
Finally, our expectations of the Commission are as follows.
It is incomprehensible that a project of this size and scope should not culminate in the processing at European level of all the information gathered.
It is unthinkable that a common policy such as the CAP should be handled like a collection of fifteen national policies or, even worse, like a pile of unconnected invoices from 80 or 90 national payment authorities.
The Commission must process all the geographic information now required from the fifteen Member States in a coordinated manner.
However, it is also vital that this precious resource is used to further the policy of economic and social cohesion, environmental protection and even regional development.
Mr President, as well as congratulating Mr Casaca on his excellent work, I must thank him for his support for the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture.
This opinion has tried to correct the Commission' s approach, which ignores most of the essential elements, not only for control, but also for administration.
This source of information is found in the administrative information resulting from the payments of the EAGGF.
Regulation (EC) No 2390/1999 demands that the Member States provide the Commission with the data on the payments of the EAGGF-Guarantee.
Nevertheless, it only demands that that information is communicated to them on request and exclusively for the preparation of verifications in situ in the process of the settlement of accounts.
This situation creates various control limits.
Effective administration must be able to provide the institutions responsible with the elements for analysis and decision and amongst these elements is the cost-efficiency index.
This approach must be applied systematically and must be based on the analysis of the payments corresponding to each regulation.
The fact that this information can only be requested for the preparation of verifications in situ in the process of the settlement of accounts sets a time limit on the availability of the fundamental information for administration and control.
Once the process of the settlement of accounts is over, it is no longer possible to make any analysis of administration or control activities.
However, as well as these verifications relating to the settlement of accounts, effective control requires other instruments such as, for example, the cross-checking of the different information available.
In order to reduce these deficiencies, it has been proposed to use the information available within the framework of the above-mentioned Regulation (EC) No 2390/1999 in the integrated administration system, which Mr Casaca spoke about earlier in this magnificent report.
Therefore, in the first stage of the establishment of this integrated administration and control system, it would be sufficient to regulate the conditions for delivering the information mentioned and the need for the Commission to store it.
Mr President, we welcome this proposal by the Commission to improve the system of control and I should like to thank Mr Casaca for his report.
This is a very technical subject and indeed to comprehend it one needs an understanding of almost all the details of the entire common agricultural policy.
Mr Casaca has made a very good effort to explain it to Parliament.
I should also like to thank the Commission for its continuing efforts to tidy up the whole business of accounting in the area of agriculture.
It is extremely important.
We have recently been talking about regional funds and cohesion funds but the common agricultural policy is extremely important.
It is the greatest instrument we have for cohesion since it is the only rural policy which the Community has and it brings immense benefits to peripheral areas and to people who are in businesses that are not otherwise viable.
The policy was given a bad name in the past when most of the funds were channelled to the agricultural industry through the processors and exporters.
We had the possibility for large amounts of fraud and racketeering through the payment of monetary compensatory amounts.
With the reorganisation of the policy we have a new situation.
It is fair to point out that the most recent report by the Court of Auditors for the year 1998 has not drawn attention to any single major failure of the Commission in this entire area.
There have been problems but they were isolated, small offences, relating to areas of aid and also to premiums and the failure of national governments to understand the details of European law.
But we have to recognise that for the most part the Commission was given a clean bill of health for 1998 which is the most recent report we have and it is to be congratulated on that.
Considering that this is something like 48% of the entire budget - EUR 38 or 39 billion - it is quite an achievement, spent over fifteen countries, that the budget was within two and a half per cent of estimate and that waste and the possibility for loss were lower than the average for the budget.
The changes to the whole system have made it easier to control.
The fact that more money is now going directly to farmers makes it easier to understand exactly what is happening.
The proposed changes will readjust our system of accounting to the new policies that have been devised.
It is reasonable to expect Member States to produce the sort of detail that is necessary for the European Commission both from the management point of view as well as that of accounting, to have exact details of where and to whom the money is going, down to the last recipient.
This is welcome.
In relation to the amendments proposed by Mr Casaca, we can support all of them.
We have received complaints from some people about the proposal to introduce tobacco.
Maybe, as things stand at the moment, because the money goes to processors there is some point in saying that it should not be extended.
But we spend EUR 1 000 million on the tobacco regime.
There are about 135 000 farmers, about 135 000 hectares.
That means approximately EUR 7 600 per hectare, approximately EUR 7 600 per farmer.
That is a lot of money.
It is only reasonable that we should seek to establish that this money goes to the farmers and applies to the hectares, as Mr Casaca has suggested.
My group is asking for a divided vote to enable those who do not like the tobacco regime to vote against it but, on the other hand, our amendment is a message to the Commission that we really think this should be clarified so that the money will go exactly where it is supposed to: to rural areas and to farmers.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate Mr Casaca on his excellent report.
My group will of course support it.
The integrated administration and control system is actually the central plank of our present agriculture policy.
We need reliable information on final beneficiaries, the number of animals kept and the surface area being cultivated.
This is a difficult task which is only possible at all by virtue of technological progress.
Mr Casaca' s report covers this to a considerable extent.
Welcome as this is, we should nevertheless not lose sight of the fact that this will involve changeover problems.
We learnt that when the present system was introduced under the 1992 regulation.
Today, eight years later, two Member States have not yet implemented the system at all or only in part.
We cannot allow delays of this kind to occur again.
This subject was addressed at the time of the 1998 final discharge.
The Commission informed us that the advance payments for these two countries, Greece and Portugal, had been reduced.
That alone is not enough.
In such cases there must be tangible sanctions that really bite, linked to the process of clearing the accounts.
In connection with the final discharge, the Commission also presented the 1998 monitoring statistics to us.
I do not want to burden you with figures here, but I will perhaps give you a short extract.
In 1998 in the 15 Community Member States there were more than 3 million applications for "area" aid.
Of these, some 12% were checked, partly on the spot and partly by satellite.
Of those applications checked, over 40% were inaccurate.
We should not of course immediately assume that deception was intended in every case.
In some cases, there were technical oversights, in others misunderstandings about interpreting the rules, and so on.
Nevertheless, these amounts add up to millions of course.
These figures therefore demonstrate just how urgently a properly functioning control system is required.
As the European Parliament rapporteur responsible for anti-fraud measures, I would like to bring a serious problem in this area to your attention.
All the Member States report any irregularities to the Commission, but only a few Member States tell the Commission which of these cases are classified as fraudulent.
For example, according to the statistics, in the United Kingdom there were 4 995 cases of over-declaration, 971 cases of duplicate applications and 52 cases of "false" applications.
But not one of these cases was classified in the statistics as being fraudulent or as giving rise to suspicions of "serious negligence" .
Finland, Austria, Portugal and Sweden do not report any such cases either.
So is there a kind of fraud-free zone in the EU?
I very much doubt it.
The problem we have here also occurs in other budget areas.
The administrative controls more or less work, but we do not have a reliable overview of criminal aspects.
This problem needs to be solved as a matter of urgency if we really want effective deterrence in order to combat fraud.
The ideal way of achieving this is to set up a European public prosecutor' s office for financial matters, which this House has repeatedly called for.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, expenditure within the framework of the EAGGF, Guarantee section, forms the largest entry in the whole of EU expenditure, and this year amounts to over EUR 41 billion.
The far-reaching management and control measures which the Commission proposes are therefore very appropriate indeed.
It is a matter of great urgency that such a large part of the EU' s expenditure should be used correctly and efficiently.
I do, however, wonder whether the proposed measures are the most effective.
In this respect, I would refer to the useful input from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in this report.
The Committee claims that, when data is collected, the existing databases are ignored, would you believe!
This is how useful information for managing Community aid falls by the wayside.
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is right in saying that the Commission is acting in an absurd manner.
Data on payments or revenue in respect of the EAGGF, Guarantee section, can only be used at the request of the Commission for closing accounts.
But surely this is no reason to ignore this information.
The existence of this wealth of information should have been a reason for the European Commission to adapt Regulation 2390/99.
We at the European Parliament can still rectify this mistake made by the Commission by including an amendment to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development' s recommendation, which unlocks this source of information for the management of Community aid.
If the regulation has been amended to this effect, we will back it without hesitation.
Mr President, I would also like to support the report presented by Mr Casaca on the European Commission proposal on the Integrated administration and control system for Community aid schemes, which was unanimously adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control.
In my opinion, the reservations expressed by the Executive, particularly the Commission' s position on Article 1 of the proposal, are unfounded.
The products which the rapporteur intends to add to the list all fall within sectors of considerable financial consequence whose control mechanisms have proved to be insufficient.
In fact, these products have all been subject to fraud and irregularity in the past.
Moreover, the extension of this system to a greater number of products would facilitate sound, effective management, which would lead to simpler procedures for both the Executive and farmers.
It is, in effect, necessary to harmonise the excessive number of different regulations which are currently in force, for the purposes of containing costs as well.
On the basis of the above considerations, I therefore call upon the Commission and the Council to incorporate the position of the Committee on Budgetary Control and, in particular, Amendment No 1 and Amendment No 2.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I too would like to warmly thank the rapporteur, Mr Casaca, and the Committees on Budgetary Control and on Agriculture and Rural Development for their proposals in the form of amendments and above all for the constructive debate on this proposal.
I am particularly grateful for their support for the basic principles underlying the Commission proposal, on which we are in agreement.
Although I cannot agree to all the amendments tabled by the committees, I would like to make it clear that the Commission supports the committees' basic view that the integrated administration and control system needs to be further strengthened.
With regard to Amendment No 1, the Commission' s main motivation in presenting this proposal was firstly to adjust the integrated control system to the new legislative situation arising from Agenda 2000, secondly, to introduce the geographic information systems designed to improve the identification of agricultural areas and, thirdly, to stipulate compatibility between IACS and administration and control systems for other Community aid systems.
Also on amendments, I would like to make the following point: in the case of Amendment No 1, I agree with the criticism raised earlier in the debate that not all Member States have yet made sufficient progress in establishing IACS.
However, it was not because of the transposal situation that the Commission presented its proposal for an amended regulation, but rather to introduce the new geographic information systems available.
As has also been explained, we have already taken advantage of the charging procedure, by setting a charge for those Member States lagging behind in that context also.
Amendment No 2 suggests that various other aid systems should be brought under IACS, with those for olive oil, tobacco, flax and hemp being mentioned in particular.
There is one particular point that must be borne in mind here: these schemes are not exclusively "area" aid schemes, so they cannot be wholly brought under IACS.
However, IACS will, of course, be applied as far as possible in these cases.
In particular, if flax and hemp are now to be integrated into the arable support system, IACS will then be fully applied.
But IACS or the geographic information system will also be used for determining areas and for drawing up the olive sector register.
With regard to Amendment No 3, the Commission is opposed to automatic exemption from the requirement to submit an area aid application for applying aid under a scheme not directly linked to agricultural areaThe Commission has in any case already granted an exemption of this kind for special cases, and it should retain the option of first being able to check whether such an exemption is sensible.
The Commission is in full agreement with Amendment No 4 to the extent that it refers to Article 10, which is to be deleted.
However, it is not possible totally to delete the provision affected in the way proposed.
The Commission must also retain the right to carry out checks in relation to IACS.
I shall now turn to the other points raised in the debate.
It has been proposed that payments should be centralised and that all data should be centralised.
We believe that the effect of this would be exactly the opposite of what we wish to achieve.
What we are looking for here is subsidiarity.
We cannot carry out all the checks from Brussels.
We know that there are millions of applications, and that means that it is only possible to check and control applications for compliance with the rules through decentralisation.
If we need information, we can in any case always access case-by-case details via national IACS operations and through national payment agencies.
There is no problem there.
But for the same reason, it would not only be organisationally counterproductive in terms of modern management but also highly costly to automatically send all data to Brussels and store it centrally there.
Mr Bösch pointed out that of all applications checked with regard to area, 40% were inaccurate.
However, we need to clarify what we mean by inaccurate applications, and above all just what the defects are.
For example, if you look at the European Court of Auditors' Statement of Assurance and in particular at the representative spot checks carried out by the Court of Auditors for 1998, the following facts emerged with regard to the support system for producers of arable crops: out of the entire random sample taken, a total of 16 substantial errors were found in relation to area.
The deviations in these 16 incorrect applications were in ten cases between 0% and 3%, in four cases between 3% and 5% and for only two applications in the entire random sample for the whole Community was the deviation over 5%.
The other point that Mr Bösch raised, and which I also consider to be important, is the question of possible criminal aspects.
The issue here is to what extent actual incidences of fraud are not subject of adequate prosecutions.
You all know that under present legislation and also in accordance with the current contractual arrangements, all matters relating to criminal law are the responsibility of the Member States.
If cases of fraud or suspected fraud should actually arise in this area, then the national public prosecutor' s office should automatically be involved.
The extent to which it would make sense to set up some kind of European public prosecutor' s office for financial matters or to introduce some kind of European financial prosecution procedure is an issue which ultimately has to be discussed in the framework of the Intergovernmental Conference, because it would imply a treaty amendment.
Just one brief observation, Commissioner.
Your institution is calling for a public prosecutor' s office for financial matters in connection with the Intergovernmental Conference.
I hope that there will be no further need for negotiations and clarification within the Commission.
We will be glad to support you on this.
I would like to make it clear that I did not say that we require anything to be clarified.
I simply said that any decision would have to be taken in the framework of the Intergovernmental Conference.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Nuts and locust beans
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission (B5-0491/2000) by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on support measures for nuts and locust beans.
Mr President, in the absence of Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, and on his request, I will speak on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture.
The majority of nut production in the European Union takes place in arid areas and on steep slopes in drought conditions.
These crops offer protection against erosion and desertification and play the role of firebreaks.
They are of fundamental importance as a source of supplementary income, which is essential to the maintenance of a large number of rural operations in the least-favoured areas.
Furthermore, this production is the basis of a significant primary and secondary processing industry, the key to economic diversification in rural areas which suffer very difficult conditions.
The Community' s level of self-sufficiency in this area is between 50 and 60%.
Community production must endure competition from third country producers whose costs are much lower and who are subject to greatly reduced tariff protection.
For example, in the case of hazelnuts, the costs of production in the European Union are three times greater than those in Turkey as a result of the differences in labour costs.
In the case of almonds, the cost difference is a result of the fact that in the European Union they are produced in very difficult climate and soil conditions.
Tariff protection is very low and is being progressively dismantled following the negotiations within the World Trade Organisation and other preferential agreements.
The Commission clearly cannot ignore the fact that, when it holds commercial negotiations, its concessions have effects which sometimes turn out to be negative.
For this reason, it must become customary to assess the consequences and automatically establish measures to lessen the negative effects of commercial concessions granted by the Commission.
Despite the fact that the measures laid down in Regulation (EEC) No 789/89 have had positive results, they have not managed to balance the cost of production with prices on a market dominated by the enormous pressure of imports at low prices.
The problem is that the support which this production has relied on is coming to an end, while the severe production conditions have not changed, and the competition from third country production has become tougher.
In fact, the tariffs applicable to almonds, for example, are going to be reduced further next month from 4.1 to 3.5% and there is a quota of 90 000 tonnes at 2%.
Furthermore, American exports to certain third countries enjoy preferential agreements which the European Union does not have.
In fact, over the last ten years the price has remained the same.
The tariff for hazelnuts stands at 3.3%.
Nevertheless, a lower rate of 3% is applied for products from Turkey.
The pressure of imports is such that there is less and less difference in prices between the select varieties and the common varieties, which has a devastating effect.
The difficult growing conditions in the European Union prevent competition with third countries and it is not possible to improve competitivity unless we abandon the current production areas and move production to other regions.
This would cause serious environmental damage, serious risks of depopulation and serious problems in terms of land management.
For these reasons, Commissioner, the Committee on Agriculture presented the oral question which has led to this debate.
The diagnosis of the problems involved in the needs of Community nut production is well known.
This is demonstrated by the fact that all the political groups in this House have agreed on the presentation of a resolution.
The pressure of imports and the difficult climate and soil conditions demand, therefore, support for Community nut production.
The Committee on Agriculture, in the resolutions presented unanimously by the political groups, is responding to the conclusions of the recent appearance of the nut sector before the Committee on Agriculture and, to a certain extent, takes up the requests of the sector, which, as the Commissioner knows, is enormously worried and concerned.
These concerns, demands and requests of the Committee on Agriculture and the political groups in Parliament are aimed at seeking a solution which involves the granting of direct aid to the income of producers which, by maintaining that cultivation, will lead to the prevention of environmental damage and depopulation and maintain certain primary and secondary processing industries in the least-favoured areas.
However, on the other hand - and this is the aspect which has led to the anguish and concern in the sector today - given that the measures aimed at this sector are coming to an end, it is essential that they be extended until a new support system has been put in place.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Jové Peres, may I remind you that the Commission itself discovered many years ago that growing nuts in the European Union involves certain difficulties!
Part of the reason for this, and you are right in saying this, is undoubtedly the keen international competition which exists, but the main reason is that there are various structural deficiencies in the main nut-growing areas.
We unfortunately discovered that these structural deficiencies above all result in low productivity and high production costs.
In view of these difficulties, a support system was introduced back in 1989.
But even at that time it was limited to 10 years, and its objective was to improve the nut quality and marketing.
This system involved a significant financial commitment.
Between 1990 and 1999, this system led to expenditure totalling EUR 725 million.
And as the contractual obligations are still in force, and run up to 2006, this year and in the coming years a further EUR 250 million will be paid out.
In addition, a separate flat-rate aid for hazelnuts was introduced in 1997.
However, as I have already said, it has been clear from the outset, as everyone affected knows, that there is a time limit on the measures to promote sales and that the objective is to facilitate the adjustments necessary to increase competitiveness.
In view of the fact that the programmes will in part be continuing up to 2006, no further measures are planned under this budget heading.
However, I would like to point out that a different form of support for nuts that did not exist previously has now become available.
Above all, the general aid scheme for fruit and vegetable growers under the "operational fund" also provides for measures of this kind, and of course additional, non-market-specific measures are also possible under the rural development programmes which had to be submitted this year.
However, none of the programmes submitted to us by the Member States, including those Member States with substantial agricultural areas, contains any proposals for measures of this kind, so that no such need was evidently identified when drawing up the programmes.
That is the present situation, and that also sets out what the Commission is in a position to do in this field so as to counter negative trends.
But the Commission should not be attacked if it was agreed beforehand that rural development was to be the responsibility of Member States and included in their programmes, and if at all possible at regional level within the Member States.
So that is where priorities for supporting rural development need to be set.
Mr President, I must thank the Commissioner for being present in this almost deserted chamber on a Thursday evening.
This House will end up as barren as the programme which you are presenting us with for nuts.
I would also like to thank all of you who are here to debate the future of nuts in the European Union.
I had my speech prepared, but having heard the reply which the Commissioner has just given us and the words of Mr Jové in his presentation, I believe that I am going to forget my notes and try to improvise in reply to the Commissioner' s response.
The Commissioner is aware of the problems of nuts in the European Union and he is aware that we are dependent on a single supplier in many cases: the United States, on the one hand, in the case of almonds, and Turkey, in the case of hazelnuts.
The Commissioner is also aware of the benefits - as Mr Jové has stressed - for the arid areas where all these crops are cultivated, and this cultivation is not improvised from year to year, since it takes a long time to grow an almond tree or a walnut tree.
Therefore, Commissioner, I believe that we are facing a very extensive problem.
When you tell us that there are structural problems of low productivity and high production costs in the European Union, we must ask ourselves whether we want a nut sector or whether we want to be totally dependent on outside sources?
We only provide 50% of the supply, for the rest we depend on other countries.
At this rate, we will end up with nothing.
You tell us that there have had to be negotiations and that there is already aid from the COM in fruit and also within the framework of the rural development projects.
Therefore, I would like to say that, in the COM in fruits, the operational funds are intended for those crops - for those fruits - for which there is large-scale production.
In those cases, the operational funds - which are a very small percentage of this global production per hectare, some 1.5 or 2% - are a reasonable amount to work with.
In the case of production per hectare which amounts to little more than ESP 100 000, I believe that the operational funds of the COM in fruits have very little significance and offer very little in terms of resolving the problem of nuts.
With regard to the framework of the rural development projects, the Commissioner knows much better than I do that, in rural development, the second pillar of the CAP - which we all view with great hope and we congratulate him for having brought it up and united it in one budgetary line -, in the regions where these fruits are grown - which are basically Objective 1 regions in some cases, and Objective 2 regions in others-, the programmes developed there are LEADER programmes.
In these LEADER programmes, and PRODER programmes in the case of Spain, where there are national programmes, which are organised from the bottom up, it will be difficult to consider a specific cultivation as being of strategic interest and as a strategic sector, when these programmes normally deal with problems of general interest.
However, Commissioner, what we are proposing to you, and I believe that all the political groups are in agreement on this, is the partial continuation, not continuation sine die, but continuation until a certain date, Commissioner, of improvement funds and plans, because in some cases they have still not ended, and in other cases their objectives have still not been fulfilled.
However, these funds are absolutely essential to the maintenance of the crop, as long as nuts are subject to differentiated treatment within the coming reform of the COM in fruits and vegetables.
Commissioner, I believe that we are talking about a sum of money which is not especially large and which can be covered within the miserly budgets which, according to what your department tells us, are available for allocation.
Therefore, Commissioner, the extension of these improvement plans, as long as they are organised, used, and allocated according to a differentiated treatment in the coming reform of fruits, which will happen shortly, I believe that this will resolve and calm the fears which Mr Jové has expressed, which are shared by all the nut producers in the European Union, as they communicated to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, where they received our political support.
Since these producers have the political support of this House, I believe that it would not be justifiable to deny them a few pesetas of economic support.
Mr President, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I wish to reject the words of Mr Fischler - and his proposals - and I wish to support the motion for a resolution presented by various parliamentary groups, which has the practically unanimous support of this House.
Mr Fischler, the European Commission must not continue to ignore the requests of the sectors affected.
You cannot continue to insist that you alone are right and that we are all mistaken.
You cannot ignore the fact that, if we do not adopt support measures for nuts and locust beans, many crops will eventually be abandoned.
There will be irreparable consequences for many areas of the Union, from both socio-economic and environmental points of view.
It must be said that both specific measures for nuts and locust beans, as well as the lump sum aid for hazelnuts, were in fact transitional measures aimed at the conversion of the crops, but there is no reason why they cannot be extended.
Commissioner, a conversion in the agricultural sector cannot be treated as if it were a conversion in the industrial sector.
In industry, one can modernise plants and improve productivity, but in the case of certain crops, however much investment is made, however many changes are made in terms of marketing, we cannot alter the fact that certain areas are arid or semi-arid.
We cannot imagine that this problem can be resolved through the scant funds available in the rural development programmes.
That is not the place to find a solution for these areas, as the Commissioner and the whole of the Commission seems to think.
Furthermore, it does not appear that an extension of this aid until the adoption of the measures proposed in the resolution, nor even until the definitive measures themselves are adopted, will cause problems within the conversations in the World Trade Organisation.
The sector produces a surplus and Community protection is minimal.
If the quantities requested are not great, if there are no further problems, if this is the only way to maintain standards of living in certain areas, Commissioner, this aid must be retained.
Mr President, having heard the interventions of Mr Jové and Mr Fischler, I believe I should change the form of my intervention and go straight to what I believe is the crux of the matter.
The Commission' s main argument is that which was agreed ten years ago.
That is to say, ten years ago there were certain conditions, we established a programme and it has come to an end.
I believe that it is precisely the change in conditions compared to ten years ago which weakens the Commission' s position, and it is therefore important for them to be sensitive to an agreement which originates from the action of certain MEPs from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the European Parliament at the moment.
In my opinion, there have been three changes.
Firstly, the competition conditions have changed.
They are not the same as ten years ago.
Secondly, according to the assessment of the agricultural sector, and this one in particular, it should be pointed out that there is much greater sensitivity towards environmental responsibility than there was ten years ago.
It is an economic sector, I agree, but it has much greater environmental responsibility than it did ten years ago.
Thirdly, if this aid is removed today, the loss of the land recovered over these ten years would be irreversible.
I therefore sincerely believe that there is no margin, either within the framework of rural development or in other areas, because we are not talking about vegetables, we are not talking about any other type of product, we are talking about a very specific product, with very specific circumstances, which were analysed ten years ago and which must be analysed today once again.
For this reason, I believe that it makes absolute sense to carry out a study of a new framework of aid and, in any event, there should be an extension with immediate effect.
Mr President, Commissioner Fischler, ladies and gentlemen, there are not many of us, just the little Mediterranean family, trying to defend the crops that Brussels does not like.
We have had the honey problem - Mr Fischler, you refused a few handfuls of euros for hive subsidies - the olive oil problem, and now it is the turn of walnuts, almonds and hazelnuts.
Brussels does not want to be involved.
We are told: there was the 1989 regulation, but it was provisional.
The fixed aid for hazelnuts in 1996 was temporary.
These measures have run their course and must come to an end.
But to put an end to Community funding is to spoil what has been achieved.
In the name of the principle of continuity, coherence and protecting the financial interests of the European Union, the aid that has already been committed must not be ended, especially since another aberration may be added to this one, the fact that we are in deficit.
We are importing.
And if that is making profits for Turkey, then fair enough, but making profits for California!
You tell us that it is expensive, but you are not telling the whole truth.
It costs EUR 250 million, but that is for years to come.
You are avoiding giving the annual figure, which would represent 0.0 something percent, a tiny fraction of the European budget.
In other words, Commissioner, action must be taken, first in the name of quality, in the name of seasonal employment, but also in the name of common sense, rurality, the environment, beauty.
I do not know whether you have seen an almond tree in February, well it is truly a thing of beauty!
And as we have told you, we are dealing with regions in Spain, in my native Languedoc-Roussillon, in Greece, where the land is arid.
We must prevent a rural exodus.
As a minimum, since extending the COM for fruit and vegetables is not a solution, we must set aside a few euros from the European budget to finance this activity.
But on top of that, Commissioner - you and I were both in Seattle - there is the problem of Community preference.
Our honey over Chinese, Canadian or Mexican honey.
Our olives instead of North African olives and our Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Greek, Languedoc-Roussillon and French Mediterranean before Anatolia and California, Commissioner.
Not for a fistful of dollars, but for a fistful of euros.
Commissioner, in your speech you told us how you viewed the situation, but I can assure you that the industry does not see it in the same way.
It is true that aid was adopted in the past to tackle great difficulties facing the industry, but the problem is that today, ten years later and through no fault of the producers, the circumstances that led to the approval of that aid have not changed.
As has been pointed out, our tariffs continue to be very low, European products are still unable to compete with those originating above all from Turkey and the United States, as a result of social and labour costs or because the crops, in the case of the United States, are in irrigable areas and are mechanisable while those in the European Union are in drought areas which are not easily accessible, where there is little chance of mechanisation, and it is therefore true that they are less competitive.
However, this does not make the production in the European Union any less important.
Furthermore, despite the importance of this production, we still have a deficit, and the disappearance of this crop - which may occur if the aid to the industry is not continued - would put the consumer in the hands of Turkey and the United States, who would set our prices from their position as a true monopoly.
We should also remember, Commissioner, that there is practically no alternative to the cultivation of nuts because of the places in which they are produced.
For all these reasons, it is not surprising that there is enormous concern in the sector at the possibility that aid may be withdrawn, since without it - and we must recognise this -, given that the future of these operations, as a result of the competition from third countries, is in jeopardy and the investment made in the modernisation of the production systems - which has taken place on a significant scale - will have been pointless.
I would therefore also like to ask you, Commissioner, on behalf of the producers in the sector and especially on behalf of the producers in Catalonia, for the specific aid to this sector to be continued in the way that has been pointed out here and along the lines of the motion for a resolution which I hope will receive the support of this House.
This aid only represents 0.18% of the total budget of the EAGGF-Guarantee and 0.16% of the total agricultural budget, for which, furthermore, it has been pointed out that there is a sufficient financial margin.
Any other type of aid such as those you have mentioned, above all rural development aid, may be positive in other sectors, it is true, but in this case, given the specific nature of the sector, they are totally insufficient to guarantee the competitiveness, and therefore the survival, of these operations, whose interests the Commission - you, Commissioner - can in no way ignore.
Mr President, here again, I would simply like to draw attention to the fact that, in this crop that I know so well, the return on investment is long term.
Moreover, the producers have worked towards obtaining certification on irrigation, selecting plants, precisely organising the crops, and this work would be completely ruined if the aid that had been given up until now was not maintained at least long enough for the return on investment to take place.
For walnut trees, for example, the return on investment is around 18 years, and consequently, I believe that economic and financial logic and coherence, and also political coherence, require that for these crops, the Commission should show continuity, logic and common sense.
Mr President, I would just like to respond, very briefly, to the most important arguments raised.
First of all I would like to make it as clear as possible that the Commission is definitely against production aids.
Even the aids that we had in the past were intended to support improvements in structure and quality - they were not intended to be permanent production aids.
In addition, I have to say that any such purely production-related aid would violate all the WTO rules.
It has been argued that we are talking about a long-term investment here.
That is quite right.
But every farmer who has made an investment in this area signed a contract at the outset before he made that investment, so that he knew for exactly how many years he would be receiving investment aid.
So it is not as if the Commission can now be accused of some kind of cynicism because it is withdrawing support in a way that the farmers affected were not expecting.
Every farmer knew for exactly how many years he would be receiving support.
We need to be very clear about that here.
I have explained that there are new options.
If a case is being made that this type of farming is absolutely essential for maintaining the landscape and preserving the environment, particularly in these dry areas, then this is an ideal case for environmental measures.
It was precisely for this purpose that, amongst other things, we topped up the funding for environmental measures in the context of agricultural development.
You cannot be right on both counts.
You cannot argue that this is an important form of agriculture if it is obviously not important enough for the regional authorities to give it priority and grant support for it.
You cannot have it both ways!
It has been said that this is all too little and that more money is needed, and it has been argued that this is only nought point something of the total agricultural budget.
I am sorry, but the proportion of the budget the Commissioner can spend as he likes is 0.0%, so that if you want aid, you must at least play fair and say who you want to take the money away from!
Because the room for manoeuvre is precisely zero, there is no leeway in the budget as has been suggested in this Chamber!
In accordance with Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure, I have received two motions for resolutions to end the debate.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 8.15 p.m.)