# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
United Nations
Report of the International Law Commission
Fifty-seventh session
(2 May-3 June and 11 July-5 August 2005)
General Assembly
Official Records
Sixtieth session
Supplement No. 10 (A/60/10)
General Assembly
Official Records Sixtieth session Supplement No. 10 (A/60/10)
Report of the International Law Commission
Fifty-seventh session (2 May-3 June and 11 July-5 August 2005)
United Nations • New York, 2005
Note
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
The word Yearbook followed by suspension points and the year (e.g. Yearbook 1971) indicates a reference to the Yearbook of the International Law Commission.
A typeset version of the report of the Commission will be included in Part Two of volume II of the Yearbook of the International Law Commission 2005.
Chapter Paragraphs Page
Membership 2 1
Officers and the Enlarged Bureau 3 - 5 2
C. Drafting Committee 6 - 7 3
Working Groups 8 - 9 3
E. Secretariat 10 4
Agenda 11 4
Shared natural resources 24 9
Effects of armed conflicts on treaties 25 9
C. Responsibility of international organizations 26 9
Expulsion of aliens 27 11
E. Unilateral acts of States 28 11
Reservations to treaties 29 11
Introduction 30 - 31 12
Consideration of the topic at the present session 32 - 107 12
Introduction by the Special Rapporteur of his third report 34 - 47 13
Summary of the debate 48 - 98 26
(a) General comments 48 - 60 26
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
(b) Comments on specific draft articles 61 - 95 30
(c) Comments on form of instrument 96 - 98 40
Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 99 - 107 41
Introduction 108 - 109 44
Consideration of the topic at the present session 110 - 191 44
General remarks on the topic 113 - 127 45
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur of his first report 113 - 116 45
(b) Summary of the debate 117 - 123 46
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 124 - 127 47
Article 1.
Scope 128 - 133 49
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 128 49
(b) Summary of the debate 129 - 131 49
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 132 - 133 50
Article 2.
Use of terms 134 - 141 51
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 134 - 135 51
(b) Summary of the debate 136 - 140 52
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 141 54
Article 3.
Ipso facto termination or suspension 142 - 148 54
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 142 54
(b) Summary of the debate 143 - 146 55
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 147 - 148 56
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
Article 4.
The indicia of susceptibility to termination or suspension of treaties in case of an armed conflict 149 - 156 56
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 149 - 150 56
(b) Summary of the debate 151 - 154 57
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 155 - 156 59
Article 5.
Express provisions on the operation of treaties 157 - 161 60
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 157 60
(b) Summary of the debate 158 - 160 60
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 161 61
Article 6.
Treaties relating to the occasion for resort to armed conflict 162 - 166 61
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 162 61
(b) Summary of the debate 163 - 164 62
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 165 - 166 62
Article 7.
The operation of treaties on the basis of necessary implication from their object and purpose 167 - 175 63
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 167 - 168 63
(b) Summary of the debate 169 - 173 64
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 174 - 175 66
Article 8.
Mode of suspension or termination 176 - 178 67
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 176 67
(b) Summary of the debate 177 67
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 178 67
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
Article 9.
The resumption of suspended treaties 179 - 181 68
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 179 68
(b) Summary of the debate 180 68
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 181 69
Article 10.
Legality of the conduct of the parties 182 - 187 69
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 182 69
(b) Summary of the debate 183 - 185 69
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 186 - 187 70
Article 11.
Decisions of the Security Council; Article 12.
Status of third States as neutrals; Article 13.
Cases of termination or suspension; and Article 14.
The revival of terminated or suspended treaties 188 - 191 71
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 188 71
(b) Summary of the debate 189 - 190 72
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 191 72
Introduction 192 - 194 73
Consideration of the topic at the present session 195 - 204 74
C. Text of the draft articles on responsibility of international organizations provisionally adopted so far by the Commission 205 - 206 79
Text of the draft articles 205 79
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
Text of the draft articles with commentaries thereto adopted by the Commission at its fifty-seventh session 206 86
Chapter III.
Breach of an international obligation 86
Article 8.
Existence of a breach of an international obligation 87
Commentary 87
Article 9.
International obligation in force for an international organization 91
Commentary 91
Article 10.
Extension in time of the breach of an international obligation 91
Commentary 92
Article 11.
Breach consisting of a composite act 92
Commentary 92
Chapter IV.
Responsibility of an international organization in connection with the act of a State or another international organization 92
Article 12.
Aid or assistance in the commission of an internationally wrongful act 96
Commentary 96
Article 13.
Direction and control exercised over the commission of an internationally wrongful act 97
Commentary 97
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
Article 14.
Coercion of a State or another international organization 99
Commentary 99
Article 15.
Decisions, recommendations and authorizations addressed to member States and international organizations 100
Commentary 101
Article 16.
Effect of this Chapter 105
Commentary 105
Introduction 207 - 224 106
Consideration of the topic at the present session 225 - 241 110
Clean hands doctrine 226 - 236 110
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 226 - 230 110
(b) Summary of the debate 231 - 235 112
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 236 114
Other issues 237 - 241 114
(a) Summary of the debate 237 - 238 114
(b) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 239 - 241 115
Introduction 242 - 243 117
Consideration of the topic at the present session 244 - 274 117
Introduction by the Special Rapporteur 245 - 250 118
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
Summary of the debate 251 - 270 119
(a) General comments 251 - 252 119
(b) The concept of the expulsion of aliens (scope and definitions) 253 - 260 120
(c) The right to expel 261 - 262 123
(d) Grounds for expulsion 263 - 265 123
(e) Rights related to expulsion 266 - 268 125
(f) Methodological issues 269 - 270 127
Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 271 - 274 127
Introduction 275 - 293 129
Consideration of the topic at the present session 294 - 332 132
Introduction by the Special Rapporteur of his eighth report 295 - 300 132
Summary of the debate 301 - 316 133
Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 317 - 326 137
Conclusions of the Working Group 327 - 332 138
Introduction 333 - 342 140
Consideration of the topic at the present session 343 - 436 142
Introduction by the Special Rapporteur of his tenth report 350 - 388 143
Summary of the debate 389 - 426 153
Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks 427 - 436 160
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
C. Text of draft guidelines on reservations to treaties provisionally adopted so far by the Commission 437 - 438 162
Text of draft guidelines 437 162
Text of the draft guidelines and commentaries thereto adopted by the Commission at its fifty-seventh session 438 185
2.6.1 Definition of objections to reservations 186
Commentary 186
2.6.2 Definition of objections to the late formulation or widening of the scope of a reservation 202
Commentary 202
Introduction 439 - 441 204
Consideration of the topic at the present session 442 - 444 205
C. Report of the Study Group 445 - 493 206
General comments and the projected outcome of the Study Group's work 445 - 448 206
Discussion of a memorandum on “regionalism” in the context of the Study on the “Function and scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'” 449 - 466 207
Discussion on the Study on the interpretation of treaties in the light of “any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties” (article 31 (3) (c) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties), in the context of general developments in international law and concerns of the international community 467 - 479 214
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
Discussion of the Preliminary Report on “Hierarchy in international law: jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, as conflict rules” 480 - 493 221
Programme, procedures and working methods of the Commission and its documentation 494 - 501 226
Cost-saving measures 497 226
Documentation 498 226
Working Group on the long-term programme of work 499 227
New topic for inclusion in the current programme of work of the Commission 500 227
Honoraria 501 227
Date and place of the fifty-eighth session of the Commission 502 227
C. Cooperation with other bodies 503 - 509 228
Representation at the sixtieth session of the General Assembly 510 - 511 229
E. International Law Seminar 512 - 524 229
chapter i
Introduction
The International Law Commission held the first part of its fifty-seventh session from 2 May to 3 June 2005 and the second part from 11 July to 5 August 2005 at its seat at the United Nations Office at Geneva.
The session was opened by Ms. Hanqin Xue, First Vice-Chairperson of the Commission at its fifty-sixth session.
Membership
The Commission consists of the following members:
Mr. Emmanuel Akwei Addo (Ghana) Mr. Husain M. Al-Baharna (Bahrain) Mr.
Ali Mohsen Fetais Al-Marri (Qatar) Mr. Joao Clemente Baena Soares (Brazil) Mr. Ian Brownlie (United Kingdom) Mr. Enrique Candioti (Argentina) Mr. Choung Il Chee (Republic of Korea) Mr. Pedro Comissário Afonso (Mozambique) Mr. Riad Daoudi (Syrian Arab Republic) Mr. Christopher John Robert Dugard (South Africa) Mr. Constantin P. Economides (Greece) Ms. Paula Escarameia (Portugal) Mr. Salifou Fomba (Mali) Mr. Giorgio Gaja (Italy) Mr. Zdzislaw Galicki (Poland) Mr. Peter C.R. Kabatsi (Uganda) Mr. Maurice Kamto (Cameroon) Mr. James Lutabanzibwa Kateka (United Republic of Tanzania) Mr. Fathi Kemicha (Tunisia) Mr. Roman Anatolyevitch Kolodkin (Russian Federation) Mr. Martti Koskenniemi (Finland) Mr. William R. Mansfield (New Zealand) Mr. Michael J. Matheson (United States) Mr. Theodor Viorel Melescanu (Romania) Mr. Djamchid Momtaz (Islamic Republic of Iran) Mr. Bernd H. Niehaus (Costa Rica) Mr. Didier Opertti Badan (Uruguay) Mr. Guillaume Pambou-Tchivounda (Gabon) Mr. Alain Pellet (France) Mr. Pemmaraju Sreenivasa Rao (India) Mr. Victor Rodríguez Cedeño (Venezuela) Mr. Bernardo Sepulveda (Mexico) Ms. Hanqin Xue (China) Mr. Chusei Yamada (Japan)
Officers and the Enlarged Bureau
At its 2831st meeting, on 2 May 2005, the Commission elected the following officers:
Chairman: Mr. Djamchid Momtaz First Vice-Chairman: Mr. Guillaume Pambou-Tchivounda Second Vice-Chairman: Mr. Roman A. Kolodkin Chairman of the Drafting Committee: Mr. William Mansfield Rapporteur: Mr. Bernd Niehaus
The Enlarged Bureau of the Commission was composed of the officers of the present session, the previous Chairmen of the Commission and the Special Rapporteurs.
On the recommendation of the Enlarged Bureau the Commission set up a Planning Group composed of the following members: Mr. G. Pambou-Tchivounda (Chairman), Mr. E.A. Addo, Mr. C.I. Chee, Mr. P. Comissário Afonso, Mr. R. Daoudi, Mr. C.P. Economides, Ms. P. Escarameia, Mr. S. Fomba, Mr. Z. Galicki, Mr. P.C.R.
Kabatsi, Mr. J.L. Kateka, Mr. F. Kemicha, Mr. R.A. Kolodkin, Mr. M. Koskenniemi, Mr. M.J. Matheson, Mr. D. Opertti Badan, Mr.
A. Pellet, Ms. H. Xue and Mr. B. Niehaus (ex officio).
C. Drafting Committee
At its 2834th and 2844th meetings, on 6 and 25 May 2005, respectively, the Commission established a Drafting Committee, composed of the following members for the topics indicated:
(a) Reservations to treaties: Mr. W. Mansfield (Chairman), Mr.
A. Pellet (Special Rapporteur), Mr. P. Comissário Afonso, Mr. R. Daoudi, Ms. P. Escarameia, Mr. S. Fomba, Mr. G. Gaja, Mr. Z. Galicki, Mr. F. Kemicha, Mr. R.A. Kolodkin, Mr. M.J. Matheson, Ms. H. Xue and Mr. B. Niehaus (ex officio).
(b) Responsibility of international organizations: Mr. W. Mansfield (Chairman), Mr. G. Gaja (Special Rapporteur), Mr. C.I. Chee, Mr. P. Comissário Afonso, Mr. C.P. Economides, Ms. P. Escarameia, Mr. R.A. Kolodkin, Mr. M.J. Matheson, Mr. P.S. Rao, Ms. H. Xue, Mr. C. Yamada and Mr. B. Niehaus (ex officio).
The Drafting Committee held a total of six meetings on the two topics indicated above.
Working Groups
At its 2832nd, 2836th, 2840th and 2843rd meetings, on 3, 11, 18 and 24 May 2005, respectively, the Commission also established the following Working Groups and Study Group:
(a) Study Group on Fragmentation of international law: difficulties arising from the diversification and expansion of international law
Chairman: Mr. M. Koskenniemi
(b) Working Group on Unilateral acts of States
Chairman: Mr.
A. Pellet
(c) Working Group on Shared natural resources
Chairman: Mr. E. Candioti
(d) Working Group on Responsibility of international organizations
Chairman: Mr. G. Gaja
The Working Group on long-term programme of work reconvened and was composed of the following members: Mr.
A. Pellet (Chairman), Mr. J.C. Baena Soares, Mr. Z. Galicki, Mr. M. Kamto, Mr. M. Koskenniemi, Ms. H. Xue and Mr. B. Niehaus (ex officio).
E. Secretariat
Mr. Nicolas Michel, Under-Secretary-General, the Legal Counsel, represented the Secretary-General.
Mr. Václav Mikulka, Director of the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs, acted as Secretary to the Commission and, in the absence of the Legal Counsel, represented the Secretary-General.
Ms. Mahnoush H. Arsanjani, Deputy Director of the Codification Division, acted as Deputy Secretary to the Commission.
Mr. George Korontzis, Senior Legal Officer, served as Senior Assistant Secretary, Mr. Trevor Chimimba and Mr. Arnold Pronto, Legal Officers, served as Assistant Secretaries to the Commission.
Agenda
At its 2831st meeting, on 2 May 2005, the Commission adopted an agenda for its fifty-seventh session consisting of the following items:
Organization of work of the session.
Diplomatic protection.
Responsibility of international organizations.
Shared natural resources.
Unilateral acts of States.
Reservations to treaties.
Expulsion of aliens.
Effects of armed conflicts on treaties.
Fragmentation of international law: difficulties arising from the diversification and expansion of international law.
Programme, procedures and working methods of the Commission and its documentation.
Cooperation with other bodies.
Date and place of the fifty-eighth session.
Other business.
As regards the topic “Shared Natural Resources”, the Commission considered the third report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/551 and Corr.1 and Add.1), which contained a complete set of 25 draft articles on the law of transboundary aquifers.
The Commission also established a Working Group on Transboundary Groundwaters chaired by Mr. Enrique Candioti to review the draft articles presented by the Special Rapporteur taking into account the debate in the Commission on the topic.
The Working Group had the benefit of advice and briefings from experts on groundwaters from UNESCO and the International Association of Hydrogeologists (IAH).
It also held an informal briefing by the Franco-Swiss Genevese Aquifer Authority.
The Working Group reviewed and revised eight draft articles and recommended that it be reconvened in 2006 to complete its work (Chap. IV).
Concerning the topic “Effects of armed conflicts on treaties”, the Commission considered the first report of the Special Rapporteur on the topic (A/CN.4/552), presenting an overview of the issues involved in the topic together with a set of 14 draft articles in order to assist the Commission and Governments with commenting, including providing State practice.
The Commission endorsed the Special Rapporteur's suggestion that a written request for information be circulated to member Governments (Chap.
As regards the topic “Responsibility of international organizations”, the Commission considered the Special Rapporteur's third report (A/CN.4/553), proposing nine draft articles dealing with the existence of a breach of an international obligation by an international organization and the responsibility of an international organization in connection with the act of a State or another international organization.
The Commission considered the third report and adopted nine draft articles together with commentaries (Chap.
As regards the topic “Diplomatic protection”, the Commission considered the Special Rapporteur's sixth report (A/CN.4/547) dealing with clean hand doctrine (Chap.
As regards the topic “Expulsion of aliens”, the Commission considered the Special Rapporteur's preliminary report on the topic (A/CN.4/554), presenting an overview of some of the issues involved and a possible outline for further consideration of the topic (Chap. VIII).
With regard to the topic “Unilateral acts of States” the Commission considered the eighth report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/557) which contained the analysis of 11 cases of State practice and the conclusions thereof.
A Working Group on Unilateral Acts was reconstituted and its work focused on the study of State practice and on the elaboration of preliminary conclusions on the topic which the Commission should consider at its next session (Chap.
Concerning the topic “Reservations to Treaties”, the Commission considered part of the Special Rapporteur's tenth report (A/CN.4/558 and Add.1) and referred seven draft guidelines dealing with validity of reservations and the definition of object and purpose of the treaty to the Drafting Committee.
The Commission also adopted two draft guidelines dealing with the definition of objections to reservations and the definition of objection to the late formulation or widening of the scope of a reservation together with commentaries (Chap.
In relation to the topic “Fragmentation of international law: difficulties arising from the diversification and expansion of international law”, the Commission held an exchange of views on the topic on the basis of a briefing by the Chairman of the Study Group on the status of work of the Study Group.
The Study Group considered the memorandum on regionalism in the context of the Study on the “Function and Scope of the lex specialis rule and the question of `self-contained regimes'”; the Study on the Interpretation of Treaties in the light of “any relevant rules of international law applicable in relations between parties” (article 31 (3) (c) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties); as well as the final report on the Study on Hierarchy in International Law: jus cogens, obligations erga omnes, Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, as conflict rules.
The Study Group also received the final report on the Study concerning the modification of multilateral treaties between certain of the parties only (article 41 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties) (Chap.
The Study Group envisaged that it would be in a position to submit a consolidated study, as well as a set of conclusions, guidelines or principles to the fifty-eighth session of the Commission (2006).
The Commission set up a Planning Group to consider its programme, procedures and working methods (Chap.
XII, sect.
The Commission decided to include in its current programme of work one new topic, namely “The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)”.
In this regard, the Commission decided to appoint Mr. Zdzislaw Galicki, Special Rapporteur for the topic.
The Commission continued traditional exchanges of information with the International Court of Justice, the Inter-American Juridical Committee, the Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization and the European Committee on Legal Cooperation and the Committee of Legal Advisers on Public International Law of the Council of Europe.
Members of the Commission also held informal meetings with other bodies and associations on matters of mutual interest (Chap.
XII, sect.
A training seminar was held with 24 participants of different nationalities (Chap.
XII, sect.
The Commission decided that its next session be held at the United Nations Office in Geneva in two parts, from 1 May to 9 June and 3 July to 11 August 2006 (Chap.
XII, sect.
Shared natural resources
Under this topic, the Commission is now focusing for the time being on codification of the law on transboundary groundwaters (aquifers and aquifer systems).
The work is progressing in the form of elaboration of draft articles on the basis of the proposals by the Special Rapporteur contained in his third report.
In its 2004 report, the Commission requested States and relevant intergovernmental organizations to provide information in reply to the questionnaire prepared by the Special Rapporteur.
The responses received from 23 States and 3 intergovernmental organizations were very useful for the Commission in its current work.
Accordingly, the Commission requests those States and intergovernmental organizations that have not yet responded to submit detailed and precise information on the basis of the questionnaire prepared by the Special Rapporteur.
Effects of armed conflicts on treaties
The Commission would welcome any information Governments may wish to provide concerning their practice with regard to this topic, particularly more contemporary practice.
Any further information that Governments consider relevant to the topic is also welcome.
C. Responsibility of international organizations
The next report of the Special Rapporteur will address questions relating to (1) circumstances precluding wrongfulness, and (2) responsibility of States for the internationally wrongful acts of international organizations.
The Commission would welcome comments and observations relating to these questions, especially on the following points:
(a) Article 16 of the articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts only considers the case that a State aids or assists another State in the commission of an internationally wrongful act.
Should the Commission include in the draft articles on responsibility of international organizations also a provision concerning aid or assistance given by a State to an international organization in the commission of an internally wrongful act?
Should the answer given to the question above also apply to the case of direction and control or coercion exercised by a State over the commission of an act of an international organization that would be wrongful but for the coercion?
(b) Apart from the cases considered under (a), are there cases in which a State could be held responsible for the internationally wrongful act of an international organization of which it is a member?
Expulsion of aliens
The Commission would appreciate receiving any information concerning the practice of States on the subject, including national legislation.
E. Unilateral acts of States
The Commission would welcome comments and observations from Governments on the revocability and modification of unilateral acts.
In particular, it would be interested to hear about the practice relating to the revocation or modification of unilateral acts, any particular circumstances and conditions, the effects of a revocation or a modification of a unilateral act and the scope of possible third party reactions in that respect.
Reservations to treaties
States often object to a reservation that they consider incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty, but without opposing the entry into force of the treaty between themselves and the author of the reservation.
The Commission would be particularly interested in Governments' comments on this practice.
It would like to know, in particular, what effects the authors expect such objections to have, and how, in Governments' view, this practice accords with article 19 (c) of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
Introduction
The Commission, at its fifty-fourth session (2002), decided to include the topic “Shared natural resources” in its programme of work and, at its 2727th meeting, on 30 May 2002, appointed Mr. Chusei Yamada as Special Rapporteur.
The General Assembly, in paragraph 2 of resolution 57/21 of 19 November 2002, took note of the Commission's decision to include the topic “Shared natural resources” in its programme of work.
At its fifty-fifth (2003) and fifty-sixth (2004) sessions, the Commission, respectively, considered the first (A/CN.4/533 and Add.1) and second (A/CN.4/539 and Add.1) reports of the Special Rapporteur.
The latter report contained a proposed general framework and a set of six draft articles.
At the fifty-sixth session, the Commission also established a Working Group, chaired by the Special Rapporteur.
Consideration of the topic at the present session
At the present session, the Commission had before it the third report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/551 and Corr.1 and Add.1).
It considered the report at its 2831st to 2836th meetings, held on 2, 3, 4, 6, 10 and 11 May 2005.
The Commission also had an informal technical presentation on the Guarani Aquifer System Project on 4 May 2005.
At its 2836th meeting, the Commission established a Working Group, chaired by Mr. Enrique Candioti.
The Working Group held 11 meetings.
At its 2863rd meeting, on 3 August 2005, the Commission took note of the report of the Working Group.
It expressed its appreciation that the Working Group had made substantial progress in its work by reviewing and revising eight draft articles.
The Commission took note of the proposal of the Working Group that the Commission consider reconvening it at the 2006 session in order that it may complete its work.
Introduction by the Special Rapporteur of his third report
In introducing the complete set of 25 draft articles contained in the third report (A/CN.4/551 and Corr.1 and Add.1), the Special Rapporteur recalled that in the 2004 report of the Commission he had already indicated his intention to submit such a complete set on the basis of the general outline.
From the debates of the Sixth Committee during the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly, there appeared to be general support for his basic approach and an endorsement of his proposal to submit such a set of draft articles.
Commenting on the substance of the draft articles, the Special Rapporteur first observed that the need for an explicit reference to General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII), on permanent sovereignty over natural resources, had been advocated by some delegations in the debate of the Sixth Committee.
In his view such a reference could be in the preamble, the formulation of which would, however, have to be deferred until the completion of the consideration of the substantive provisions.
Secondly, the Special Rapporteur introduced the various draft articles.
The substance of draft article 1, remained the same as proposed in the second report (A/CN.4/539, para.
However, it was reformulated to clarify the three different categories of activities that are intended to fall within the scope of the draft articles.
On draft article 2, its subparagraph (a) had been recast to respond to concerns expressed on the terms “rock formation” and “exploitable quantities” of water.
In clarifying the change, it was noted, first, that an aquifer consists of two elements: (a) an underground geological formation, which functions as a container; and (b) the extractable water stored in it.
The term “rock” was a technical term used by hydrogeologists to include not only hard rock but also gravel and sand.
Since in common usage, “rock” often means hard rock, the term “geological formation” seemed more appropriate than the term “rock formation”.
Secondly, to function as a container, the geological formation must be permeable, with at least a less permeable layer underlaying it and a similar layer often overlaying it.
Extractable water exists in the saturated zone of the formation.
The water above the saturated zone of the formation is in the form of vapour and is not extractable.
Thus, to avoid confusion, the term “extractable” or “exploitable” is not used.
Subparagraph (b) defines an “aquifer system” as meaning a series of two or more aquifers and better clarifies the term “aquifer system” than previously.
In the second report, a fiction that an aquifer system also includes a single aquifer was employed to achieve economy of words.
The bracketed phrase “each associated with specific geological formations”, which could alternatively be placed in the commentary, denoted the fact that an aquifer system may consist of a series of aquifers of different categories of geological formations.
Subparagraphs (c) and (d) remained the same as contained in the second report, while subparagraphs (e) and (f), defining “Recharging aquifer” and “Non-recharging aquifer” were new.
Under draft article 5, it is contemplated that different rules would be applicable in respect of each category of aquifer.
While water resources in a recharging aquifer, e.g. the Guarani aquifer (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay), are renewable, such is not the case in a non-recharging aquifer in an arid zone, e.g. the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer (Chad, Egypt, Libya and Sudan).
Draft article 3, is intended to emphasize the importance of bilateral and regional arrangements entered into by States concerned with respect to specific aquifers.
If a binding instrument would be the preferred option, it would be cast as a framework convention.
Thus, while the basic principles to be enunciated would have to be respected, the bilateral or regional arrangements would have priority.
Stressing that draft articles 5 and 7 were key provisions, it was observed that draft article 5 contains two basic principles found in almost all water-related treaties: the principle of equitable utilization which prescribes the right of a State to participate in an equitable manner with others in the utilization of the same activity, and the principle of reasonable utilization which prescribes the right as well as the obligation of a State in the management of a particular activity in a reasonable manner.
Although they were closely interrelated, taken for granted and often mixed up, the two principles were different and have thus been dealt with separately in paragraphs 1 and 2, respectively.
The Special Rapporteur viewed the principle of equitable utilization in paragraph 1 as viable only in the context of a shared resource.
The acceptance of the principle in paragraph 1 thus implied a recognition of the shared character of the transboundary aquifer among the aquifer States.
However, there was no intention to internationalize or universalize transboundary aquifers.
Concerning the role of third States in the scheme, it was noted that the utilization and management of a specific transboundary aquifer was the business of the aquifer States in whose territory the aquifer is located and any third States were considered as having no role.
Paragraph 2, on reasonable utilization (i.e. sustainable utilization), was divided into subparagraphs (a) and (b) to reflect the practical application of this principle in different circumstances of a recharging and a non-recharging aquifer.
Although many groundwater experts advocated sustainable utilization of groundwaters, the application of such a principle was viewed as only feasible for a resource which was truly renewable, such as surface water.
Draft article 6 simply enumerated the relevant factors and circumstances that should be taken into account in assessing what constitutes equitable or reasonable utilization in respect of a specific aquifer.
On the other key draft article 7, there continued to be objection to the threshold of significant harm.
Considering the particularities of aquifers, some delegations in the Sixth Committee preferred a lower threshold.
However, the Special Rapporteur viewed the concept of significant harm to be relative and capable of taking into account the fragility of any resource.
Moreover, the Commission's position was well established and there seemed to be no justification to depart from the threshold.
Some delegations in the Sixth Committee were also opposed to a reference to “compensation” in subparagraph 3.
However, the provision was similar to paragraph 2 of article 7 of the 1997 Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses (hereinafter referred to as the “1997 Convention”) and had been proposed then by the Commission on the basis of State practice.
As regards the remaining draft articles, draft articles 8 to 10 deal with issues pertaining to cooperation among aquifer States, with draft article 8, setting out the general obligation to cooperate and recommending implementation through the establishment of joint mechanisms or commissions at bilateral or regional levels.
While draft article 9 deals with one aspect of cooperation, namely regular exchange of comparable data and information, the other aspect, monitoring, is addressed in a separate and independent draft article 10 to emphasize the importance of monitoring in managing transboundary aquifers.
Draft articles 16 and 17 set out procedural requirements for planned measures.
Compared to the 1997 Convention, which contains elaborate procedures for planned activities, it was noted that only two draft articles were presented.
From the Sixth Committee debates, there seemed to be a general wish for simpler procedural arrangements, whole detailed elaboration could be left to the specific aquifer States concerned.
Draft articles 4 and 11 through 15, as well as draft articles 18 to 25 were considered self-explanatory.
However, attention was drawn to draft article 13 on protection of recharge and discharge zones, which were located outside aquifers and were vital to their functioning.
The regulation of activities in those zones would ensure that the functioning of the aquifers is not impaired.
The draft article also addresses the situation in which such zones were located in third States, by making provision for cooperation, in principle non-obligatory.
Attention was also drawn to draft article 18 on scientific and technical assistance to developing countries.
Since the science of hydrogeology was still in its infancy and relatively advanced only in the developed countries, such a provision was necessary to ensure assistance to developing countries, where most aquifers were located.
As to the form of final instrument, the Special Rapporteur, at the outset of his introduction, mentioned that the presentation of the draft articles should not be considered as in any way intended to prejudge the final outcome since he had not yet made a decision on the matter.
While aware of views in the Sixth Committee in favour of non-binding guidelines, the Special Rapporteur urged that at this early stage, the focus be on the substance rather than the form.
Summary of the debate
(a) General comments
Members of the Commission commended the Special Rapporteur for his third report and his continuing efforts to elaborate the topic, taking into account the views of Governments, and to enrich its understanding by consulting and seeking the scientific advice of groundwater experts.
Such an approach would assure an outcome that would be both generally acceptable and responsive to the concerns of the scientific community.
The importance of the topic was stressed, and attention in this regard was drawn to the report of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, which alluded to the topic.
Concerning general matters of structure, presentation, and how the consideration of the topic should be proceeded with, some members welcomed the overall structure and the draft articles presented by the Special Rapporteur, while some other members, depending on the importance that they attached to the substance of particular provisions, offered an indication that they preferred placement of certain draft articles at the beginning, at the end or their omission from the text.
Some members also noted that the drafting of certain provisions needed to be reconsidered since the language used was merely hortatory and did not appear suitable for a legally binding instrument, which was their preferred option.
Some other members, however, felt that such language was entirely appropriate even in a framework instrument, which was aimed at providing States guidance in the further negotiation of specific instruments.
Flexibility was considered to be an essential characteristic.
Some members also noted that some of the principles were couched with a high degree of generality and abstraction, thus giving rise to doubts as to whether, in practice, they would be helpful in providing sufficient guidance to States.
On the other hand, it was pointed out that there was no other way to proceed since a more detailed and prescriptive text was likely to raise more questions than answers.
Noting that the 1997 Convention was essentially used as the basis for formulating the draft articles, some members also commented that it would have helped to have a fuller appreciation of the draft articles if clarifications were offered in the report as to the reasoning behind any departure, even minor, from the language of the 1997 Convention, and if detailed commentaries were given on the proposed draft articles.
While some members proposed the referral of the draft articles, except for a few, to the Drafting Committee, the preponderant view favoured their further consideration first within the context of a working group.
As noted above, at its 2836th meeting, the Commission established such a Working Group.
Several members alluded to questions of paucity of State practice in the area and its impact on the work of the Commission.
It was doubted whether there was sufficient State practice on which the Commission could proceed with a codification exercise.
It was considered that the law in the area was still in its embryonic stages.
Thus, the project would largely proceed as a matter of progressive development or analogously taking the 1997 Convention as a point of departure.
While reference to the 1997 Convention was generally perceived as inevitable, some members, bearing in mind the differences between surface and groundwaters, especially the vulnerability of aquifers, suggested the need to proceed with caution.
It was noted that the topic was substantially different from that of watercourses, and, therefore, the 1997 Convention should be taken as a guide only.
Groundwaters raised sensitive issues particularly from the perspective of environmental protection which needed to find proper reflection in the text, also taking into account developments since the adoption of the 1997 Convention, including within the Commission itself, such as the adoption of the draft articles on the prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities.
Given their physical characteristics, it was asserted that the protection and preservation of aquifers needed to be emphasized in policy considerations.
Sustainability should not merely be regarded as related to utilization but also to the overall protection of the ecological conditions of the aquifers.
Some members also recalled that the 1997 Convention had not yet entered into force and thus far lacked universal support.
Some members noted that, in the elaboration of the draft articles, the overriding consideration was the utilization and protection of aquifers, which could effectively be accomplished through bilateral and regional approaches.
The Commission should therefore not aim at providing universal solutions but general principles that would guide and encourage bilateral or regional solutions.
In this connection, some members also stressed the importance of taking into account developments at regional levels.
In particular, work being carried out in respect of certain regional projects, including by the Common Market of the Southern Cone (Mercosur) in respect of the Guarani Aquifer, was highlighted.
Mention was made of the project being carried out with the support of the World Bank and the Organization of American States to better understand the physical and technical characteristics of the Guarani aquifer as well as the work carried out by an ad hoc group of experts convened by the Council of Mercosur to establish principles and criteria for the use of the aquifer.
Such work proceeded on the basis of the following considerations: (a) affirmation of territorial sovereignty; (b) the obligation not to cause significant harm; and (c) conservation through rational and sustainable utilization.
Some members also stressed considerations concerning geographical proximity and efforts towards regional economic integration as relevant.
At the same time, it was pointed out by some other members that bilateral and regional agreements did not always provide sufficient guidance since they often tended to favour the stronger parties.
Concerning the Special Rapporteur's suggestion to include an explicit reference to General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII) in the preamble, some members supported such a reference once the preamble is elaborated.
However, some other members felt that the principle of permanent sovereignty over natural resources was central to the topic and deserved full treatment in a separate draft article.
Such a reference would dispel any criticism that groundwaters were a common heritage of humankind.
Yet some other members doubted that there was any role for the principle in the draft articles: if the transboundary aquifer is recognized as a shared natural resource it followed that no aquifer State could claim to have permanent sovereignty over it.
It was also pointed out that there would not be any risk of undermining the principle even if such a reference were omitted.
Some members stressed the relative character of the concept of sovereignty and highlighted the importance of construing sovereignty for the purposes of the draft articles as not denoting absolute sovereignty.
Water in a transboundary aquifer was not only subject to the sovereignty of a State in the territory in which it was located but also to the regulatory framework freely agreed upon by States that shared such an aquifer.
Some other members sought to accentuate aspects of jurisdictional competence as well as the existence of an obligation to cooperate with each other rather than whether sovereign rights were absolute or limited.
Since a transboundary aquifer or aquifer system would run under different national jurisdictions it was incumbent upon States concerned to mutually respect the sovereign rights of the other States in areas falling within their jurisdiction.
The relationship between the draft articles and general international law was also alluded to as a relevant consideration by some members and it was stressed that the operation of the draft articles should not be perceived in isolation but in the context of the continuing application of general international law.
Such law continued to apply in respect of activities of States vis-à-vis their relations with other States.
In particular, the underlying principles enunciated in the Corfu Channel case were considered relevant in the case of transboundary aquifers.
The need to keep in view the relationship between the current sub-topic on groundwaters and the other related sub-topics in respect of oil and gas was highlighted by some members.
In relation to the overall substance of the draft articles, some members stressed that Part II containing general principles was fundamental to the overall structure of the draft articles.
It would be helpful if such principles could provide useful guidance for States to negotiate and conclude agreements or arrangements that could be readily accepted by the parties concerned.
It was also recalled by some members that in the elaboration of the draft articles on the law on the non-navigational uses of international watercourses, the Commission had held extensive debates on questions concerning sovereignty, the principles of equitable and reasonable utilization, the obligation not to cause harm and the threshold of significant harm.
Accordingly no useful purpose would be served in reopening these matters in the context of the present topic.
Some members expressed preference for a much more prominent and pronounced role for the precautionary principle while some other members considered the precautionary approach taken by the Special Rapporteur as adequate.
Some members, disagreeing with the Special Rapporteur, preferred elaborate provisions on the relationship with non-aquifer States, and to highlight their role.
Such States particularly those in which recharge and discharge zones were located had an obligation to cooperate and exchange information with respect to the protection of aquifers.
Furthermore, some other members stressed the importance of providing for an institutional framework both for the implementation of the provisions of the draft articles and for dispute settlement.
In regard to the latter, the need for separate provisions on dispute settlement was highlighted.
(b) Comments on specific draft articles
Concerning draft article 1, on scope of the present Convention, some members supported the current reformulation.
However, some other members pointed to the need to clearly delineate the scope of the topic either in the body of the article or the commentary, specifying those situations in which groundwaters would already be covered by the 1997 Convention, as well as the relationship between transboundary and national aquifers, by stating expressly that the draft articles do not apply to national aquifers.
Moreover, there was need to include provisions concerning the regulation of obligations of non-aquifer States in the draft article.
While the draft articles as a whole contained specific provisions concerning the activities contemplated in subparagraphs (a) and (c), some members noted that there did not seem to be any elaborate draft articles that addressed activities covered by subparagraph (b).
Some other members doubted the seemingly wide scope of subparagraph (b), as well as its placement.
In regard to the former, some members sought its deletion while others suggested the need to clarify its scope, including the meaning of the term “impact”.
It was proposed that the term should be qualified by “significant” as a threshold so as to ensure consistency with the provisions of Part II of the draft articles.
It would also help to avoid creating the impression that other uses which may have negligible impact on aquifers are also covered by the regulatory framework of the draft articles.
However, some other members endorsed the use of the term “impact”, which as noted by the Special Rapporteur in his third report, had a wider scope than “harm”.
It was also noted that the phrase “other activities” was not sufficiently precise.
Concerning the latter aspects of placement, some suggestions were made to place subparagraph (c) before subparagraph (b) in order to emphasize the prominent role that ought to be given to the protection, preservation and management of aquifers.
With regard to draft article 2, on use of terms, the new definition of “aquifer” in subparagraph (a), as well as the change from “rock formation” to “geological formation” and the deletion of “exploitable”, was considered favourably by some members and there was also some support for the retention of the phrase “[water-bearing]” since it made the definition easier to be understood by a layperson.
Furthermore, the definition of aquifer in the 1989 Bellagio Model Agreement concerning the use of Transboundary Groundwaters, which was considered more concise, made reference to “water-bearing”.
On the other hand, the deletion of “water-bearing” and the clarification of the term in the commentary, as proposed by the Special Rapporteur, also found support.
Some members also pointed out that the concept of water “use” or “utilization” was essential to the definition.
It should be reintroduced and should also include the element of exploitability.
Some other members raised questions on the usefulness of retaining the reference to “underlain by less permeable layer” in the definition of aquifer.
It was also wondered whether the definition would still apply even if the geological formation were not saturated with water.
Furthermore, some members saw the need to clarify certain changes in the definitions as compared to the ones proposed by the Special Rapporteur in the second report.
In some instances different terms had been used, although the same meaning seemed to have been retained.
The notion of “aquifer system” in subparagraph (b) as consisting of a series of two or more aquifers as suggested in the corrigendum (A/CN.4/551/Corr.1) was considered an improvement over the earlier proposal contained in the Special Rapporteur's second report.
It accentuated the transboundary nature of the aquifer as a source of obligations for States concerned rather than a universal source of obligations for all States.
Some members considered the phrase “[each associated with specific geological formations]”, in the definition of “aquifer system” superfluous and supported its deletion and the clarification of its meaning in the commentary, as suggested by the Special Rapporteur.
With regard to the definition of transboundary aquifer in subparagraph (c), some members doubted whether the circular approach which was followed added any substance to the definition.
Both “aquifer” and “aquifer system” were already adequately defined.
Some doubts were also expressed regarding the distinction between a “recharging aquifer” and a “non-recharging aquifer” in subparagraphs (e) and (f), respectively.
The difference between negligible and non-negligible amount of contemporary water recharge seemed to be insignificant from a practical perspective.
A recharge should not be given much weight in the consideration of the sustainability of the resources.
Moreover, the diversity of aquifers would make it difficult to measure negligibility of the amount of recharge.
In this regard, it was suggested that such definitional questions could best be addressed in the relevant substantive draft article 5, where a less rigid distinction could be made.
It was also suggested that the matter should await the discussion on whether or not separate rules would be required under draft article 5.
On the other hand, the distinction was welcomed by some other members.
At the same time, it was pointed out that the definition of “contemporary” water recharge would be necessary in the commentary.
Comments were also made regarding the need to provide definitions or explanations for terms, such as “impact” in draft article 1, “significant harm” in draft article 7 et al., “recharge or discharge zones” in the territories of third States in draft article 13 (3), “adverse effects” in draft article 16, “significant adverse effect” in draft article 17 and “serious harm” in draft article 19, as well as of “uses” to distinguish the various uses of water.
As regards draft article 3, on bilateral and regional arrangements, some members expressed support for its general thrust since it highlighted the importance of bilateral and regional arrangements.
It was asserted that in the case of groundwaters, more so than for surface water, it was pertinent to allow for more flexibility for such arrangements.
Yet the wording seemed to be more strict than comparable provisions in the 1997 Convention.
Although it seemed cautiously worded, some other members noted that it would give rise to problems of interpretation and implementation.
In particular, it was considered important that the provisions of the present draft articles should not affect the rights and obligations under existing agreements.
Doubt was also expressed regarding whether draft article 3 was an improvement over corresponding article 3 of the 1997 Convention.
In this connection, some members would have preferred a text that followed closely the language of article 3 of the 1997 Convention.
The use of the term “arrangement” which was considered too broad and uncertain than the more familiar precedent-based term “agreement” was questioned by some members.
However, some other members accepted the proposed change for the reason given by the Special Rapporteur in his report that the cooperative framework for groundwaters remained to be properly developed and the term “arrangement” provided flexibility of participation.
Concerning paragraph 1, some members preferred stronger and more definitive language than a general encouragement to enter into bilateral or regional arrangements.
Such obligation was critical, particularly in the context of a fragile resource such as an aquifer.
It was also considered that the paragraph was overly detailed and it was suggested to simply recast the whole paragraph by recasting the first sentence in more obligatory language.
Some other members, however, viewed the obligation to encourage as appropriate since it gave States the flexibility at bilateral and regional levels to decide on mutually acceptable arrangements, particularly considering that in some situations circumstances may be such that it may not be feasible to negotiate such arrangements for particular aquifers.
The principle of harmonization in paragraph 2 was considered important by some members who viewed it essential that a framework convention should contain principles that would assist States in the negotiation of bilateral and regional agreements.
Some members, however, were of the view that the phrase “consider harmonizing” in the paragraph was too weak and needed to be replaced.
With regard to paragraph 3, it was suggested that there should be an explicit reference to compliance with the general principles set out in the draft articles.
Moreover, unlike the 1997 Convention, it was not clear whether the paragraph affected arrangements already concluded by States, thereby requiring their renegotiation.
It was also pointed out that in the absence of agreement, States had a right to operate independently with respect to the utilization of aquifers and were only limited by rights and obligations imposed by general international law.
Some members suggested that any such utilization should nevertheless be consistent with the principles contained in Part II of the draft articles.
Concerning draft article 4, on relation to other conventions and international agreements, some members noted that it was a step in the right direction since, in the event of conflict, it automatically gave precedence to the draft articles over the 1997 Convention, as well as, in certain situations, over other international agreements.
Some other members noted that there was potential for dual application of the present draft articles and the 1997 Convention.
Accordingly, there was a need to strive for the creation of unified comprehensive legal regime governing both surface and groundwaters.
However, some members expressed doubt on the suggested relationship between the draft articles and the 1997 Convention, noting that substantively the relationship was tenuous and different bodies of water were under consideration.
Moreover, the whole question needed closer consideration, particularly in view of the fact that the 1997 Convention had not yet entered into force.
The inclusion of an additional formulation on the relationship between the draft articles and general international law, which would be designed to assert the relevance of the latter was also suggested.
Some other members suggested a preambular provision.
In relation to paragraph 1, it was noted that it would be inappropriate to suggest that the provisions of the 1997 Convention would only apply to the extent that they were compatible with those of the draft articles.
Such a proposition would only be valid if all States which shared an aquifer were parties to the 1997 Convention.
According to some members, it would be reasonable to contemplate the draft articles being framed in a form of a Protocol to the 1997 Convention.
Such a possibility, however, did not find favour with some members who considered it important, legally and as a matter of policy, to delink the draft articles from the 1997 Convention.
Although some attention was drawn to article 311 (2) of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, some members doubted whether it could serve as a precedent for paragraph 2.
Moreover, instead of a reference to conformity with the present convention, it was suggested that a reference to the general principles of the present convention would be more appropriate.
It was also pointed out that it was difficult to envision how the present paragraph related to draft article 3.
It was thus suggested that the draft articles 3 and 4 should be replaced by article 3 of the 1997 Convention.
Some members expressed preference for a provision that would specify that the future instrument would not affect the rights and obligations assumed under other agreements.
Concerning draft article 5, on equitable and reasonable utilization, several members expressed support for the principles therein, noting that they were important for aquifers in view of their fragile nature.
However, some other members recalled that article 5 of the 1997 Convention which is similar to the present draft article was problematic during the negotiations of the 1997 Convention.
The transposition of the two principles for application to groundwaters was therefore cautioned against.
Indeed, some doubt was expressed regarding the application of these principles to groundwaters.
Some members recalled the necessary balance that must exist between sovereign rights of States over their natural resources and the need to safeguard the interests of other States as well as the rights of present and future generations.
Accordingly, it was suggested that the principle of permanent sovereignty over natural resources rather than in the preamble or the principle of sovereign equality in draft article 8, could properly be dealt with in the context of draft article 5.
Concerning paragraph 2, some members welcomed the distinction drawn between rules applicable to recharging and non-recharging transboundary aquifers.
It was noted that such a distinction would provide better protection for aquifers.
On the other hand, some other members considered such a distinction as immaterial.
Some questions were raised regarding how “sustainability” would be assessed in practice.
It was not clear whether the requirement in subparagraph (a) that aquifer States should “not impair the utilization and functions of such aquifer or aquifer system” entailed zero risk or some form of graduated risk or risk threshold.
Moreover, it was asserted that sustainability did not necessarily imply that renewable natural resources must be kept at the level that would provide maximum sustainable yield as suggested by the Special Rapporteur in his report.
Such interpretation, applicable in fishery resources, need not be the same in the case of groundwaters since the States concerned may not wish to exploit the limit of exploitability or there may be alternative sources.
Some members suggested that the concept of “economic recoverability” of the aquifer could be a possible criterion.
Subparagraph (b) was considered by some members to be a creative and useful attempt to give meaning to the concept of reasonable utilization in the context of a non-recharging aquifer.
While welcoming the wording of draft article 6, on factors relevant to equitable and reasonable utilization, some members noted that its provisions seemed more germane in the context of the 1997 Convention.
Some other members noted that the obligation to preserve aquifer resources was extant not only in respect of future generations but for the present generations as well.
With regard to subparagraph (a) it was questioned whether there was a material difference between the “natural condition” of the aquifers and the taking into account of the “natural factors” as characteristics of the aquifer as suggested by the Special Rapporteur in the third report.
Some members welcomed the inclusion of the factors contained in subparagraphs (b) and (c).
It was suggested that one of the factors to be taken in subparagraph (c) was water for drinking purposes.
Moreover, it was suggested that there should be a reference to paragraph 1 of article 9 and paragraph 1 of article 10, which also contained relevant factors.
Concerning draft article 7, on obligation not to cause harm, some members expressed support for the position of the Special Rapporteur that for purposes of consistency the threshold of significant harm should be maintained, noting also that such reference should be included in the title of the draft article.
In the field of natural resources and the environment, harm cannot be set in absolute terms because the right of use is always weighed against the right to protect.
The threshold carried certain policy considerations aimed at achieving a balance of interests.
The term “significant” meant something more than trivial or detectible but which need not be serious or substantial.
However, some other members felt that the threshold should be lowered to a simple reference to “harm”.
Any such harm to the aquifer may be difficult to reverse and could be detrimental in view of their nature and vulnerability.
Moreover, the precautionary principle seemed to militate against the threshold of “significant” harm since the effects on groundwaters may take years before they became detectable.
It was also contended that it would be useful for the draft articles as a whole to take into account developments that had taken place since the adoption of the 1997 Convention, in particular the adoption by the Commission in 2001 of the draft articles on prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities.
It was therefore suggested that there should be a greater focus on prevention, before addressing the question of liability.
Furthermore, some other members asserted the necessity of addressing aspects in which non-aquifer States might cause harm to an aquifer State.
The retention in paragraph 2 of the phrase “… have or are likely to have an impact …” was advocated by some members.
On the other hand, it was suggested that the term “adverse” should qualify such impact.
Concerning paragraph 3, some members expressed support for a provision dealing with liability in the context of aquifers.
In this connection, some other members doubted whether paragraph 3 in itself without additional details was sufficient.
As it is, its value as a tool in the settlement of disputes was considered insignificant.
Yet some other members suggested its deletion or at least the clarification of how it would operate in the context of rules of general international law.
The continued application of rules of State responsibility was asserted.
For example, the principles in the Corfu Channel case would be relevant in a situation in which an aquifer served as an instrumentality for causing harm to a neighbouring State and there existed the requisite degree of knowledge or imputability to the aquifer State.
As presently drafted, “where appropriate” conveyed the impression that there was no obligation to provide compensation.
It would be more appropriate to make clear that the obligation to discuss, rather than to provide compensation, presupposed that the obligation of prevention had been complied with.
Elimination and mitigation of harm were applicable regardless of compliance with the obligation of prevention.
Concerning draft article 8, on general obligation to cooperate, support was expressed for the emphasis on the general obligation to cooperate.
It was noted, however, that the inclusion of “territorial integrity” as a basis of cooperation was striking and yet the rationale for its inclusion was not clear in the third report.
It was stated that it would be sufficient to base such obligation on the principles of mutual benefit and good faith.
Comments were also made regarding the need for a more detailed provision on the institutional framework for the implementation of the duty to cooperate.
In paragraph 2, the view was expressed that the use of the word “encouraged” was rather cautious and it was suggested that bolder obligatory language should be employed.
As a way to provide an administrative mechanism for implementation, the possibility of combining this paragraph with the elements of draft article 15 was also offered.
Some members welcomed the provisions concerning exchange of data in draft article 9.
Such exchange was considered vital in facilitating the better understanding of characteristics of an aquifer.
Without such information, it would be extremely difficult to establish plans and standards for utilization of aquifers.
While welcoming paragraph 2, the point was made that the rationale for its inclusion should have been explained fully.
It was also suggested that paragraph 2 could appropriately be placed at the beginning or at the end of draft article 10.
The formulation of the phrase “… aquifer States shall employ their best efforts to collect …” was considered by some members as weak.
It was also posited that the language of the paragraph as a whole seemed more suitable for a commentary than a draft article.
The provisions of draft article 10, on monitoring, were welcomed by some members.
It was, however, observed that paragraph 1 was too obligatory, creating the impression that a universal obligation was being established.
Such a provision would be more appropriate in the context of a bilateral or regional arrangement.
Doubt was expressed whether draft article 12, on protection and preservation of ecosystems, was an improvement over the corresponding article 20 of the 1997 Convention.
Given the present state of knowledge on aquifers and their effects on the ecosystem, it was observed, however, that its language was too categorical.
It was also wondered whether it applied, if at all, to a non-rechargeable aquifer.
Draft article 13, on protection of recharge and discharge zones, was considered to be an important innovation.
In particular, the introduction of the concept of detrimental impact was positively perceived by some members.
Moreover, it was noted that the best solution would be to create direct rights and obligations of non-aquifer States and to identify the legal and practical links with other States.
Some members doubted whether there was any legal basis under general international law on which an obligation to cooperate by such non-aquifer States could be grounded.
As regards draft article 14, on prevention, reduction and control of pollution, some members agreed with the Special Rapporteur that the precautionary principle had not yet developed as a rule of general international law, as well as on the approach taken.
However, some other members expressed regret that the Special Rapporteur had decided to take a more cautious approach regarding the precautionary principle.
The language used seemed appropriate for a commentary.
The principle was contained in the Rio Declaration on the Environment and Development, the International Law Association (ILA) Helsinki and Berlin Rules on Water Uses and Management as well as in various treaties.
The principle was well recognized as a general principle of international environmental law and needed to be stressed in the draft articles.
It was also noted that the assertion by the Special Rapporteur in his report that the “objectives of draft articles were not to protect and preserve aquifers for the sake of the aquifers but to protect and preserve them so that humankind could utilize the precious water resources contained therein”, should be revised because it seemed to bring connotations concerning the common heritage of humankind.
Some member expressed doubt whether draft article 15, on management, was an improvement over corresponding article 24 of the 1997 Convention.
Since the notion of “management” was employed in a variety of ways, its use in the context of the draft articles required explanation.
It was also stressed that unless particular language represented a clear improvement, the 1997 Convention language should be retained.
On the other hand, it was suggested that the whole premise of draft article 15 should be reviewed.
In order to avoid being faced with a default situation, the overall premise would be to require aquifer States to enter into consultations with a view to agreeing to a management plan or mechanism.
Individual plans would only emerge as a fall back.
Some members noted that the provisions of draft article 16, on assessment of potential effects of activities, as read with draft article 17, on planned activities, were more realistic than the complicated procedures under the 1997 Convention.
Such plans should take into account the interests of other aquifer States as contemplated in draft article 17.
On the other hand, reservations were expressed that nine articles devoted to planned measures in the 1997 Convention could be reduced to only two draft articles.
Some members felt that the language used was weak, for example, the phrase “… as far as possible …” was preferred to “… as far as practicable …”.
The importance of timely notifications in draft article 17 was stressed as already recognized in the Lake Lanoux arbitration.
It was also noted that the requirement for an environmental impact assessment should be signalled upfront without it being implied as optional.
While draft article 18, on scientific and technical assistance to developing countries, seemed important and attractive from a theoretical perspective since it created a legal obligation to provide assistance, some members noted that its practical application was difficult to secure.
Its inclusion might therefore be more problematic than it seemed on face value.
Some other members viewed the language as too obligatory.
Draft article 19, on emergency situations, was seen by some members as an improvement over a corresponding provision in the 1997 Convention.
However, it was noted that a more incisive analysis of the reasoning behind the changes made would have provided a better understanding of the draft article.
It was observed that draft article 20, on protection in time of armed conflict, and draft article 21, on data and information vital to national defence or security, contributed nothing that was new and should not be referred to the Drafting Committee.
In this regard, it was noted that draft article 20 seemed more relevant in respect of surface waters.
However, some other members supported draft article 21, noting that the protection should extend to industrial secrets and intellectual property, on the basis of article 14 of the draft articles on prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities.
Concerning the final provisions, the suggestion was made to include a provision on reservations.
(c) Comments on form of instrument
Regarding the final form of instrument, some members agreed with the Special Rapporteur that a decision on the matter should be deferred until agreement was reached on the substance.
Some other members, however, observed that work could be expedited if a decision were made earlier on in the consideration of the topic, since such a decision would have a bearing on matters of both drafting and substance.
As it is, in some cases, it appeared that there was already a bias towards a binding instrument.
Some members expressed preference for a binding instrument in the form of a framework convention.
It was stressed that such a framework convention should contain guiding principles for use by States in the negotiation of their bilateral and regional arrangements.
Some other members suggested that such an instrument could suitably be a protocol to the 1997 Convention.
However, doubt was also expressed regarding such an approach.
First, it was mentioned that the 1997 Convention had not yet entered into force and there seemed to be little support for it.
Secondly, it was pointed out that although there existed a relationship, the subject matter covered by the 1997 Convention and the present topic was substantially different.
Thirdly, it was noted that the question of groundwaters affected only a certain group of States, thus an independent convention would usefully achieve the intended results beneficial to the States concerned.
In view of the scarcity of State practice, some members favoured the elaboration of non-binding guidelines.
Such an approach would provide sufficient flexibility to aquifer States, and presented the best possibility of commanding the support of States.
It was also suggested that the Commission could adopt the approach followed in respect of the draft principles on the allocation of loss in the case of transboundary harm arising out of hazardous activities, whereby non-binding principles were adopted on first reading while reserving the right to reconsider the matter as to the final form of instrument at the second reading in the light of the comments and observations of Governments.
It was also noted that such guidelines could take the form of a resolution.
Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
Concerning whether the topic was ripe for codification, the Special Rapporteur recalled that the 2000 decision of the Commission to include the topic in its programme of work was based on an assessment made on its viability.
While his previous reports might have contributed in creating an impression that there was insufficient evidence of State practice for codification, there had been an upsurge of practice of States in the subject matter in recent years.
There were many cooperative efforts in Africa, the Americas and Europe, with State practice, agreements, arrangements and doctrine emerging, sufficient for the Commission to embark on work on the subject.
The Commission would be embarking upon an exercise in the progressive development and codification of the law on groundwaters.
Groundwaters represented 97 per cent of the available freshwater resources, and, in recent years, dependency on such waters had increased and problems were being confronted regarding their exploitation and pollution of aquifers.
Since groundwaters would be one of the major issues to be discussed at the Fourth World Water Forum in Mexico in 2006, it was a challenge to the Commission to respond quickly in order to keep apace with a rapidly developing field.
Without prejudging the decision of the Commission on the other sub-topics relating to oil and gas, the Special Rapporteur noted that there were many similarities with groundwaters.
The elaboration of draft articles on groundwaters would have implications on oil and gas and conversely State practice on oil and gas has a bearing on groundwaters.
While it was feasible to embark on a first reading of draft articles on groundwaters without considering oil and gas, it would be necessary to give due attention to the relationship before completing the second reading.
As regards whether permanent sovereignty over natural resources should be treated in the preamble or in a separate article, the Special Rapporteur noted that there were precedents for both approaches.
The preambular approach which he had suggested found precedent in the draft articles on the prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities as well as the Vienna Convention for Protection of the Ozone Layer, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity.
On the other hand, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea had a separate article 193 on permanent sovereignty, which he would study further.
On the relationship between the draft articles and general international law, the Special Rapporteur observed that it was in the nature of international law that the general international law has parallel application with treaties.
This could be affirmed in the preamble as in the United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property, the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations and the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations or in a separate article as evidenced in article 56 of the draft articles on the Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
Concerning the precautionary principle, the Special Rapporteur noted that he was aware that it had been incorporated in various legally binding instruments.
However, in his view, such provisions were neither declaratory of customary international law nor constitutive of new custom.
At any rate, the important task for the Commission was to spell out the measures to be implemented for the management of aquifers that would give effect to the principle.
With regard to the suggestion for elaborate provisions on obligations of non-aquifer States, the Special Rapporteur stressed the need to be realistic.
If a binding instrument were to be the preferred option, it was very likely that only aquifer States would become party to such an instrument.
There would be no real incentive for non-aquifer States to join such an instrument without any quid pro quo that would justify their assumption of obligations.
Concerning the obligation not to cause harm in draft article 7, the Special Rapporteur clarified that the draft article was not concerned with the question of State responsibility.
Rather it was concerned with activities not prohibited by international law, namely the utilization of transboundary aquifers.
Such activities are essential and legitimate for human survival and their adverse effect is often tolerated to a certain degree hence the need for the threshold.
While paragraph 1 addressed aspects concerning the obligation of prevention, paragraph 3 deals with the eventuality where significant harm is caused in spite of the fulfilment of the duty of due diligence.
The Special Rapporteur acknowledged that there was no provision relating to institutional mechanisms and management of transboundary aquifers in the draft articles.
Unlike the case of international watercourses, where there was a long history of international cooperation, in the case of groundwaters, the Franco-Swiss Genevese Aquifer Authority seemed to be the only fully functioning international organization.
While various cooperative organizational arrangements were emerging, paragraph 2 of draft article 8, recommends the establishment of joint mechanisms and joint commissions.
The Special Rapporteur also noted that while there was no objection to including a provision on disputes settlement similar to article 33 of the 1997 Convention, he perceived article 33 to be devoid of substance since it did not provide for compulsory jurisdiction.
The compulsory reference to impartial fact-finding in paragraph 3 of article 33 has been reflected in paragraph 2 of draft article 17 to assist in resolving differences concerning the effect of planned activities.
The Special Rapporteur also responded to some comments made on specific draft articles and offered to provide fuller explanations in his analysis of the various provisions of the draft articles in the commentary.
Introduction
The Commission at its fifty-second session (2000), identified the topic “Effects of armed conflicts on treaties” for inclusion in its long-term programme of work.
A brief syllabus describing the possible overall structure and approach to the topic was annexed to that year's report of the Commission.
In paragraph 8 of its resolution 55/152 of 12 December 2000, the General Assembly took note of the topic's inclusion.
During its fifty-sixth session, the Commission decided, at its 2830th meeting, on 6 August 2004, to include the topic “Effects of armed conflicts on treaties” in its current programme of work, and to appoint Mr. Ian Brownlie as Special Rapporteur for the topic.
The General Assembly, in paragraph 5 of its resolution 59/41 of 2 December 2004, endorsed the decision of the Commission to include the topic in its agenda.
Consideration of the topic at the present session
At the present session, the Commission had before it the first report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/552) as well as a memorandum prepared by the Secretariat entitled, “The effect of armed conflict on treaties: an examination of practice and doctrine” (A/CN.4/550 and Corr.1).
The Commission considered the Special Rapporteur's report at its 2834th to 2840th meetings, from 6 to 18 May 2005.112.
At its 2866th meeting, on 5 August 2005, the Commission endorsed the Special Rapporteur's suggestion that the Secretariat be requested to circulate a note to Governments requesting information about their practice with regard to this topic, in particular the more contemporary practice as well as any other relevant information.
General remarks on the topic
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur of his first report
The Special Rapporteur observed that he had produced an entire set of draft articles providing an overall view of the topic and of the issues that it involves, in order to assist the Commission and Governments with commenting, including providing State practice, on the topic.
The basic policy underlying the draft articles was to clarify the legal position and to promote and enhance the security of legal relations between States (thereby limiting the occasions on which the incidence of armed conflict had an effect on treaty relations).
The Special Rapporteur further pointed to the concerns expressed by writers regarding the uncertainty attending the subject: the nature of the sources presented problems, the subject was dominated by doctrine, and practice was sparse with much of it being more than 60 years old.
As regards the latter concern, in his view, it was not necessarily the case that policy perspectives on the effect of armed conflict had changed qualitatively since 1920.
Instead, the key change in the inter-war period had been the gradual shift towards pragmatism and away from the view that the incidence of armed conflict was beyond the realm of law and more or less non-justiciable.
The Special Rapporteur explained that the draft articles were intended to be compatible with the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
There was a general assumption that the subject matter under examination formed a part of the law of treaties, not a development of the law relating to the use of force; it being recalled that the Vienna Convention, in article 73, had expressly excluded the subject.116.
The Special Rapporteur further acknowledged that the subject of peaceful settlement of disputes was missing from the draft articles.
To his mind, it was not a good idea to look at the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes until the work on the substantive draft was near completion, since there existed a close relationship between the matters of substance and the type of dispute settlement mechanism which would be appropriate.
(b) Summary of the debate
Members expressed support for the Special Rapporteur's decision to provide an entire set of draft articles.
Reference was also made to the memorandum prepared by the Secretariat, which was considered extremely helpful in understanding the substance and complexity of the issues at hand.
Some members were of the view that the Special Rapporteur's report was too concise in that it provided little guidance as to how the solutions proposed related to past or existing State practice.
It was pointed out that a thorough analysis of available practice could prove catalytic by inducing States to produce possibly divergent practice.
Similarly, the relative lack of discussion in the report of the underlying policy considerations was regretted.
Some members pointed out that the draft articles should be compatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
In particular, they should take into consideration the illicit (wrongful) character of recourse to force in international relations and the fundamental distinction between aggression and legitimate individual or collective self-defence or the use of force in the context of the collective security system established by the United Nations.
Issue was taken with some of the views expressed in the report including the statement that “[i]t is generally recognized that the municipal decisions are `not of great assistance'”.
It was observed that, while they were not always consistent, which could also be said of available State practice, municipal court decisions provided helpful evidence of State practice, of the intention of parties in respect of certain kinds of treaties and of the effect of the nature of a conflict on the survival of the treaty.
The importance of municipal case law was borne out by the Secretariat memorandum which referred to a number of such decisions.
Support was expressed for the Special Rapporteur's desire to encourage continuity of treaty obligations in armed conflict in cases where there was no genuine need for suspension or termination, as well as for the view that the Commission should not be bound by some of the rigid doctrines of the past that would inhibit such continuity.
At the same time, the view was expressed that the effect of an armed conflict on treaties would depend more on the particular provisions and circumstances in question than on any general rules that might be articulated, and that it could be more effective to identify the considerations that States must take into account rather than to lay down definitive rules or categorizations that States must always follow.
Support was also expressed for approaching the topic within the context of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
Others felt it was not necessary to specify the location of the topic within the broader field of international law.
Reference was also made to the fact that it was in the nature of the topic that it had undergone significant developments over time owing to changes in the formalities and modalities of modern armed conflict as well as in the international legal regime governing the recourse to armed force, particularly since World War II.
Various suggestions were made as to the way forward, including referring the draft articles (or only some) to the Drafting Committee, establishing a working group to consider the more contentious articles, or simply not taking any action at that stage so as to allow the Special Rapporteur the time to reflect further on the observations made in the Commission as well as any contributions that may be received from States.
It was also suggested that a questionnaire be prepared for circulation among member Governments.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur reiterated the overall goals of his report, as enumerated during his introduction, and recalled that his chosen method of work was to provide a complete set of draft articles without prejudice to their final form.
However, he clarified that the recourse to draft articles should not give rise to the assumption that he was rushing to judgement.
He noted that the normative form had been accompanied by elements of open-mindedness and that he had deliberately left open several issues for the formation of collective opinion within the Commission.
He also recalled that the draft articles enjoyed a provisional character and had been provided with a view to soliciting information (especially as to evidence of State practice) and opinions from Governments.
As regards the sources employed, the Special Rapporteur admitted that more reference to doctrine was called for.
As for municipal cases, he clarified that it was not that he thought that they were of little value, but only that they tended to be contradictory.
He also observed that domestic case law called for careful assessment: it was necessary to distinguish between those legal decisions where the court actually adverted to public international law as an applicable law from those cases where the court approached the legal problems at hand from the standpoint of municipal law exclusively.
Similarly, the practice of international tribunals, when analysed carefully, was also not always very helpful.
The Special Rapporteur further identified several policy questions requiring consideration in the future, including the question of the applicable lex specialis which could be referred to in the draft articles, as well as the question of introducing a distinction between bilateral and multilateral treaties.
To his mind, however, there seemed to be no good case for seeking to design special criteria for the two categories.
The principle of intention appeared to provide the general criterion.
Given the preliminary nature of the first report, the Special Rapporteur opposed the referral of draft articles to the Drafting Committee or the establishment of a working group.
Instead, he suggested that a request be circulated to Governments requesting information about their practice with regard to this topic, in particular, the more contemporary practice.
Article 1.
Scope
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur explained that draft article 1 was based on the formulation of article 1 of the Vienna Convention.
(b) Summary of the debate
Comments on article 1 were limited to suggestions for expansion of the scope of the topic.
For example, several members supported the inclusion of treaties entered into by international organizations.
Examples cited were regional integration treaties and treaties dealing with the privileges and immunities of the officials and staff of international organizations, especially in the context of peacekeeping operations undertaken during times of armed conflict.
It was also noted that the Institute of International Law, in article 6 of its resolution II of 1985 entitled “[t]he effects of armed conflicts on treaties”, had included treaties establishing an international organization.
In terms of another view, the inclusion of international organizations was not entirely necessary.
Reference was further made to article 74, paragraph 1, of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organizations or between International Organizations of 1986.
It was suggested that a distinction be made between contracting parties, under article 2, paragraph (1) (f), of the Vienna Convention, and those which are not.
While some members preferred including treaties which had not yet entered into force, others suggested that only treaties in force at the time of the conflict, should be covered by the draft articles.
In terms of a further suggestion, the provision on scope could exclude the specific category of treaties prescribing the rules of warfare or rules of engagements, such as The Hague and Geneva Conventions.
As such treaties become operative only during armed conflicts, they would not fall under the categories of treaties described in draft Article 7, paragraph 1, as the logic of “continue in operation during an armed conflict” in that paragraph would be inapplicable.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur, referring to the suggestion that the draft articles cover treaties with international organizations, stated that while he shared some of the doubts expressed he would not oppose their inclusion.
Regarding the question of the relationship of the draft articles to other areas of international law, which had been referred to by some members in the context of specific articles, the Special Rapporteur advised caution: it was necessary to avoid simply adding other topics of international law onto the draft without good cause.
He agreed that a certain amount of overlap existed with such topics as the use of force.
However, he was not troubled by the existence of situations where the same subject matter responded to multiple classification.
However, he acknowledged that care had to be taken not to affect issues of the ordinary law of treaties so as to avoid problems of compatibility with the law of treaties.
He recalled further that some members had suggested, during the discussion on the lawful resort to the use of force (in the context of draft article 10), that account needed to be taken of the application of principles of jus cogens.
He wondered, however, whether it was desirable to embark on a codification of jus cogens as a by-product of the topic under consideration.
He did not even think it necessary to include a proviso for principles of jus cogens, since that would require defining which principles were being referred to.
He also noted a suggestion that reference be made to principles of State responsibility in the draft articles.
In his view, however, such principles stood in the background and were not part of the current project.
Article 2.
Use of terms
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur recalled that draft article 2 defined the terms “treaty” and “armed conflict” in its paragraphs (a) and (b), respectively.
The definition of “treaty” followed that set out in the Vienna Convention while the definition of “armed conflict” was based on the formulation adopted by the Institute of International Law in its 1985 resolution.
He recalled that when the topic had first been proposed for inclusion in the Commission's agenda, concerns had been expressed that it would lead to a general academic exposition of the concept of armed conflict.
He hoped that the Commission would be satisfied with a working definition to be applied contextually, as opposed to attempting an unnecessarily complex codification.
Although not comprehensive, the Special Rapporteur was of the view that the definition adopted by the Institute of International Law was preferable since it took a contextual approach.
The Special Rapporteur referred to a further general question of policy, namely whether or not armed conflict should also include internal conflicts.
He expressed a preference for restricting, rather than extending, the situations in which armed conflict could interrupt the treaty relations among States; and, therefore, favoured excluding non-international armed conflict.
At the same time, he was aware of the view that internal armed conflicts could involve external elements and thereby affect the operation of treaties as much as, if not more than, international armed conflicts.
The wording of paragraph (b) had left the question unresolved.
(b) Summary of the debate
As regards paragraph (a), it was pointed out that the term “treaty” had already been defined in three treaties: the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969; the Vienna Convention on Succession of States in Respect of Treaties of 1978 and the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organizations or between International Organizations of 1986.
The view was expressed that such a definition was not needed in the present draft articles.
Concerning paragraph (b), agreement was expressed with the Special Rapporteur's suggestion that the Commission not embark on a comprehensive definition of armed conflict.
The view was expressed that the threshold contained in paragraph (b), namely the test of “nature or extent” of the conflict was too general.
The view was also expressed that the definition, which referred to the conflict “likely to affect the operation of treaties …” was circular in that it was for the draft articles to determine whether the operation of a treaty was to be affected or not.
As for the scope of the definition of “armed conflict”, support was expressed for the inclusion of blockades (although some members expressed doubts), as well as military occupation unaccompanied by protracted armed violence or armed operations, even if this was not easy to reconcile with the express reference to “armed operations”.
It was queried whether such express reference to “armed operations” included broader conflicts such as the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Concern was also expressed that the formulation employed could apply to situations falling outside the ordinary concept of armed conflict, such as violent acts by drug cartels, criminal gangs, and domestic terrorists.
Different views were expressed as to the appropriateness of including the effects on non-international armed conflicts on treaties within the scope of the topic.
Several members spoke in favour of such inclusion, noting, inter alia, that the guiding criterion on this point should be that of the relevance of the draft articles in the context of the kind of armed conflicts occurring in the present era in which the distinction between international and internal armed conflicts was often blurred.
It was noted that the effects of the two types of conflicts on treaties would not necessarily be the same, and accordingly should be considered.
Others expressed reservations as to making such a distinction between the two types of conflict.  It was suggested that the matter could be dealt with separately, even as a new topic of its own.
Suggestions for reformulating the provision, included: adopting a definition which simply stated that the articles applied to armed conflicts, whether or not there existed a declaration of war, without going further; or taking as a basis the definition adopted in the Tadić case, namely that “… an armed conflict exists whenever there is a resort to armed force between States or protracted armed violence between governmental authorities and organized armed groups or between such groups within a State”.
It was also suggested that account should be taken of the provisions of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court of 1998.
As for drafting, it was suggested that the words “for the purposes of the present draft articles …” be included so as to limit the scope of the definition; that a reference to international organizations be made; and that the question of the relationship with third parties be examined also within the context of paragraph (b).
Others queried whether a definition was even needed, and pointed to the fact that those multilateral treaties which contained a reference to “armed conflict” did not define it.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur observed that while a majority in the Commission had favoured including non-international armed conflict within the definition of “armed conflict”, many did not favour attempting to redefine the concept of armed conflict in the draft articles.
He recalled that there were also suggestions along the lines of a simpler formulation stating the articles applied to armed conflicts whether or not there was a declaration of war, without proceeding further.
Article 3.
Ipso facto termination or suspension
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur characterized draft article 3 as being primarily expository in nature: in the light of the wording of subsequent articles, particularly draft article 4, it was not strictly necessary.
Its purpose was merely to emphasize that the earlier position, according to which armed conflict automatically abrogated treaty relations, had been replaced by a more contemporary view according to which the mere outbreak of armed conflict, whether declared war or not, did not ipso facto terminate or suspend treaties in force between parties to the conflict.
He would, however, not oppose the deletion of the provision if the Commission so desired.
Its formulation was based on article 2 of the resolution adopted by the Institute of International Law in 1985.
(b) Summary of the debate
While support was expressed for the Special Rapporteur's proposal, some members pointed out that there existed examples of instances of practice, referred to both in the Special Rapporteur's report and the Secretariat's memorandum, that appeared to suggest that armed conflicts cause the automatic suspension of various categories of treaty relations, in whole or in part.
Indeed, it was suggested that the articles should not rule out the possibility of automatic suspension or termination in some cases.
In terms of another suggestion, the provision could simply state that the outbreak of armed conflict did not necessarily terminate or suspend the operation of any treaty.
It was further suggested that a distinction be made between termination and suspension: an armed conflict would not ipso facto terminate the treaty between the parties to the armed conflict themselves, but the suspension of the operation of treaties between the parties to the armed conflict would be governed along the lines proposed by the Institute of International Law in articles 7 and 9 of its resolution of 1985.
In terms of a further proposal, the position of third parties could be clarified, particularly whether the situation may be different vis-à-vis third parties from that prevailing between parties to the conflict.
One suggestion was to clarify in the text that, with regard to effects for third States, the ordinary rules in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties such as those relating to fundamental change of circumstance and supervening impossibility of performance would apply.
Agreement was also expressed with the Special Rapporteur's proposal, made in his report, to replace the phrase “ipso facto” with “necessarily”, although some members were comfortable with the former phrase.
Other suggestions included inserting a reference to international organizations in the context of draft article 3.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur recalled that he had not strongly supported the draft article from the beginning.
However, he was of the view that article 3, with improved wording (including replacing “ipso facto” with “necessarily”) should be kept.
He noted that many members considered article 3 to be the point of departure of the whole draft and that it reflected the basic principle of continuity.
He also took note of the various drafting suggestions that were made.
With regard to the position of third parties, he observed that the distinction between third party relationships and the relation between parties to the armed conflict themselves was only significant within the framework of the criterion of intention.
It was that criterion which would govern relations between belligerents and neutrals, although he conceded that the relevant practice had to be checked in order to see whether there existed the possibility of different solutions.
He noted that the point applied equally to draft article 4.
Article 4.
The indicia of susceptibility to termination or suspension of treaties in case of an armed conflict
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur observed that there existed in the literature four basic rationales regarding the effects of armed conflicts on treaties: (1) that war was the polar opposite of peace and involved a complete rupture of relations and a return to anarchy; it therefore followed that all treaties were annulled without exception and that the right of abrogation arose from the occurrence of war regardless of the original intention of the parties; (2) that the test was compatibility with the purposes of the war or the state of hostilities, i.e. that treaties remained in force subject to the necessities of war; (3) that the relevant criterion was the intention of the parties at the time they had concluded the treaty; and (4) that since 1919, and especially since the appearance of the Charter of the United Nations, States no longer possessed a general competence to resort to the use of force, except in case of legitimate defence and it therefore followed that the use of force should not be recognized as a general solvent of treaty obligations.
In his view, the third rationale was the most workable and the most representative of the existing framework of international law.
Noting that draft article 4 was a key provision, the Special Rapporteur observed that modern doctrine contained two main streams of opinion: (1) that the intention of the parties is the solution to the problem of the effect of the outbreak of war, and (2) that the doctrine of caducité, which featured prominently in French-language sources, consisting of an amalgam between the earlier and more recent positions according to which the effect of war was to terminate treaty relations, though with some important exceptions based upon intention or inferences of intention.
He was, however, of the view that it was inherently contradictory to say that armed conflict was qualitatively incompatible with treaty relations and was therefore non-justiciable while at the same time saying that there could be exceptions to that rule, the test being the object and purpose of the treaty.
In the final analysis, however, both approaches seemed to his mind to end with the notion of intention; and therefore draft article 4 sought to universalize the test of intention, with regard both to the nature of the treaty itself and to the nature and extent of the armed conflict in question.
(b) Summary of the debate
On the four basic theories outlined by the Special Rapporteur as possibly governing the effect of armed conflict on treaties, several members commented on the Special Rapporteur's choice of the criterion of the intention of the parties.
The view was expressed that the Special Rapporteur had not sufficiently explained why he could not support some of the other theories.
For example, it was suggested that the criterion based on compatibility with the armed conflict was an important one, and that traces of it were to be found in some of the draft articles proposed by the Special Rapporteur.
It was noted by some members that the principle of the prohibition of the resort to the use of force was essential.
As for the proposed criterion of intention, while some members expressed support, others were of the view that it was vague, subjective or non-existent and that it raised complex issues of the application of the Vienna Convention.
It was also considered problematic since there normally was no actual intent at the time of conclusion.
When concluding a treaty, States rarely reflect on the effect any possible armed conflict might have on it.
This is particularly the case of treaties after World War II.
It was suggested that if the purpose of selecting intention as the criterion was to establish a presumption, then that should be provided for in a different manner.
Others were less critical of the concept, because it took into account the contextual factors in a particular situation and thereby allowed a more realistic and sensitive regulation of the matter.
It was suggested that while the intention of the parties was the most important criterion, there were other relevant criteria, and that the draft articles should avoid maintaining one exclusive criterion.
Indeed, it was recalled that, in effect, the criteria for determining intention were the object and nature and extent of the armed conflict (in paragraph 2 (b)); the existence of an express provision in the treaty (art.
5, para.
1); and the object and purpose of the treaty (art.
7, para.
(1) read together with paragraph (2) providing examples of pertinent categories of treaties).
In terms of another suggestion, the object and purpose test could serve as the general guideline.
Alternatively, it was proposed that the draft articles simply provide that the general criteria apply when the treaty does not provide otherwise.
In terms of yet another view, it was also important to consider subsequent actions in the application of the treaty, including those after the outbreak of the conflict.
As regards paragraph 2, doubts were expressed about the relevance of the two sets of criteria suggested for determining the intention of the parties.
It was also suggested that the logic of the subparagraph (a) was circular: it was suggesting that to establish the intention of the parties one needs to base oneself on the intention of the parties.
It was also noted that reference to articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention was of limited use if there was no express intention at the time of conclusion.
Support was further expressed for adding the criterion of the nature of the treaty as an additional criterion under paragraph 2.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur noted that the question of the criterion of intention had been the subject of much debate, and that several members had indicated major concerns, especially as regards the familiar problems of proof.
At the same time, he recalled that the majority of the opinions expressed did not propose the replacement of intention by some other major criterion.
He announced his intention to undertake a fuller examination of these issues in the second report, but cautioned that there was no avoiding the concept of intention since, for better or worse, it was the basis of international agreements.
He pointed further to the complexity of the elements of intention relating to draft article 4, as had been raised in the debate.
In particular, it seemed obvious that the nature and extent of the conflict in question were necessary criteria since the criterion of intention was applied not in the abstract but within a particular context.
As such, he maintained that a sense of proportion was called for, since there was no simple solution to the problem of proving intention.
The Special Rapporteur further indicated that the debate had revealed a need for greater clarity as to the relation between draft articles 3 and 4 (including the possibility that they may be amalgamated), and that article 4 needed further development as regards the effects of termination or suspension.
Article 5.
Express provisions on the operation of treaties
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
Draft article 5 dealt with the situation where treaties expressly applicable to situations of armed conflict remained operative in case of an armed conflict and the outbreak of an armed conflict did not affect the competence of the parties to the armed conflict to conclude treaties.
The Special Rapporteur pointed to well known examples of belligerents in an armed conflict concluding agreements between themselves during the conflict, and noted that the principles enunciated in the draft article were also supported by the relevant literature.
(b) Summary of the debate
General support was expressed for the provision.
The point was made that while the provision was, in a sense, obvious and superfluous, it could nonetheless be included for the sake of clarity.
Concerning paragraph 1, reference was made to the principle enunciated in the Nuclear Weapons Advisory Opinion that, while certain human rights and environmental principles do not cease in time of armed conflict, their application was determined by “the applicable lex specialis, namely, the law applicable in armed conflict which is designed to regulate the conduct of hostilities”.
It was suggested that this principle be reflected in the draft articles.
It was likewise suggested that reference be made to peremptory norms of international law applicable during times of armed conflict.
In addition, the inclusion of the qualifier “lawful” was queried.
As regards paragraph 2, the view was expressed that its relationship with paragraph 1 was not clear.
It was also suggested that the reference to “competence” of the parties to the armed conflict to conclude treaties be replaced by the word “capacity”.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur noted that the provision, which complemented article 3, was uncontroversial.
As for the reference to the word “lawful” in relation to agreements made between States which were already in a situation of armed conflict, he recalled that there existed examples of situations where pairs of States which were at war with each other, nonetheless entered into special agreements during the state of war; even agreements which purported to modify the application of the law of war.
Hence the term “lawful” was included so as to ensure that such agreements would be in conformity with international public policy.
The issue would be elaborated further in the commentary.
The Special Rapporteur agreed that the principle enunciated in the Nuclear Weapons Advisory Opinion should be appropriately reflected.
Article 6.
Treaties relating to the occasion for resort to armed conflict
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur explained that draft article 6 dealt with the specialized question of treaties relating to the occasion for resort to armed conflict.
He remarked that, although some earlier authorities had held the opinion that in cases in which an armed conflict was caused by differences as to the meaning or status of a treaty, the treaty could be presumed to be annulled, the more contemporary view was that such a situation did not necessarily mean that the treaty in question would lose its force.
The practice of States confirmed that, during the process of peaceful settlement of disputes, the existing treaty obligations remained applicable.
(b) Summary of the debate
While some agreement with the provision was expressed, others voiced some doubts as to the compatibility of draft article 6 with contemporary international law.
It was noted that the subject matter of the provision depended much on the context and prevailing circumstances and that the more applicable principle would be that of the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In terms of a further view, the very fact that the contracting parties had to resort to an armed conflict suggested that at least one of the contracting parties disagreed with the substance or continuance of the treaty.
Alternatively, the provision could apply in situations where the dispute concerned the interpretation of the treaty and not the validity of the treaty in its entirety.
The view was also expressed that draft article 6 was, strictly speaking, not necessary in the light of draft article 3 whereby no treaty is ipso facto terminated or suspended by the outbreak of armed conflict: that would include a treaty whose interpretation may be the occasion for a conflict.
The matter could, accordingly, equally be dealt with in the commentary to Article 3.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur observed that the draft article had proved to be problematical, with justification.
He explained that, in his view, it was unreasonable to presume that a treaty which served as the basis of an armed conflict, and, which later was the subject of some process in accordance with law, should be assumed to be annulled.
However, he conceded that the draft article was redundant in view of the earlier provisions of the draft.
It was further announced that the commentary to the draft article would be amended to include more apposite material, including the Ethiopia-Eritrea Boundary Commission decision Regarding Delimitation of the Border between the State of Eritrea and the Federal Republic of Ethiopia of 13 April 2002.
Article 7.
The operation of treaties on the basis of necessary implication from their object and purpose
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur observed that draft article 7 dealt with the species of treaties the object and purpose of which involved the necessary implication that they would continue in operation during an armed conflict.
Paragraph 1 established the basic principle that the incidence of armed conflict would not, as such, inhibit the operation of those treaties.
Paragraph 2 contained an indicative list of some such categories of treaties.
It was observed that the effect of such categorization was to create a set of weak rebuttable presumptions as to the object and purpose of those types of treaties, i.e. as evidence of the object and purpose of the treaty to the effect that it survives a war.
He clarified that while he did not agree with all the categories of treaties in the list, he had nonetheless included them as potential candidates for consideration by the Commission.
The list reflected the views of several generations of writers and was to a considerable extent reflected in available State practice, particularly United States practice dating back to the 1940s.
While closely linked to articles 3 and 4, the draft article was primarily expository and could accordingly be excluded.
While there was a case for the inclusion of treaties for the protection of human rights, especially in the light of the inclusion of friendship, commerce and navigation and analogous agreements concerning private rights such as bilateral investments treaties, he was not entirely persuaded.
Similarly, in the case of environmental law treaties, he noted that while there were some important pieces of law taken individually and some important standard-setting treaties, there was no unified law for the protection of the environment, and therefore there was no single position as to whether the incidence of armed conflict affected environmental treaties.
(b) Summary of the debate
A range of views were expressed in connection with paragraph 1.
It was observed that the intention of the parties and the object and purpose of the treaty were different criteria and that it was difficult to establish a general criterion exactly because the applicable considerations were primarily contextual in nature.
What seemed pertinent was more the type of the conflict rather than the intention of the parties.
The view was also expressed that the emphasis was better placed on the nature of the treaty, as opposed to its object and purpose.
Still others supported the criterion of object and purpose, particularly because of its connection to the Vienna Convention.
Other suggestions included having a more general formulation such as: “in principle, provisions of a treaty continue to apply depending on their viability, taking into account the context of the armed conflict and depending on the position of the party on the legality of the conflict”.170.
Concerning paragraph 2, while some support was expressed for the inclusion of an indicative list, several members expressed doubts.
It was observed that treaties do not fall into neat categories and that, for example, bilateral treaties often include aspects of several different fields of law; that even within a particular category, some provisions of a treaty may logically be of a nature as to be subject to suspension during armed conflict, while other provisions of the same treaty may not; that even with respect to particular types of provisions, the language of a treaty and the intention of its parties could differ from that of similar provisions in other treaties; that State practice was not consistent in most areas and did not lend itself to yes-or-no answers as to whether a category of treaties may or may not be suspended or terminated; and that it could be difficult to reach a reasonable consensus within the Commission or among States on such a catalogue of treaties.
The view was also expressed that, strictly speaking, the list was not necessary in light of the application of the general criterion of intention, i.e. if the intention is known, an indicative list is not necessary.
It was further suggested that the list could be included in the commentary.
As regards subparagraph (a), the view was expressed that this category was unnecessary as it was already covered by draft article 5.
In addition, the category in subparagraph (b) seemed ambiguous, as it was not clear what rights and obligations were “permanent” and which sets of such rights and obligations amounted to a “regime” or “status”.
Furthermore, some provisions of those types of treaties could be inconsistent with the obligations and rights of occupying powers in armed conflict and, as such, would need to be temporarily suspended.
The view was also expressed that subparagraph (c) provided a good example of treaties that contained some provisions that should ordinarily continue during armed conflict (such as the personal status and property rights of foreign nationals), as well as other provisions which might need to be suspended under some circumstances (such as the conduct of navigation and commerce between States engaged in armed conflict).
The view was expressed that the category of treaties in subparagraph (d) was one in which there probably was a good basis for continuity, subject to the admonition of the International Court of Justice, in the Nuclear Weapons Advisory Opinion, that such rights were to be applied in accordance with the law of armed conflict.
Doubts were expressed as to the existence of a general presumption of continuity for the entire category in subparagraph (e), in the light of the fact that many environmental treaties imposed very specific technical limitations that could be inconsistent with the legitimate requirements of military operations in armed conflict in some situations.
Others supported the inclusion of the category by way of progressive development of international law.
It was also suggested that treaties relating to groundwaters could be included.
On the category of treaties in subparagraph (f), doubts were also expressed whether there could be any general presumption of continuity, given that it could be imperative in wartime to prevent or restrict air or sea traffic to or from an enemy State.
Concerning subparagraph (g), it was observed that it was not self-evident what might constitute a “law-making” treaty, given the fact that all treaties create law, and that many of such treaties had provisions regarding personal rights that should be continued, together with other provisions that might be incompatible with the requirements of armed conflict and might have to be temporarily suspended.
Other suggestions for additional categories included treaties establishing international organizations and those containing new conventional rules on international crimes.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur observed that draft article 7 had elicited a variety of views.
He noted that it was a corollary of article 4, although he admitted that such connection could be more clearly spelled out in the commentary.
The content of article 7 was meant to be tentative and expository.
While it could be deleted, he pointed out that a major feature of the literature on the topic was the indication of categories of treaties in order to identify types of treaty which are in principle not susceptible to termination or suspension in the case of armed conflict.
While he noted that doubts had been expressed, he nonetheless felt that there seemed to be general support for the basic concept of article 7, namely that it was merely expository in character and that it was intended only to create a rebuttable presumption.
He suggested that some of the categories were worth distinguishing as they enjoyed a firm base in State practice, for example, treaties creating a permanent regime, treaties of friendship, commerce and navigation, and multilateral law-making treaties.
Article 8.
Mode of suspension or termination
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
Article 8 was described as being fairly mechanical in its operation.
A discussion of the possible outcome in terms of suspension or termination necessarily raised the question of the mode of suspension or termination.
While not essential, it seemed useful to include the provision.
(b) Summary of the debate
It was suggested that the possibility of partial termination or suspension of treaties in particular situations also be envisaged in the draft article, since there existed no a priori requirement that a treaty be suspended or terminated as a whole.
Such possibility would further serve to allow for the taking into account of the context within which the drafts articles were to be applied.
It was also suggested that termination and suspension be distinguished.
Further suggestions included considering the article together with draft article 13 (while clarifying the relationship between the two) and giving consideration to the possible inclusion of a provision analogous to that in article 57 of the Vienna Convention.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur noted that the draft article had been relatively uncontroversial.
He took note of the suggestion that the possibility of separability of provisions be given a clearer profile in the draft article, and observed that such a possibility had, in fact, been included by reference to article 44 of the Vienna Convention.
He confirmed that the issue would be given greater prominence in the draft article.
Article 9.
The resumption of suspended treaties
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur explained that, like article 8, draft article 9 was mechanical in nature.
Reference was made to international experience, including some Peace Treaties like the Italian Peace Treaty, where serious attempts were made to clarify the position where, as a result of a major armed conflict, there was a great residue of legal relations the survival of which was in question.
In such circumstances, States had adopted practical methods of removing substantial ambiguities in their relationships.
(b) Summary of the debate
Support was expressed for the position that the resumption of suspended treaties should be favoured when the reasons for suspension no longer apply.
Many members raised the same points in connection with draft article 9 as had been made in the context of article 4.
For example, it was again suggested that a reference to the nature of the treaty be included in a new subparagraph 2 (c).
Similarly, any changes to draft article 4 would imply consequential amendments to article 9.
It was also suggested that a provision be included stipulating that, in cases of doubt as to whether a treaty is suspended or terminated as a result of an armed conflict, it would be presumed that it was only suspended, thereby leaving open the possibility for the parties to agree otherwise.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur noted that article 9 was ancillary to the purposes of article 4.
Article 10.
Legality of the conduct of the parties
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur explained that, in draft article 10, he had taken a different approach from that of the Institute of International Law in its resolution of 1985 which provided several articles on the question of the legality of the conduct of the parties to an armed conflict.
He observed that the difficulty was the absence of a determination of an illegality by an authoritative organ.
In the present draft article that issue was largely set aside.
He explained that the character of the draft articles would change if they were to consider such questions.
(b) Summary of the debate
Several members spoke in favour of including similar provisions to those in articles 7, 8 and 9 of the resolution of the Institute of International Law, distinguishing the rights of the State acting in individual or collective self-defence, or in compliance with a Security Council resolution adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, from those of the State committing aggression.
The view was expressed that it was necessary to consider the situation in which the parties to an armed conflict had profited from an illegal war, and that resort to the sole criterion of the intention of the parties could lead to a different conclusion.
Several members also expressed the view that the draft articles had to take into account developments since World War II, in particular as regards the prohibition of the use or threat of use of force, which constituted the cornerstone of the whole structure of the United Nations system for the maintenance of international peace and security.
It was maintained that this could be done by focusing on what the effects would be of aggression or self-defence on treaties, without defining such acts.
It was observed that only treaties incompatible with the exercise of the right to self-defence should be suspended or even repealed.
In terms of a further view, while the question of the legality of armed conflict was not pertinent in connection with the rules of armed conflict, the same could not be said with regard to the termination or suspension of other categories of treaties.
It was accordingly not clear that the provision conformed to the Vienna Convention which singled out wrongdoing States for different treatment.
At the same time, opposition was expressed to the introduction of references to the inequality of belligerent parties in the draft articles.
It was observed that, in practice, it was difficult to pass judgement on the parties to an armed conflict, and it was also noted that the matter was not without its complexity especially in the light of the existence of views, in the international community, that there were other forms of the lawful resort to the use of force, allegedly endorsed by customary international law.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur acknowledged that the criticism of draft article 10 was justified and that the draft article needed to be redrafted accordingly.
In his opinion, the matter could be resolved by means of resort to a proviso, cast in general terms, referring to the right to individual or collective self-defence.
It could not be presumed that the States concerned could rely on such a proviso unless the legal conditions existed necessitating suspension or termination.
The Special Rapporteur stated that it was not his intention to examine the question of the validity or the voidability of treaties in terms of the Charter provisions relating to the use of force.
Article 11.
Decisions of the Security Council; Article 12.  Status of third States as neutrals; Article 13.
Cases of termination or suspension; and Article 14.
The revival of terminated or suspended treaties
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur explained that while not strictly necessary, draft article 11 was useful in an expository draft.
He further recalled the content of article 75 of the Vienna Convention.
Draft article 12, likewise, contained a pure proviso, which, although also not strictly necessary, had a pragmatic purpose.
With regard to draft article 13, the Special Rapporteur pointed to the fact that the subject matter of the report overlapped with other well-recognized aspects of the law of treaties, and that the provision took such overlap into account.
The Special Rapporteur limited his introduction of draft article 14 to observing that there existed a substantial amount of practice on the revival of the status of pre-war treaties.
(b) Summary of the debate
General support existed for draft articles 11 to 14.
Support was expressed for the reiteration of the rules of the Vienna Convention in draft article 13.
It was further suggested that treaties that might attract a defence of waiver or impossibility of performance in a situation of non-performance should be clearly distinguished for reasons of clarity and composition.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur took note of the fact that draft articles 11, 12, 13 and 14 had not attracted any criticism.
He also observed that while Article 11 was a necessary proviso, it could be incorporated into a more general proviso on the Charter of the United Nations.
chapter vi
responsibility of international organizations
Introduction
At its fifty-second session (2000), the Commission decided to include the topic “Responsibility of international organizations” in its long-term programme of work.
The General Assembly, in paragraph 8 of its resolution 55/152 of 12 December 2000, took note of the Commission's decision with regard to the long-term programme of work, and of the syllabus for the new topic annexed to the Commission's 2000 report.
The Assembly, in paragraph 8 of its resolution 56/82 of 12 December 2001, requested the Commission to begin its work on the topic “Responsibility of international organizations”.
At its fifty-fourth session, the Commission decided, at its 2717th meeting, held on 8 May 2002, to include the topic in its programme of work and appointed Mr. Giorgio Gaja as Special Rapporteur for the topic.
At the same session, the Commission established a Working Group on the topic.
The Working Group in its report briefly considered the scope of the topic, the relations between the new project and the draft articles on “Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts”, questions of attribution, issues relating to the responsibility of member States for conduct that is attributed to an international organization, and questions relating to the content of international responsibility, implementation of responsibility and settlement of disputes.
At the end of its fifty-fourth session, the Commission adopted the report of the Working Group.
At its fifty-fifth (2003) and fifty-sixth sessions (2004), the Commission had before it and considered the first and second reports of the Special Rapporteur.
The Commission provisionally adopted articles 1 to 7.
Consideration of the topic at the present session
At the present session, the Commission had before it the third report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/553).
Following the recommendations of the Commission, the Secretariat had circulated the relevant chapter of the report of the Commission to international organizations asking for their comments and for any relevant materials which they could provide to the Commission.
Comments from international organizations and from governments so far received were also before the Commission.
The third report of the Special Rapporteur, like the previous two reports, followed the general pattern of the articles on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
It considered matters which were addressed in chapters III and IV of Part One of those articles.
Thus following the second report, which dealt with questions of attribution of conduct to international organizations, the third report dealt with the existence of a breach of an international obligation on the part of an international organization and with the responsibility of an international organization in connection with the act of a State or another international organization.
In his third report the Special Rapporteur proposed draft articles 8 to 16: article 8 “Existence of a breach of an international obligation”, article 9 “International obligation in force for an international organization”, article 10 “Extension in time of the breach of an international obligation”, article 11 “Breach consisting of a composite
act”, article 12 “Aid or assistance in the commission of an internationally wrongful act”, article 13 “Direction and control exercise over the commission of an internationally wrongful act”, article 14 “Coercion of a State or another international organization”, article 15 “Effects of the preceding articles”, and article 16 “Decisions, recommendations and authorizations addressed to member States and international organizations”.
Draft articles 8 to 11 corresponded to articles 12 to 15 in chapter III of the articles on Responsibility of States for an internationally wrongful act which dealt with the existence of a breach of an international obligation, the requirement that the obligation be in force at the time the act occurs, the extension of the breach in time and the breach consisting of a composite act.
In the view of the Special Rapporteur, those articles on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts were of a general nature and reflected principles that were clearly applicable to the breach of an international obligation on the part of any subject of international law.
Therefore there was no reason to take a different approach, in this context, with regard to international organizations.
However, the Special Rapporteur considered it useful to add in draft article 8 a specific paragraph dealing with the breach of an obligation under the rules of the organization.
With regard to draft articles 12 to 16, the Special Rapporteur explained that they corresponded to articles 16 to 19 in chapter IV of the articles on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
The articles of that chapter consider cases and conditions under which a State is responsible for aid or assistance, or direction and control of another State in the commission of an internationally wrongful act, or else for the coercion of another State to commit a wrongful act.
The Special Rapporteur explained that, even though there was little practice relating to the international responsibility of international organizations in this type of situations, there was no reason to think that the requirements and approach would be any different from those relating to Responsibility of States.
He noted that there may be situations in which an international organization may be responsible for the conduct of its members.
These cases do not seem to fall squarely into any of the categories covered by articles 16 to 18 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
They involved compliance with acts of international organizations by their members.
Such acts may be binding decisions or non-binding recommendations or authorizations.
To cover these situations, he had proposed draft article 16.
The Commission considered the third report of the Special Rapporteur at its 2839th to 2843rd meetings, from 17 to 24 May 2005.
At its 2843rd meeting, on 24 May 2005, the Commission established a Working Group to consider draft articles 8 and 16.
The Commission considered the report of the Working Group, at its 2844th meeting, on 25 May 2005.
At its 2843rd meeting, 24 May 2005, the Commission referred draft articles 9 to 15 to the Drafting Committee.
Draft articles 8 and 16 were referred to the Drafting Committee, at the 2844th meeting, on 25 May 2005, following the report of the Working Group.
The Commission considered and adopted the report of the Drafting Committee on draft articles 8 to 16 at its 2848th meeting, on 3 June 2005 (see section C.1 below).
At its 2862nd and 2863rd meetings, on 2 and 3 August 2005, the Commission adopted the commentaries to the aforementioned draft articles (see section C.2 below).
C. Text of the draft articles on responsibility of international organizations provisionally adopted so far by the Commission
Text of the draft articles
The text of the draft articles provisionally adopted so far by the Commission is reproduced below.
Responsibility of international organizations
Introduction
Article 1
Scope of the present draft articles
The present draft articles apply to the international responsibility of an international organization for an act that is wrongful under international law.
The present draft articles also apply to the international responsibility of a State for the internationally wrongful act of an international organization.
Article 2
Use of terms
For the purposes of the present draft articles, the term “international organization” refers to an organization established by a treaty or other instrument governed by international law and possessing its own international legal personality.
International organizations may include as members, in addition to States, other entities.
Article 3
General principles
Every internationally wrongful act of an international organization entails the international responsibility of the international organization.
There is an internationally wrongful act of an international organization when conduct consisting of an action or omission:
(a) Is attributable to the international organization under international law; and
(b) Constitutes a breach of an international obligation of that international organization.
Attribution of conduct to an international organization
Article 4
General rule on attribution of conduct to an international organization
The conduct of an organ or agent of an international organization in the performance of functions of that organ or agent shall be considered as an act of that organization under international law whatever position the organ or agent holds in respect of the organization.
For the purposes of paragraph 1, the term “agent” includes officials and other persons or entities through whom the organization acts.
Rules of the organization shall apply to the determination of the functions of its organs and agents.
For the purpose of the present draft article, “rules of the organization” means, in particular: the constituent instruments; decisions, resolutions and other acts taken by the organization in accordance with those instruments; and established practice of the organization.
Article 5
Conduct of organs or agents placed at the disposal of an international organization by a State or another international organization
The conduct of an organ of a State or an organ or agent of an international organization that is placed at the disposal of another international organization shall be considered under international law an act of the latter organization if the organization exercises effective control over that conduct.
Article 6
Excess of authority or contravention of instructions
The conduct of an organ or an agent of an international organization shall be considered an act of that organization under international law if the organ or agent acts in that capacity, even though the conduct exceeds the authority of that organ or agent or contravenes instructions.
Article 7
Conduct acknowledged and adopted by an international organization as its own
Conduct which is not attributable to an international organization under the preceding draft articles shall nevertheless be considered an act of that international organization under international law if and to the extent that the organization acknowledges and adopts the conduct in question as its own.
Breach of an international obligation
Article 8
Existence of a breach of an international obligation
There is a breach of an international obligation by an international organization when an act of that international organization is not in conformity with what is required of it by that obligation, regardless of its origin and character.
Paragraph 1 also applies to the breach of an obligation under international law established by a rule of the international organization.
Article 9
International obligation in force for an international organization
An act of an international organization does not constitute a breach of an international obligation unless the international organization is bound by the obligation in question at the time the act occurs.
Article 10
Extension in time of the breach of an international obligation
The breach of an international obligation by an act of an international organization not having a continuing character occurs at the moment when the act is performed, even if its effects continue.
The breach of an international obligation by an act of an international organization having a continuing character extends over the entire period during which the act continues and remains not in conformity with the international obligation.
The breach of an international obligation requiring an international organization to prevent a given event occurs when the event occurs and extends over the entire period during which the event continues and remains not in conformity with that obligation.
Article 11
Breach consisting of a composite act
The breach of an international obligation by an international organization through a series of actions and omissions defined in aggregate as wrongful, occurs when the action or omission occurs which, taken with the other actions or omissions, is sufficient to constitute the wrongful act.
In such a case, the breach extends over the entire period starting with the first of the actions or omissions of the series and lasts for as long as these actions or omissions are repeated and remain not in conformity with the international obligation.
Responsibility of an international organization in connection with the act of a State or another international organization
Article 12
Aid or assistance in the commission of an internationally wrongful act
An international organization which aids or assists a State or another international organization in the commission of an internationally wrongful act by the State or the latter organization is internationally responsible for doing so if:
(a) That organization does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the internationally wrongful act; and
(b) The act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that organization.
Article 13
Direction and control exercised over the commission of an internationally wrongful act
An international organization which directs and controls a State or another international organization in the commission of an internationally wrongful act by the State or the latter organization is internationally responsible for that act if:
(a) That organization does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the internationally wrongful act; and
(b) The act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that organization.
Article 14
Coercion of a State or another international organization
An international organization which coerces a State or another international organization to commit an act is internationally responsible for that act if:
(a) The act would, but for the coercion, be an internationally wrongful act of the coerced State or international organization; and
(b) The coercing international organization does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the act.
Article 15
Decisions, recommendations and authorizations addressed to member States and international organizations
An international organization incurs international responsibility if it adopts a decision binding a member State or international organization to commit an act that would be internationally wrongful if committed by the former organization and would circumvent an international obligation of the former organization.
An international organization incurs international responsibility if:
(a) It authorizes a member State or international organization to commit an act that would be internationally wrongful if committed by the former organization and would circumvent an international obligation of the former organization, or recommends that a member State or international organization commit such an act; and
(b) That State or international organization commits the act in question in reliance on that authorization or recommendation.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 apply whether or not the act in question is internationally wrongful for the member State or international organization to which the decision, authorization or recommendation is directed.
Article 16
Effect of this chapter
This chapter is without prejudice to the international responsibility of the State or international organization which commits the act in question, or of any other State or international organization.
Text of the draft articles with commentaries thereto adopted by the Commission at its fifty-seventh session
The text of the draft articles together with commentaries thereto provisionally adopted by the Commission at its fifty-seventh session is reproduced below.
Chapter III
Breach of an international obligation
(1) Draft articles 4 to 7 of the present draft address the question of attribution of conduct to an international organization.
According to draft article 3, paragraph 2, attribution of conduct is one of the two conditions for an internationally wrongful act of an international organization to arise.
The other condition is that the same conduct “constitutes a breach of an international obligation of that organization”.
This condition is examined in the present Chapter.
(2) As specified in draft article 3, paragraph 2, conduct of an international organization may consist of “an action or omission”.
An omission constitutes a breach when the international organization is under an international obligation to take some positive action and fails to do so.
A breach may also consist in an action that is inconsistent with what the international organization is required to do, or not to do, under international law.
(3) To a large extent, the four articles included in the present Chapter correspond, in their substance and wording, to articles 12 to 15 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
Those articles express principles of a general nature that appear to be applicable to the breach of an international obligation on the part of any subject of international law.
There would thus be little reason to take a different approach in the present draft articles, although available practice relating to international organizations is limited with regard to the various issues addressed in the present Chapter.
Article 8
Existence of a breach of an international obligation
There is a breach of an international obligation by an international organization when an act of that international organization is not in conformity with what is required of it by that obligation, regardless of its origin and character.
Paragraph 1 also applies to the breach of an obligation under international law established by a rule of the international organization.
Commentary
(1) The wording of paragraph 1 corresponds to that of article 12 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, with the replacement of the term “State” with “international organization”.
(2) As with regard to States, the term “international obligation” means an obligation under international law “regardless of its origin”.
As mentioned in the commentary to article 12 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, this is intended to convey that the “[i]nternational obligation may be established by a customary rule of international law, a treaty or a general principle applicable within the international legal order”.
(3) An international obligation may be owed by an international organization to the international community as a whole, one or several States, whether members or non-members, another international organization or other international organizations and any other subject of international law.
(4) For an international organization most obligations are likely to arise from the rules of the organization, which are defined in draft article 4, paragraph 4, of the present draft as meaning “in particular: the constituent instruments; decisions, resolutions and other acts taken by the organization in accordance with those instruments; and established practice of the organization”.
While it may seem superfluous to state that obligations arising from the constituent instruments or binding acts that are based on those instruments are indeed international obligations, the practical importance of obligations under the rules of the organization makes it preferable to dispel any doubt that breaches of these obligations are also covered by the present draft.
The wording in paragraph 2, which refers to an obligation “established by a rule of the international organization”, is intended to refer to any obligation arising from the rules of the organization.
(5) The question may be raised whether all the obligations arising from rules of the organization are to be considered as international obligations.
The legal nature of the rules of the organization is to some extent controversial.
Many consider that the rules of treaty-based organizations are part of international law.
Some authors have held that, although international organizations are established by treaties or other instruments governed by international law, the internal law of the organization, once it has come into existence, does not form part of international law.
Another view, which finds support in practice, is that international organizations that have achieved a high degree of integration are a special case.
A further view, which was shared by some members of the Commission, would draw a distinction according to the source and subject matter of the rules of the organization, and exclude, for instance, certain administrative regulations from the domain of international law.
(6) Although the question of the legal nature of the rules of the organization is far from theoretical for the purposes of the present draft, since it affects the applicability of the principles of international law with regard to responsibility for breaches of certain obligations arising from rules of the organization, paragraph 2 does not attempt to express a clear-cut view on the issue.
It simply intends to say that, to the extent that an obligation arising from the rules of the organization has to be regarded as an obligation under international law, the principles expressed in the present draft apply.
(7) Rules of an organization may devise specific treatment of breaches of obligations, also with regard to the question of the existence of a breach.
This does not need to be stated in article 8, because it could be adequately covered by a final provision of the draft, which would point to the possible existence of special rules on any of the matters covered by the draft.
These special rules do not necessarily prevail over principles set out in the present draft.
For instance, with regard to the existence of a breach of an international obligation, a special rule of the organization would not affect breaches of obligations that an international organization may owe to a non-member State.
Nor would special rules affect obligations arising from a higher source, irrespective of the identity of the subject to whom the international organization owes the obligation.
(8) As explained in the commentary to article 12 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, the reference in paragraph 1 to the character of the obligation concerns the “various classifications of international obligations”.
(9) Obligations existing for an international organization may relate in a variety of ways to conduct of its member States or international organizations.
For instance, an international organization may have acquired an obligation to prevent its member States from taking a certain conduct.
In this case, the conduct of member States would not per se cause a breach of the obligation.
The breach would consist in the failure, on the part of the international organization, to comply with its obligation of prevention.
Another possible combination of the conduct of an international organization with that of its member States occurs when the organization is under an obligation to achieve a certain result, irrespective of whether the necessary conduct will be taken by the organization itself or by one or more of its member States.
This combination was acknowledged by the European Court of Justice in a case, Parliament v.
Council, concerning a treaty establishing cooperation that was concluded by the European Community and its member States, on the one side, and several non-member States, on the other side.
The Court found that:
“In those circumstances, in the absence of derogations expressly laid down in the Convention, the Community and its Member States as partners of the ACP States are jointly liable to those latter States for the fulfilment of every obligation arising from the commitments undertaken, including those relating to financial assistance.”
Article 9
International obligation in force for an international organization
An act of an international organization does not constitute a breach of an international obligation unless the international organization is bound by the obligation in question at the time the act occurs.
Commentary
Given the fact that no specific issue appears to affect the application to international organizations of the principle expressed in article 13 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, the term “State” is simply replaced by “international organization” in the title and text of draft article 9.
Article 10
Extension in time of the breach of an international obligation
The breach of an international obligation by an act of an international organization not having a continuing character occurs at the moment when the act is performed, even if its effects continue.
The breach of an international obligation by an act of an international organization having a continuing character extends over the entire period during which the act continues and remains not in conformity with the international obligation.
The breach of an international obligation requiring an international organization to prevent a given event occurs when the event occurs and extends over the entire period during which the event continues and remains not in conformity with that obligation.
Commentary
Similar considerations to those made in the commentary to draft article 9 apply in the case of draft article 10.
The text corresponds to that of article 14 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, with the replacement of the term “State” with “international organization”.
Article 11
Breach consisting of a composite act
The breach of an international obligation by an international organization through a series of actions and omissions defined in aggregate as wrongful, occurs when the action or omission occurs which, taken with the other actions or omissions, is sufficient to constitute the wrongful act.
In such a case, the breach extends over the entire period starting with the first of the actions or omissions of the series and lasts for as long as these actions or omissions are repeated and remain not in conformity with the international obligation.
Commentary
(1) The observation made in the commentary to draft article 9 also applies with regard to draft article 11.
This corresponds to article 15 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, with the replacement of the term “State” with “international organization” in paragraph 1.
Chapter IV
Responsibility of an international organization in connection with the act of a State or another international organization
(1) Articles 16 to 18 on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts consider the cases in which a State assists or aids, directs and controls, or coerces another State in the commission of an internationally wrongful act.
Parallel situations could be envisaged with regard to international organizations.
For instance, an international organization may aid or assist a State or another international organization in the commission of an internationally wrongful act.
For the purposes of international responsibility, there would be no reason for distinguishing the case of an international organization aiding or assisting a State or another international organization from that of a State aiding or assisting another State.
Thus, even if available practice with regard to international organizations is limited, there is some justification for including in the present draft provisions that are parallel to articles 16 to 18 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
(2) The pertinent provisions on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts are based on the premise that aid or assistance, direction and control, and coercion do not affect attribution of conduct to the State which is aided or assisted, under the direction or control, or under coercion.
It is that State which commits an internationally wrongful act, although in the case of coercion wrongfulness could be excluded, while the other State is held responsible not for having actually committed the wrongful act but for its causal contribution to the commission of the act.
(3) Relations existing between an international organization and its member States or international organizations allow the former organization to influence the conduct of members also in cases that are not envisaged in articles 16 to 18 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
Some international organizations have the power to take decisions binding their members, while most organizations may only influence their members' conduct through non-binding acts.
The consequences that this type of relation, which does not have a parallel in the relations between States, may entail with regard to an international organization's responsibility will also be examined in the present Chapter.
(4) The question of an international organization's international responsibility in connection with the act of a State has been discussed in several cases before international tribunals or other bodies, but has not been examined by those tribunals or bodies because of lack of jurisdiction ratione personae.
Reference should be made in particular to the following cases:  M. & Co. v.
Germany before the European Commission of Human Rights; Cantoni v. France, Matthews v. United Kingdom and Senator Lines v.
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom before the European Court of Human Rights; and H.v.d.P. v. Netherlands before the Human Rights Committee.
In the latter case, a communication concerning the conduct of the European Patent Office was held to be inadmissible, because that conduct could not,
“in any way, be construed as coming within the jurisdiction of the Netherlands or of any other State party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol thereto.”
(5) Several cases concern the relations between the European Community and its member States.
In M.
& Co. v.
Germany the European Commission of Human Rights held:
“The Commission first recalls that it is in fact not competent ratione materiae to examine proceedings before or decisions of organs of the European Communities [] This does not mean, however, that by granting executory power to a judgment of the European Court of Justice the competent German authorities acted quasi as Community organs and are to that extent beyond the scope of control exercised by the conventional organs.”
(6) A different view was recently endorsed in European Communities - Protection of Trademarks and Geographical Indications for Agricultural Products and Foodstuffs by a World Trade Organization (WTO) panel, which:
“accepted the European Communities' explanation of what amounts to its sui generis domestic constitutional arrangements that Community laws are generally not executed through authorities at Community level but rather through recourse to the authorities of its member States which, in such a situation, `act de facto as organs of the Community, for which the Community would be responsible under WTO law and international law in general'.”
This approach implies making an exception for the relations between the European Community and its member States, to the effect that, in the presence of a European Community act binding a member State, State authorities would be considered as acting as organs of the Community.
(7) The issue was recently before the European Court of Human Rights in Bosphorus Hava Yollari Turizm ve Ticaret AS v.
Ireland.
The Court said in its decision on admissibility in this case that it would examine at a later stage of the proceedings:
“whether the impugned acts can be considered to fall within the jurisdiction of the Irish State within the meaning of article 1 of the Convention, when that State claims that it was obliged to act in furtherance of a directly effective and obligatory EC Regulation.”
In its unanimous judgement on the merits of 30 June 2005 the Grand Chamber of the Court held:
“In the present case it is not disputed that the act about which the applicant complained, the detention of the aircraft leased by it for a period of time, was implemented by the authorities of the respondent State on its territory following a decision to impound of the Irish Minister for Transport.
In such circumstances the applicant company, as the addressee of the impugned act fell within the `jurisdiction' of the Irish State, with the consequence that its complaint about that act is compatible ratione loci, personae and materiae with the provision of the Convention.”
For the purposes of the present Chapter, it seems preferable at the current stage of judicial developments not to assume that a special rule has come into existence to the effect that, when implementing a binding act of the European Community, State authorities would act as organs of the European Community.
Article 12
Aid or assistance in the commission of an internationally wrongful act
An international organization which aids or assists a State or another international organization in the commission of an internationally wrongful act by the State or the latter organization is internationally responsible for doing so if:
(a) That organization does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the internationally wrongful act; and
(b) The act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that organization.
Commentary
The application to an international organization of a provision corresponding to article 16 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts is not problematic.
Draft article 12 only introduces a few changes: the reference to the case in which a State aids or assists another State has been modified in order to refer to an international organization aiding or assisting a State or another international organization; in consequence, certain changes have been made in the rest of the text.
Article 13
Direction and control exercised over the commission of an internationally wrongful act
An international organization which directs and controls a State or another international organization in the commission of an internationally wrongful act by the State or the latter organization is internationally responsible for that act if:
(a) That organization does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the internationally wrongful act; and
(b) The act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that organization.
Commentary
(1) The text of draft article 13 corresponds to article 17 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, with changes similar to those explained in the commentary to draft article 12.
Thus, the reference to the directing and controlling State has been replaced by that to an international organization which directs and controls; moreover, the term “State” has been replaced with “State or another international organization” in the reference to the entity which is directed and controlled.
(2) If one assumes that the Kosovo Force [KFOR] is an international organization, an example of two international organizations allegedly exercising direction and control in the commission of a wrongful act may be taken from the French Government's preliminary objections in Legality of Use of Force (Yugoslavia v.
France) before the International Court of Justice, when the French Government held that:
“NATO is responsible for the `direction' of KFOR and the United Nations for `control' of it.”
A joint exercise of direction and control was probably envisaged.
(3) In the relations between an international organization and its member States and international organizations the concept of “direction and control” could conceivably be extended so as to encompass cases in which an international organization takes a decision binding its members.
The commentary to article 17 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts explains that “Article 17 is limited to cases where a dominant State actually directs and controls conduct which is a breach of an international obligation of the dependent State”, that “the term `controls' refers to cases of domination over the commission of wrongful conduct and not simply the exercise of oversight, still less mere influence or concern”, and that “the word `directs' does not encompass mere incitement or suggestion but rather connotes actual direction of an operative kind”.
If one interprets the provision in the light of the passages quoted above, the adoption of a binding decision on the part of an international organization could determine, under certain circumstances, a form of direction or control in the commission of an internationally wrongful act.
The assumption is that the State or international organization which is the addressee of the decision is not given discretion to take conduct that, while complying with the decision, would not constitute an internationally wrongful act.
(4) If the adoption of a binding decision were to be regarded as a form of direction and control within the purview of draft article 13, this provision would overlap with draft article 15 of the present draft.
The overlap would only be partial: it is sufficient to point out that draft article 15 also covers the case that a binding decision requires a member State or international organization to take an act which is not unlawful for that State or international organization.
In any case, the possible overlap between draft articles 13 and 15 would not create any inconsistency, since both provisions assert, albeit under different conditions, the international responsibility of the international organization which has taken a decision binding its member States or international organizations.
Article 14
Coercion of a State or another international organization
An international organization which coerces a State or another international organization to commit an act is internationally responsible for that act if:
(a) The act would, but for the coercion, be an internationally wrongful act of the coerced State or international organization; and
(b) The coercing international organization does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the act.
Commentary
(1) The text of draft article 14 corresponds to article 18 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, with changes similar to those explained in the commentary to draft article 12.
The reference to a coercing State has been replaced with that to an international organization; moreover, the coerced entity is not necessarily a State, but could also be an international organization.
Also the title has been modified from “Coercion of another State” to “Coercion of a State or another international organization”.
(2) In the relations between an international organization and its member States or international organizations, a binding decision by an international organization could give rise to coercion only under exceptional circumstances.
The commentary to article 18 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts stresses that:
“Coercion for the purpose of article 18 has the same essential character as force majeure under article 23.
Nothing less than conduct which forces the will of the coerced State will suffice, giving it no effective choice but to comply with the wishes of the coercing State.”
(3) Should nevertheless an international organization be considered as coercing a member State or international organization when it adopts a binding decision, there could be an overlap between draft article 14 and draft article 15.
The overlap would only be partial, given the different conditions set by the two provisions, and especially the fact that according to draft article 15 the act committed by the member State or international organization need not be unlawful for that State or that organization.
To the extent that there would be an overlap, an international organization could be regarded as responsible under either draft article 14 or draft article 15.
This would not give rise to any inconsistency.
Article 15
Decisions, recommendations and authorizations addressed to member States and international organizations
An international organization incurs international responsibility if it adopts a decision binding a member State or international organization to commit an act that would be internationally wrongful if committed by the former organization and would circumvent an international obligation of the former organization.
An international organization incurs international responsibility if:
(a) It authorizes a member State or international organization to commit an act that would be internationally wrongful if committed by the former organization and would circumvent an international obligation of the former organization, or recommends that a member State or international organization commit such an act; and
(b) That State or international organization commits the act in question in reliance on the authorization or recommendation.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 apply whether or not the act in question is internationally wrongful for the member State or international organization to which the decision, authorization or recommendation is directed.
Commentary
(1) The fact that an international organization is a subject of international law, which is distinct from the organization's members, opens up the possibility for the organization to try to influence its members in order to achieve through them a result that the organization could not lawfully achieve directly, and it would circumvent one of its international obligations.
As was noted by the delegation of Austria during the debates in the Sixth Committee:
“[] an international organization should not be allowed to escape responsibility by `outsourcing' its actors.”
(2) The Legal Counsel of WIPO considered the case of an international organization requiring a member State to commit an internationally unlawful act, and wrote:
“[] in the event a certain conduct, which a member State takes in compliance with a request on the part of an international organization, appears to be in breach of an international obligation both of that State and of that organization, then the organization should also be regarded as responsible under international law.”
(3) The opportunity for circumvention is likely to be higher when the conduct of the member State or international organization would not be in breach of an international obligation, for instance because the circumventing international organization is bound by a treaty with a non-member State and the same treaty does not produce effects for the organization's members.
(4) The existence on the part of the international organization of a specific intention of circumventing is not required.
Thus, when an international organization requests its members to take a certain conduct and this would imply the circumvention of one of the organization's international obligations, that organization could not avoid its responsibility by showing the absence of any intention to circumvent its obligation.
(5) In the case of a binding decision paragraph 1 does not stipulate as a pre-condition, for international responsibility of an international organization to arise, that the required act be committed by member States or international organizations.
Since compliance by members with a binding decision is to be expected, the likelihood of a third party being injured would then be high.
It appears therefore preferable to hold the organization already responsible and thus allow the third party that would be injured to seek a remedy even before the act is committed.
Moreover, if the threshold of international responsibility is advanced, the international organization would have to refrain from placing its members in the uncomfortable position of either infringing their obligations under the decision or causing the international responsibility of the international organization, as well as possibly incurring their own responsibility.
(6) A member State or international organization may be given discretion with regard to implementation of a binding decision adopted by an international organization.
In its judgment on the merits in Bosphorus Hava Yollari Turizm ve Ticaret AS v.
Ireland, the European Court of Human Rights considered conduct that member States of the European Community take when implementing binding EC acts and observed:
“[…] (A) State would be fully responsible under the Convention for all acts falling outside its strict international legal obligations […] [N]umerous Convention cases […] confirm this.
Each case (in particular, the Cantoni judgment, at para.
26) concerned a review by this Court of the exercise of State discretion for which EC law provided.”
(7) Paragraph 1 assumes that compliance with the binding decision of the international organization necessarily entails circumvention of one of its international obligations.
As was noted in a statement in the Sixth Committee by the delegation of Denmark on behalf of the five Nordic countries:
“[] it appeared essential to find the point where the member State could be said to have so little `room for manoeuvre' that it would seem unreasonable to make it solely responsible for certain conduct.”
Should on the contrary the decision allow the member State or international organization some discretion to take an alternative course which does not imply circumvention, responsibility would arise for the international organization that has taken the decision only if circumvention actually occurs, as stated in paragraph 2.
(8) Paragraph 2 considers the case in which an international organization circumvents one of its international obligations by recommending to a member State or international organization the commission of a certain act or by authorizing a member State or international organization to commit such an act.
The effects of recommendations and authorizations may differ, especially according to the organization concerned.
The reference to these two types of acts is intended to cover all non-binding acts of an international organization that are susceptible of influencing the conduct of member States or international organizations.
(9) For international responsibility to arise, the first condition in paragraph 2 is that the international organization authorizes an act that would be wrongful for that organization and moreover would allow it to circumvent one of its international obligations.
Since the recommendation or authorization in question is not binding, and may not prompt any conduct which conforms to the recommendation or authorization, a further condition laid out in paragraph 2 is that, as specified under (a), the act which is recommended or authorized is actually committed.
(10) Moreover, as specified under (b), the act in question has to be committed “in reliance on that authorization or recommendation”.
This condition implies a contextual analysis of the role that the recommendation or authorization actually plays in determining the conduct of the member State or international organization.
(11) Reliance on the recommendation or authorization should not be unreasonable.
Responsibility of the recommending or authorizing international organization cannot arise if, for instance, the recommendation is outdated and not intended to apply to the current circumstances, because of the substantial changes that have intervened since the adoption.
(12) While the authorizing or recommending international organization would be responsible if it requested the commission of an act that would represent a circumvention of one of its obligations, that organization would clearly not be responsible for any other breach that the member State or international organization to which the authorization or recommendation is addressed might commit.
To that extent, the following statement contained in a letter addressed on 11 November 1996 by the United Nations Secretary-General to the Prime Minister of Rwanda appears accurate:
“[] insofar as `Opération Turquoise' is concerned, although that operation was `authorized' by the Security Council, the operation itself was under national command and control and was not a United Nations operation.
The United Nations is, therefore, not internationally responsible for acts and omissions that might be attributable to `Opération Turquoise'.”
(13) Paragraph 3 makes it clear that, unlike draft articles 12 to 14, draft article 15 does not base the international responsibility of the international organization that takes a binding decision, or authorizes or recommends, on the unlawfulness of the conduct of the member State or international organization to which the decision, authorization or recommendation is addressed.
As was noted in the commentaries to draft articles 13 and 14, when the conduct is unlawful and other conditions are fulfilled, there is the possibility of an overlap between the cases covered in those provisions and those to which draft article 15 applies.
However, the consequence would only be the existence of alternative bases for holding an international organization responsible.
Article 16
Effect of this Chapter
This Chapter is without prejudice to the international responsibility of the State or international organization which commits the act in question, or of any other State or international organization.
Commentary
Draft article 16 is a “without prejudice” clause relating to the whole Chapter.
It corresponds in part to article 19 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
The latter provision intends to leave unprejudiced “the international responsibility, under other provisions of these articles, of the State which commits the act in question, or of any other State”.
References to international organizations have been added in draft article 16.
Moreover, since the international responsibility of States committing a wrongful act is covered by the articles on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts and not by the present draft, the wording of the clause has been made more general.
chapter VII
diplomatic protection
Introduction
At its forty-eighth session (1996), the Commission identified “Diplomatic protection” as one of three topics appropriate for codification and progressive development.
In the same year, the General Assembly, in its resolution 51/160 of 16 December 1996, invited the Commission further to examine the topic and to indicate its scope and content in the light of the comments and observations made during the debate in the Sixth Committee and any written comments that Governments might wish to make.
At its forty-ninth session (1997), the Commission, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 51/160, established at its 2477th meeting a Working Group on the topic.
The Working Group submitted a report at the same session, which was endorsed by the Commission.
The Working Group attempted to (a) clarify the scope of the topic to the extent possible and (b) identify issues that should be studied in the context of the topic.
The Working Group proposed an outline for consideration of the topic, which the Commission recommended be used as the basis for the submission of a preliminary report by the Special Rapporteur.
At its 2501st meeting, on 11 July 1997, the Commission appointed Mr. Mohamed Bennouna Special Rapporteur for the topic.
The General Assembly, in paragraph 8 of its resolution 52/156, endorsed the decision of the Commission to include in its agenda the topic “Diplomatic protection”.
At its fiftieth session (1998), the Commission had before it the preliminary report of the Special Rapporteur.
At the same session, the Commission established an open-ended Working Group to consider possible conclusions that might be drawn on the basis of the discussion on the approach to the topic.
At its fifty-first session (1999), the Commission appointed Mr. Christopher J.R. Dugard Special Rapporteur for the topic, after Mr. Bennouna was elected a judge of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
At its fifty-second session (2000), the Commission had before it the Special Rapporteur's first report (A/CN.4/506 and Corr.1 and Add.1) containing draft articles 1 to 9.
The Commission deferred its consideration of A/CN.4/506/Add.1 to the next session, due to the lack of time.
At the same session, the Commission established an open-ended informal consultation, chaired by the Special Rapporteur, on draft articles 1, 3 and 6.
The Commission subsequently decided, at its 2635th meeting, to refer draft articles 1, 3 and 5 to 8 to the Drafting Committee together with the report of the informal consultation.
At its fifty-third session (2001), the Commission had before it the remainder of the Special Rapporteur's first report (A/CN.4/506/Add.1) on draft article 9, as well as his second report (A/CN.4/514 and Corr.1).
Due to the lack of time, the Commission was only able to consider those parts of the second report covering draft articles 10 and 11, and deferred consideration of the remainder of document A/CN.4/514, concerning draft articles 12 and 13, to the next session.
The Commission decided at its 2688th meeting, on 12 July 2001, to refer draft article 9 to the Drafting Committee, and decided at its 2690th meeting, on 17 July 2001, to refer draft articles 10 and 11 to the Drafting Committee.
At its 2688th meeting, the Commission established an open-ended informal consultation on article 9, chaired by the Special Rapporteur.
At its fifty-fourth session (2002), the Commission had before it the remainder of the second report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/514 and Corr.1), concerning draft articles 12 and 13, as well as his third report (A/CN.4/523 and Add.1), covering draft articles 14 to 16.
The Commission decided, at its 2719th meeting, on 14 May 2002, to refer draft article 14, paragraphs (a), (b), (d) (to be considered in connection with paragraph (a)), and (e), to the Drafting Committee.
It further decided, at its 2729th meeting, on 4 June 2002, to refer draft article 14, paragraph (c), to the Drafting Committee, to be considered in connection with paragraph (a).
The Commission considered the report of the Drafting Committee on draft articles 1 to 7 , at its 2730th to 2732nd meetings, from 5 to 7 June 2002.
It adopted articles 1 to 3 at its 2730th meeting, articles 4 , 5 and 7 at its 2731st meeting, and article 6 at its 2732nd meeting.
At its 2745th and 2746th meetings, on 12 and 13 August 2002, the Commission adopted the commentaries to the aforementioned draft articles.
At its 2740th meeting, on 2 August 2002, the Commission established an open-ended informal consultation, chaired by the Special Rapporteur, on the question of the diplomatic protection of crews as well as that of corporations and shareholders.
At its fifty-fifth session (2003), the Commission had before it the fourth report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/530 and Add.1).
The Commission considered the first part of the report, concerning draft articles 17 to 20, at its 2757th to 2762nd, 2764th and 2768th meetings, from 14 to 23 May and on 28 May and 5 June 2003, respectively.
It subsequently considered the second part of the report, concerning draft articles 21 and 22, at its 2775th to 2777th meetings, on 15, 16 and 18 July 2003.
At its 2762nd meeting, on 23 May 2003, the Commission decided to establish an open-ended Working Group, chaired by the Special Rapporteur, on article 17, paragraph 2.
The Commission considered the report of the Working Group at its 2764th meeting, on 28 May 2003.
The Commission decided, at its 2764th meeting, to refer article 17, as proposed by the Working Group, and articles 18, 19 and 20 to the Drafting Committee.
It subsequently further decided, at its 2777th meeting, to refer articles 21 and 22 to the Drafting Committee.
The Commission considered the report of the Drafting Committee on draft articles 8 , 9 and 10 at its 2768th meeting, on 5 June 2003.
It provisionally adopted draft articles 8 , 9 and 10 at the same meeting.
At its fifty-sixth session (2004), the Commission had before it the fifth report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/538).
The Commission considered the report at its 2791st to 2796th meetings, from 3 to 11 May 2004.
In response to a request from the Commission, the Special Rapporteur prepared a memorandum on the relevance of the clean hands doctrine to the topic.
Owing to a lack of time, the Commission deferred consideration of the memorandum to the following session.
At its 2794th meeting, on 6 May 2004, the Commission decided to refer draft article 26, together with the alternative formulation for draft article 21 as proposed by the Special Rapporteur, to the Drafting Committee.
The Commission further decided, at its 2796th meeting, on 11 May 2004, that the Drafting Committee should consider elaborating a provision on the connection between the protection of ships' crews and diplomatic protection.
At its fifty-sixth session (2004), the Commission adopted on first reading a set of 19 draft articles together with commentaries on diplomatic protection.
At the same meeting, the Commission decided, in accordance with articles 16 and 21 of its statute, to transmit the draft articles, through the Secretary-General, to Governments for comments and observations, with the request that such comments and observations be submitted to the Secretary-General by 1 January 2006.
Consideration of the topic at the present session
At the present session, the Commission had before it the sixth report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/546).
The Commission considered the report at its 2844th to 2846th meetings, from 25 to 31 May 2005.
Clean hands doctrine
(a) Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur noted that while the importance of the clean hands doctrine in international law could not be denied, the question before the Commission was whether it was sufficiently closely linked to the topic of diplomatic protection to warrant its inclusion in the draft articles on the topic.
His conclusion was that it did not obviously belong to the field of diplomatic protection and that it should therefore not be included in the draft articles.
He observed that it had been argued in previous sessions of the Commission that the clean hands doctrine should be included in the draft articles because it was invoked in the context of diplomatic protection in order to preclude a State from exercising diplomatic protection if the national it was seeking to protect had suffered injury as a result of his or her own wrongful conduct.
Three arguments had been made in support of that position.
First, it was contended that the doctrine did not belong to the realm of inter-State disputes, i.e., those involving direct injury by one State to another rather than injury to a national.
In response, the Special Rapporteur provided a brief survey of the jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice to illustrate the fact that, while the Court had never asserted that the doctrine belonged to the realm of a State claim either for direct or for indirect injury, the clean hands doctrine had most frequently been raised in the context of inter-State claims for direct injury to a State.
In no case had the Court relied on or upheld the doctrine.
It had, instead, always found the doctrine inapplicable.
Likewise, in no case had it stated or suggested that the argument was inapplicable in inter-State claims and that it applied only to cases of diplomatic protection.
Second, it was suggested that if the individual seeking diplomatic protection had himself violated the domestic law of the respondent State or international law, then the State of nationality could not protect him.
In response, the Special Rapporteur observed that once a State took up a claim of its national in relation to a violation of international law, the claim became that of the State, in accordance with the Vattelian fiction recognized in the Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions case, and the misconduct of the national ceased to be relevant; only the misconduct of the plaintiff State itself might become relevant.
He cited the examples of the La Grand and Avena cases, where the foreign nationals had committed atrocious crimes but their misconduct had not been raised by the respondent State to defend itself against the charges of failure to grant them consular access.
In addition, the State of nationality would seldom protect one of its nationals who had behaved improperly or illegally in a foreign State, because in most circumstances no internationally wrongful act would have been committed.
Third, it was contended that the clean hands doctrine had been applied in cases involving diplomatic protection.
In response, the Special Rapporteur noted that relatively few cases could be cited in favour of the applicability of the clean hands doctrine in the context of diplomatic protection, and that, upon analysis, those that were cited did not support the case for its inclusion.
He noted further that while some writers nevertheless maintained that the clean hands doctrine belonged in the context of diplomatic protection, they offered no authority to support their views; and many other writers were highly sceptical about the doctrine.
In addition, during the debate in the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, most delegations had made no comment on the clean hands doctrine, and those that had commented had agreed that the clean hands doctrine should not be included in the draft articles on diplomatic protection.
(b) Summary of the debate
General support was expressed for the Special Rapporteur's conclusion that the clean hands doctrine should not be included in the draft articles.
The doctrine had been raised primarily in the context of claims for direct State injury, which was beyond the scope of diplomatic protection, and the few cases falling within the scope of diplomatic protection did not constitute sufficient practice to warrant codification.
Nor could its inclusion be justified as an exercise in the progressive development of international law.
Furthermore, support was expressed for the Special Rapporteur's suggestion in his report that it was more appropriate for the doctrine to be invoked at the stage of the examination of the merits since it related to the attenuation or exoneration of responsibility rather than admissibility; and it was suggested that such a possibility could be expressly recognized in the draft articles.
Another suggestion was to insert a proviso stating that the draft articles were without prejudice to the application of general international law to questions of admissibility.
Others were of the view that the Special Rapporteur had gone too far in suggesting that the clean hands doctrine could lead to exoneration of responsibility at the stage of the merits, and preferred that it be limited to attenuation.
It was pointed out that the application of the doctrine, or that of good faith, could yield different results in different situations, and would not necessarily deny the complaining party the right to seek in every single instance a suitable remedy, even if its own wrongful conduct had elicited the wrongful response.
Reference was also made to article 39 on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
Notwithstanding their support for the Special Rapporteur's conclusions, some members took issue with the Special Rapporteur's reasoning.
For example, the Commission was cautioned against stretching the Mavrommatis principle that an injury to a national is an injury to the State itself too far: it would not be incongruous to consider that the “clean hands” of the individual could constitute a precondition for diplomatic protection, exactly as the exhaustion of local remedies was up to the private individual and not the State.
In addition, some members maintained that in referring to the consular notification cases (La Grand and Avena), by way of illustrating the point that the “unclean” hands of the individuals concerned played no role in diplomatic protection, the Special Rapporteur was employing too vague a conception of the clean hands doctrine because he failed to examine the relationship between the unlawful act of the individual and the internationally wrongful act of the State.
The question was whether the individual who benefited from diplomatic protection was himself or herself responsible for the breach of the rule of international law that the host State was accused of violating.
In another view, the lack of practice did not necessarily preclude the adoption of some version of the doctrine by way of progressive development of the law.
The key difficulty involved the proper identification of the doctrine, as there existed at least the two following different legal positions described by the same phrase: (a) where the illegality alleged would, in principle, form part of the merits and (b) where it is invoked ex parte by a respondent State simply by way of prejudice as a principle of international public policy constituting a bar to the admissibility of the claim.
Each case called for contextual analysis and careful characterization.
(c) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur observed that the clean hands doctrine was an important principle of international law that had to be taken into account whenever there was evidence that an applicant State had not acted in good faith and that it had come to court with unclean hands.
It was to be distinguished from the tu quoque argument, which allowed a respondent State to assert that the applicant State had also violated a rule of international law, and was instead to be confined to cases in which the applicant State had acted improperly in bringing a case to court.
He further acknowledged the various criticisms that had been raised as to his treatment of the doctrine in his report, and observed that some members had rightly noted that the report omitted a consideration of the doctrine in the case concerning Certain Phosphate Lands in Nauru (Nauru v.
Australia) case.
Other issues
(a) Summary of the debate
As regards the draft articles adopted on first reading in 2004, the view was expressed that the draft articles had been prematurely transmitted to the General Assembly, since the draft dealt only with the conditions for the exercise of diplomatic protection.
No guidance was given on questions such as who could exercise such protection; how it should be exercised; what the consequences of its exercise were; how to evaluate harm in cases involving the exercise of diplomatic protection; and the justification of the rule, under article 2 of the draft articles, that only a State had the right to exercise diplomatic protection, while an individual had no actual right to be compensated, even if the State responsible discharged its obligations in terms of compensation; as well as the general question of the degree of control that an individual should have in respect of an international claim, i.e., the extent to which an individual or legal person could require a Government to make a claim in the first place.
In addition, reservations were again expressed as to the resort to the Mavrommatis principle in the draft articles.
In particular, while there was agreement with the position that diplomatic protection was a right of the State, it was maintained that the State's right to ensure respect for international law in the person of its national was an outdated concept.
While it may have been relevant in 1924 - at the time of the Mavrommatis decision - it seemed unacceptable, 80 years later, to adhere to a fiction that had been created in response to a specific historical context while ignoring subsequent developments in the law, particularly as regards the status of individuals, and their protection, under international law.
Under that view, the Commission had missed an opportunity to clarify that when a State exercised its right to exercise diplomatic protection, it did so on behalf of its national and not in order to ensure respect for its own right in the person of that individual.
(b) Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
Regarding the suggestion that the draft articles include a consideration of the consequences of diplomatic protection, the Special Rapporteur recalled that the draft articles adopted on first reading focused on what was the accepted scope of diplomatic protection, both in the Sixth Committee and among most academic writers, i.e., the nationality of claims and the exhaustion of local remedies.
He observed further that article 44 of the articles on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts had also contemplated only those two issues, and that the commentary to that provision had made it clear that those matters would be taken up in the supplementary study on diplomatic protection.
In addition, the Special Rapporteur was of the view that it was not necessary to deal with the consequences of diplomatic protection since they were already covered by the articles on Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, with one exception, namely, whether a State was under an obligation to pay over to an injured individual money that it had received by way of compensation for a claim based on diplomatic protection.
While he agreed that that was an important issue, the options open to the Commission were either simply to codify well-established rules (even if that meant adopting what many members regarded as a retrogressive rule: that the State was not obliged to transfer money to the injured person) or to engage in progressive development and enunciate a new rule whereby the State was obliged to pay over to the injured individual money that it had received by way of compensation.
In the light of the Commission's decision not to adopt a provision compelling States to exercise diplomatic protection on behalf of an individual, he had not detected a general willingness on the part of the Commission to engage in progressive development in respect of the payment of monetary compensation received by the State.
His preference, therefore, was neither to expressly codify what many regarded as an unfortunate principle nor to attempt to progressively develop a new principle that would be unacceptable to States, but rather to leave the matter open in the draft articles so as to allow for further development in the law.
As regards the Mavrommatis principle, the Special Rapporteur recalled that it was generally acknowledged to be a fiction, with serious implications for the individual.
For example, because the claim for diplomatic protection was seen to be that of the State and not of the individual, it was generally accepted that the State enjoyed discretion as to whether to bring the claim or not.
He recalled that in his first report he had proposed making it obligatory for States to exercise diplomatic protection where a norm of jus cogens had been violated in respect of the individual, but the proposal had been rejected on the ground that that would have meant engaging in progressive development.
He acknowledged that the Mavrommatis principle was inconsistent and flawed in that, for example, it was not easy to reconcile with the principle of continuous nationality or with the exhaustion of local remedies rule.
Yet, notwithstanding its flaws, the Mavrommatis principle was the basis of customary international law on the subject of diplomatic protection and for this reason it has been retained.
expulsion of aliens
Introduction
The Commission at its fiftieth session (1998) took note of the report of the Planning Group identifying, inter alia, the topic of “Expulsion of aliens” for possible inclusion in the Commission's long-term programme of work, and which was subsequently done at the fifty-second session (2000).
A brief syllabus describing the possible overall structure of and approach to the topic was annexed to that year's report of the Commission.
In paragraph 8 of resolution 55/152 of 12 December 2000, the General Assembly took note of the topic's inclusion in the long-term programme of work.
During its fifty-sixth session, the Commission decided, at its 2830th meeting held on 6 August 2004, to include the topic “Expulsion of aliens” in its current programme of work, and to appoint Mr. Maurice Kamto as Special Rapporteur for the topic.
The General Assembly, in paragraph 5 of its resolution 59/41 of 2 December 2004, endorsed the decision of the Commission to include the topic in its agenda.
Consideration of the topic at the present session
At the present session, the Commission had before it the preliminary report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/554).
The Commission considered the Special Rapporteur's report at its 2849th to 2852nd meetings, from 11 to 15 July 2005.
Introduction by the Special Rapporteur
The Special Rapporteur observed that the expulsion of aliens was an old question closely linked to the organization of human societies in the form of States.
It remained of current interest because of the paradox between the existence of a globalized world, in terms of technology and economy, and barriers of political sovereignty operating like a filter between aliens which had the right to stay on the territory of a foreign country and those which did not.
The subject raised important questions of international law and, because of the diversity of practices which it had generated on every continent, lent itself to codification.
Expulsion of aliens affected all regions of the world, and, accordingly, there existed a significant body of national legislation which made it possible to ascertain general principles.
Some such principles had already been incorporated into existing international human rights conventions.
It seemed to the Special Rapporteur that a preliminary report was necessary to set out his understanding of the subject to the Commission.
Its purpose was simply to provide an overall view of the subject, while highlighting the legal problems which it raised and the methodological difficulties related to its consideration.
The Special Rapporteur proposed a work plan (in annex I of his report) outlining the general plan of his future reports.
The report provided a basic sketch of the concept of the expulsion of aliens followed by a basic exposition of the concept of the “right to expel” in international law.
In the Special Rapporteur's view, such customary international law right, inherent in the sovereignty of States, was not in question.
The reasons for expulsion, however, could vary and not all were permissible under international law: such expulsion of an alien brought into play rights, particularly fundamental human rights, to which international law attached legal consequences to their violation.
In preparing the report, the Special Rapporteur had been confronted with questions of terminology, i.e. whether to speak of “expulsion” of aliens, which when looking at national legislation was a term covering a more limited phenomenon than removing aliens.
Nevertheless, his tentative preference was to keep the term “expulsion”, even if it had to be defined broadly.
Similarly, it remained to be considered whether the reference to “aliens” was sufficiently accurate.
In his opinion, it did cover all the categories of persons under consideration.
The Special Rapporteur sought guidance on a number of questions of methodology, in particular, as to what treatment was to be given to existing conventional rules, found in a number of human rights treaties.
His inclination was to elaborate a complete regime, bearing in mind that, although treaty law would offer elements which might be included in the draft articles, a number of those rules arose initially from national legislation and also international jurisprudence developed in the context of global and regional human rights judicial instances.
The Special Rapporteur further requested that the Secretariat prepare a compilation of applicable national and international instruments, texts and jurisprudence on the topic.
Summary of the debate
(a) General comments
The Special Rapporteur was commended for his preliminary report.
Several members commented on the importance of the subject, none the least because it affected the lives of large numbers of people around the world.
It was observed that, as a constant and normal social phenomenon, the movement of people and national restrictions on such movement had important political, economic and social repercussions for international relations.
The task for the Commission was to carefully consider all the rules on the topic existing in customary international law, in treaties and international agreements, State practice and internal laws; to develop them further where possible or where appropriate, and to codify them for clearer and better application.
Support was further expressed for the Special Rapporteur's formulation of the key issue underlying the topic, i.e. how to reconcile the right to expel with the requirements of international law, particularly those relating to the protection of fundamental human rights.
In terms of a further view, there existed a general problem with the Commission's approach to commencing new topics - not limited to the topic under consideration - which was reminiscent of the collective preparation of a textbook, i.e. first defining the scope of the topic as well as the basic expressions and key concepts, followed by a process of identifying existing customary or treaty rules on the matter.
While such questions had to be considered, it was necessary to first consider the interests involved in the expulsion of aliens and to identify the values that were affected by the typical cases of the expulsion of aliens, in short describing the factual problems arising from the expulsion of aliens.
Without such a preliminary consideration, it was difficult to foresee the intended direction of a legislative intervention in the field, resulting in drafts containing excessive generalities.
(b) The concept of the expulsion of aliens (scope and definitions)
For many members one of the central questions of the topic concerned the scope of the future study.
The issue was considered problematic because of the connections between expulsion and admission of aliens, especially with regard to the return of irregular immigrants.
It was maintained that an attempt by the Commission to address questions relating to immigration or emigration policies would negatively affect the prospects of the Commission's work.
In terms of a further view, the central area of study was less the issue of expulsion or refusal of entry, and more that of the control that a State exercises over its territory.
Expulsion was merely a modality for the exercise of such control.
While support existed for taking a broad approach to the topic, specific suggestions were made as to its limits.
Hence, a preference was expressed for limiting the scope of the study to those measures which concerned resident aliens, with the possible inclusion of aliens who had stayed irregularly over a certain span of time.
It was also suggested that the topic cover the removal of foreign nationals who had entered illegally or whose presence had become illegal as well as the removal of foreigners who were lawful in the country.
Others preferred drawing a distinction between the expulsion of aliens who are legally present in a country and those who were not - a distinction recognized both in State practice and in relevant international agreements.
It was common for States to expel aliens solely on the basis of their illegal entry or presence.
It was thus proposed that the topic either not cover the removal of persons who are not lawfully present, or, if it were decided to include such persons, to stipulate clearly that States have the right of expulsion without the need for other justification.
It was also observed that account had to be taken of the fact that different categories of aliens existed, and that some such categories enjoyed special status under the law of the foreign State in which they were residing.
Reference was also made to the situation of illegal aliens whose presence in the territory of the host State was tolerated.
As regards questions to be excluded from the scope of the topic, it was suggested that the issues of refoulement, non-admission of asylum-seekers or refusal of admission for regular aliens should not be considered.
Likewise, agreement was expressed with the Special Rapporteur's preference to exclude internally displaced persons (IDPs) and people in transit.
It was also suggested that the topic not cover measures of expulsion taken by a State vis-à-vis its own nationals of an ethnic, racial or religious origin which is different to that of the majority of the population.
It was queried whether the Special Rapporteur intended to include large-scale population expulsions, particularly in situations of armed conflict.
While references in the report seemed to suggest that such mass expulsions were to be covered, doubts were expressed as to the appropriateness of doing so.
It was pointed out that the question of expulsion from occupied territories and during periods of armed conflict was covered by international humanitarian law and it was suggested that a “without prejudice” clause could eventually be included so as to cover the obligations of States under international humanitarian law relating to civilians.
Others were of the view that, in light of their importance, consideration should be given to questions of forced exit of people in times of armed conflict.
It was also suggested that international displacement of people at the outset of the creation of new States or dismemberment of a State or during periods of grave natural calamities should likewise not be considered.
General support was expressed for the Special Rapporteur's preference for retaining “expulsion” to be applied in a broad sense.
It was noted that the term was commonly used to describe the removal of an alien from the territory of a State, either voluntarily under threat of forced removal or forcibly.
In terms of another view, even as a purely descriptive term, “expulsion” was of limited accuracy because it covered what was, in fact, a large variety of situations.
As regards the tentative definition of “expulsion” in paragraph 13 of the report, the view was expressed that it was too narrow since it did not include stateless persons and because it implied that expulsion consisted in a formal measure aimed at turning an individual out of a territory.
Reference was made to existing case-law recognizing the fact that an “expulsion” may be considered to have taken place even in exceptional cases where the alien leaves a country without being directly and immediately forced or officially ordered to do so.
It was also noted that many of the legitimate actions resulting in the transfer of a foreign national out of the jurisdiction of the receiving State were taken under laws relating to immigration or laws for the temporary entry of business or tourist purposes.
It was further suggested that the term “expulsion” should be viewed broadly so as to cover the situation of aliens being prevented from entering within the jurisdictional control of the State concerned, for example, on the high seas or on board a plane of the expelling State in a third State without necessarily physically crossing the territory.
In terms of another view, the definition of “expulsion” in paragraph 13 was too broad in that it could be read to include the transfer of an alien to the authorities of another Government for law enforcement purposes, such as extradition for the purpose of prosecution, as well as the expulsion of diplomatic personnel.
The preference was expressed for excluding such actions from the scope of the topic since transfers for law enforcement purposes involved an entirely different set of issues, legal norms and policy considerations.
Similarly diplomatic personnel were already adequately covered by their own laws and institutions.
Concerning the term “alien”, it was pointed out that there existed a number of distinct categories of persons residing in territories other than that of their nationality and subject to different legal regimes.
These included political refugees (whose status in Latin America was governed by the 1954 Caracas Convention), asylum-seekers and refugees (regulated by the Convention relating to the Status of refugees of 1951 and its 1967 protocol), migrant workers (whose rights were protected by the 1990 International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families), and stateless persons (covered by the 1954 and 1961 Conventions).
(c) The right to expel
With regard to the question of the sovereign “right” of the State to expel aliens, it was observed that such right was generally recognized under international law, albeit subject to certain limits, mostly in the context of human rights law (as discussed in the next section).
The view was expressed that such right gave rise to many questions, including whether it is an inalienable right of the State, and whether it could be resorted to only in certain situations (such as for purposes of national security, or for the maintenance of public order).
The key was how to reconcile such right with the limits that international law imposed on it.
At the same time, it was noted that any such limitations of the right of the State should be clearly defined in line with existing limits arising from treaties and custom universally recognized in times of war and peace.
Others expressed doubts as to the approach in the report of giving such a priori status to States' right to expel, while relativizing human rights standards.
It was conceded that there existed situations where the State might be justified in expelling aliens, but there still was no reason for describing such right in as forceful a way as was done in the report.
A preference was further expressed for not using qualifiers, such as “absolute” or “discretionary”, when referring to the State's “right” to expel.
(d) Grounds for expulsion
It was observed that the right of a State to expel was necessary as a means of protecting the rights of the society which existed within the territory of the State.
However, while a State had a wide discretion in exercising its rights to expel aliens, this discretion was not absolute and had to be balanced against existing fundamental human rights protections, including, for example, article 13 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which provided, inter alia, that “[a]n alien lawfully in the territory of a State Party to the present Covenant may be expelled therefrom only in pursuance of a decision reached in accordance with law …”.
Similarly, customary international law demanded that the State must not abuse its rights by acting arbitrarily in taking its decision to expel an alien, nor act unreasonably in carrying out the expulsion.
The State of nationality of an alien expelled could assert the right to inquire into the reasons for his expulsion.
The reasons for the expulsion would have to be stated before an international tribunal when the occasion demanded it.
Expulsion was not to be carried out with hardship or violence or unnecessary harm to the alien involved.
Compulsion and detention of an alien under an expulsion order had to be avoided, except in cases where the alien refused to leave or tried to escape from control of the State authorities.
The alien had also to be given a reasonable time to settle his or her personal affairs before leaving the country, and to be allowed to choose the country he or she wished to apply for admission to.
At the same time, it was conceded that the position under customary international law remained uncertain, since many municipal systems provided that the authorities of a country could deport aliens without having to provide reasons.
Doubts were also expressed as to the requirement, mentioned in the Special Rapporteur's report, that “the State resorting to expulsion is bound to invoke the grounds used to justify it”.
It was not clear that, in the absence of a dispute or another State or institution raising issues, the territorial sovereign had an original duty to invoke grounds of justification.
It was further suggested that the study should consider a set of issues, other than the absence of admissible motives, which equally related to the question whether a given expulsion was consistent with international law.
These included: (1) taking into account provisions in international human rights conventions requiring a decision on expulsion to be taken “in accordance with law”, which covered not only procedure but also the conditions for expulsion; (2) the application of the principle of non-discrimination so as to invalidate, as a matter of international law, decisions on expulsion taken on a discriminatory basis; (3) balancing a State's interest in expelling with the individual's right to private and family life; and (4) considering the question of the risk that an individual's rights might be infringed in the State of destination.
In terms of another suggestion, consideration could also be given to the situation where the alien had been awarded the right of residence, or was otherwise domiciled, as another limitation on expulsion.
(e) Rights related to expulsion
It was noted that contemporary international law recognized the rights of individuals to just and fair procedures for expulsion and placed requirements and obligations on the State to ensure such procedures.
It was suggested that the act of expulsion must be formal in order for the person concerned to be afforded an opportunity to appeal.
It was also suggested that particular consideration be given to procedural guarantees with regard to individual expulsions, including remedies, especially those remedies capable of preventing expulsion since it would be difficult for an alien who had been expelled to a distant country to effectively resort to an available remedy and have such expulsion measure effectively repealed.
Other suggestions included: specifying that such fundamental guarantees applied to the entire process of expulsion, and not only to the procedure for the examination of individual cases; specifying the obligation of the expelling State to notify the alien concerned of the decision to expel and granting the alien the right to appeal such decision; requiring that the implementation of the decision to expel not be inhumane, degrading or humiliating for the person being expelled; requiring the establishment of procedures applicable to all decisions of expulsion relating, inter alia, to: due process of law, non-discriminative access to justice; access to legal aid for those who need it; protection of personal property; protection of investments; and respect for applicable international obligations.
It was also noted that the lawfulness of the expulsion was to be measured against the degree to which it complied with the procedures laid down under the domestic law of the expelling State; although it was not clear whether a sufficient number of States did regulate through their national legislation the procedures used for expelling aliens.
Opposition was expressed as to the existence of the “right” of collective expulsion.
It was maintained that, in the twenty-first century, collective expulsions should be treated as prima facie prohibited.
At best, a clear presumption in favour of their prohibition had to be established.
It was added that while an expulsion may involve a group of people sharing similar characteristics, the decision to expel should nonetheless be taken at the level of the individual and not the group.
In terms of another view, the term “collective” required further precision as it was not clear how many individuals would constitute a “collective” expulsion.
Others maintained that such issues should be considered separately from that of the treatment of migrant workers, in which case the relevant international treaties would prevail.
Similarly, it was suggested that the Special Rapporteur consider existing bilateral repatriation agreements as possible models for establishing regulations in this area.
Some members agreed with the Special Rapporteur's suggestion that some consideration be given to the question of the consequences, under international law, of an expulsion of aliens, in terms of the State responsibility and diplomatic protection.
Other members expressed reservations since such matters were taken into account by other topics both previously and currently before the Commission.
It was suggested that, in the initial phases of the consideration of the topic, the focus instead be placed on the basic questions of the rights and duties of States with respect to expulsion, leaving for a later stage the question of whether to attempt to elaborate on the consequences for breaches of those duties.
(f) Methodological issues
Many members expressed support for the Special Rapporteur's proposal that the focus be on drafting articles covering all aspects of expulsion, and not merely providing a set of residual principles.
It was maintained that a simple body of general principles would not be fully operational, nor would it be particularly useful or effective.
It was suggested that a future set of draft articles could include a provision allowing for the application of treaties - whether universal or regional - giving further protection to the individuals concerned.
Others expressed concern as to what an exhaustive regime would involve.
It was suggested that the topic should not cover other settled rules, and that the task should be limited to bridging the gaps where these could be clearly identified.
The Special Rapporteur was further encouraged to undertake a detailed consideration of existing customary international law and treaty law, including a comparative study of international case law both at the global and regional levels as well as of national laws and practice.
Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
The Special Rapporteur noted no basic disagreement in the Commission with regard to the approach being taken to the subject, with the exception of the suggestion that the study commence with a consideration of the issues and interests at stake.
In response, the Special Rapporteur noted that some of those issues had been raised in the introductory part of his report, and that it was the well-established practice of the Commission to study a topic with a view to identifying rules of customary international law or those rules pertaining to the progressive development of international law.
As for the points of agreement in the Commission, the Special Rapporteur noted that support existed for: retaining the current title of the topic, while defining its two component terms; the proposition that the central problem of the subject concerned reconciling the right to expel with the requirements of international law, in particular with the rules of international human rights law; carefully delimiting the scope of the topic; and not considering questions of refusal of admission and immigration, movements of population or situations of decolonization or self-determination, nor the position of the occupied territories in the Middle East.
Many members also expressed support for the methodology proposed in the report, namely that a comprehensive legal regime be drawn up recognizing, where necessary, the provisions of existing international conventions.
He also acknowledged those who suggested that the topic be undertaken on the basis of a comparative analysis and criticisms of national legislation in the area, and drawing on the jurisprudence of global, regional and human rights instances.
The general outline proposed by the Special Rapporteur had, likewise, been approved by most members of the Commission, with the reservation that some answers to particular questions needed to be provided.
The Special Rapporteur further provided a detailed overview of the discussion.
He agreed with those members who suggested that “expulsion” be defined so as not necessarily to require the taking of a formal act in all cases.
In addition, the qualifications suggested by the Commission on the concept of “alien” would be covered in the provision on scope, which would include a clear indication of the different categories of persons to be covered.
To his mind, that would include persons residing in the territory of a State of which they do not have nationality, with the distinction being made between persons in a regular situation and those in an irregular situation (including those who have been residing for a long time in the State seeking to expel them).
The topic would also cover refugees, asylum-seekers, stateless persons and migrant workers in the definition.
He also accepted the suggestion that the question of the expulsion of stateless persons to a State where they maintain residence be considered separately.
On the other hand, as had been pointed out in the debate, it would be difficult to include in the topic denial of admission.
Another category not covered by the scope would be persons whose nationality status changed because of a change in the status of territory where they were resident, in the context of decolonization.
He noted further that, while his preference was not to enter into questions of the nationality of persons expelled during an armed conflict, he did not intend to totally discard the rules of armed conflict from the topic because international humanitarian law included precise rules on expulsion of aliens.
Introduction
In the report on the work of its forty-eighth session (1996), the Commission proposed to the General Assembly that the law of unilateral acts of States should be included as a topic appropriate for the codification and progressive development of international law.
The General Assembly, in paragraph 13 of resolution 51/160, inter alia, invited the Commission to further examine the topic “Unilateral Acts of States” and to indicate its scope and content.
At its forty-ninth session (1997), the Commission established a Working Group on the topic which reported to the Commission on the admissibility and feasibility of a study on the topic, its possible scope and content and an outline for a study on the topic.
At the same session, the Commission considered and endorsed the report of the Working Group.
Also at its forty-ninth session, the Commission appointed Mr. Victor Rodríguez Cedeño, Special Rapporteur on the topic.
The General Assembly, in paragraph 8 of its resolution 52/156, endorsed the Commission's decision to include the topic in its work programme.
At its fiftieth session (1998), the Commission had before it and considered the Special Rapporteur's first report on the topic.
As a result of its discussion, the Commission decided to reconvene the Working Group on Unilateral Acts of States.
The Working Group reported to the Commission on issues related to the scope of the topic, its approach, the definition of unilateral act and the future work of the Special Rapporteur.
At the same session, the Commission considered and endorsed the report of the Working Group.
At its fifty-first session (1999), the Commission had before it and considered the Special Rapporteur's second report on the topic.
As a result of its discussion, the Commission decided to reconvene the Working Group on Unilateral Acts of States.
The Working Group reported to the Commission on issues related to: (a) the basic elements of a workable definition of unilateral acts as a starting point for further work on the topic, as well as for gathering relevant State practice; (b) the setting of general guidelines according to which the practice of States should be gathered; and (c) the direction that the work of the Special Rapporteur should take in the future.
In connection with point (b) above, the Working Group set the guidelines for a questionnaire to be sent to States by the Secretariat in consultation with the Special Rapporteur, requesting materials and enquiring about their practice in the area of unilateral acts as well as their position on certain aspects of the Commission's study of the topic.
At its fifty-second session (2000), the Commission considered the third report of the Special Rapporteur on the topic, along with the text of the replies received from States to the questionnaire on the topic, which was circulated on 30 September 1999.
The Commission at its 2633rd meeting, on 7 June 2000, decided to refer revised draft articles 1 to 4 to the Drafting Committee and revised draft article 5 to the Working Group on the topic.
At its fifty-third session (2001), the Commission considered the fourth report of the Special Rapporteur and established an open-ended Working Group.
At the recommendation of the Working Group, the Commission requested that a questionnaire be circulated to Governments inviting them to provide further information regarding their practice of formulating and interpreting unilateral acts.
At its fifty-fourth session (2002), the Commission considered the fifth report of the Special Rapporteur, as well as the replies received from States to the questionnaire on the topic, which was circulated on 31 August 2001.
The Commission also established an open-ended Working Group.
At its fifty-fifth session (2003), the Commission considered the sixth report of the Special Rapporteur.
At its 2771st meeting, the Commission established an open-ended Working Group on Unilateral Acts of States, chaired by Mr. Alain Pellet.
The Working Group held six meetings.
At its 2783rd meeting, held on 31 July 2003, the Commission considered and adopted the recommendations contained in Parts 1 and 2 of the Report of the Working Group on the scope of the topic and the method of work.
At its fifty-sixth session (2004), the Commission considered the seventh report of the Special Rapporteur.
At its 2818th meeting, on 16 July 2004, the Commission established an open-ended Working Group on Unilateral Acts of States, chaired by Mr. Alain Pellet.
The Working Group held four meetings.
At its 2829th meeting, on 5 August 2004, the Commission took note of the oral report of the Working Group.
The Working Group agreed to retain a sample of unilateral acts sufficiently documented to allow for an in-depth analysis.
It also established a grid which would permit to use uniform analytical tools.
Individual members of the Working Group took up a number of studies, which would be effected in accordance with the established grid.
It was agreed that these studies should be transmitted to the Special Rapporteur before 30 November 2004.
It was decided that the synthesis, on the basis exclusively of these studies, would be entrusted to the Special Rapporteur who would take them into consideration in order to draw the relevant conclusions in his eighth report.
Consideration of the topic at the present session
At the present session, the Commission had before it the Special Rapporteur's eighth report (A/CN.4/557) which it considered at its 2852nd, 2853rd, 2854th and 2855th meetings on 15, 19, 20 and 21 July 2005.
Introduction by the Special Rapporteur of his eighth report
Introducing his eighth report on unilateral acts of States, the Special Rapporteur reminded the Commission that the working group chaired by Mr. Pellet had selected and discussed several examples of State practice in accordance with the list of criteria it had established.
The Special Rapporteur also alluded to the discussions in the Sixth Committee, where the need to establish a definition of unilateral acts and some general rules that could apply to them had been mentioned.
Any such definition should be flexible enough to allow States some room for manoeuvre.
The first part of the report offered a fairly detailed presentation of 11 examples or types of unilateral acts of various kinds.
The examples were a fairly broad and representative sample of unilateral acts ranging from a diplomatic note on recognition of one State's sovereignty over an archipelago to statements by the authorities of a United Nations host country about tax exemptions and other privileges and immunities.
The examples selected also contained statements of general application, renouncing sovereignty over a Territory, or protesting about the legal regimes applicable to the territorial seas of Caspian Sea States.
The second part of the report presented the conclusions drawn from the cases discussed.
It was noted that the acts varied widely in form, content, authors and addressees.
The addressees could be specific States, international organizations, groups of States or the international community as a whole.
The Special Rapporteur hoped that the discussion of the acts analysed in his report would be constructive, and that they might lead to a definition of unilateral acts of States such as had been called for in the Sixth Committee.
Summary of the debate
Several members voiced satisfaction over the examples analysed in the eighth report and said that the topic was one of constant interest to them.
Some, however, said that the conclusions should have been set out in greater detail.
Some members thought it was evident from the study of the examples cited in the eighth report that the existence of unilateral acts producing legal effects and creating specific commitments was now beyond dispute, a point that could be corroborated by international jurisprudence.
On the other hand, for some members, the diversity of effects and the importance of the setting in which acts occurred made it very difficult to arrive at a “theory” or “regime” of unilateral acts.
Some other members, however, thought that it was possible to establish such a regime.
It was pointed out that while some factors, such as the timing or, perhaps, the form of acts, did not appear to play a decisive role, others, such as the essence of an act, who performed it and on what authority, seemed to be crucial features.
That being so, the part played by the addressees, their reactions and the reactions of third parties should not be overlooked.
It was therefore pointed out that the practice studied so far, supplemented perhaps by further study of other acts (for example those on which there was International Court of Justice case law, such as the Frontier dispute between Burkina Faso and the Republic of Mali), might provide the basis for a formal definition that nevertheless retained some flexibility.
It might thus be possible to consider enlarging the circle of persons who could enter into commitments binding on the State beyond that defined by article 7 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties by studying cases of declarations of other members of the executive, as well as legislative acts and judicial decisions.
A position should also be reached on certain questions of terminology (the difference between unilateral acts in the strict sense and conduct) and questions relating to the form of unilateral acts (e.g. written or oral statements).
The consequences of unilateral acts and the question of responsibility in the event that the resulting obligations were breached could be studied later on.
The value of the topic, it was said, was that it showed States the extent to which they could be bound by their own voluntary commitments.
It was therefore necessary to identify the conditions under which constraints arose in order to avoid “surprises”.
After establishing a definition (which could extend to several draft articles, all as precise as possible), therefore, the Commission should study the capacity and authority of the author of a unilateral act.
It would be premature to study State conduct which might have consequences equivalent to those of unilateral acts.
As regards the validity of unilateral acts, one of the hardest aspects of the topic and one bound up with the capacity and authority of the author, it would be helpful to make a comparison with the relevant provisions of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties in order to determine the hierarchy and distribution of authority between international and domestic law as regards the formulation and performance of international commitments.
A summary of the Commission's work on the subject, in the form of a declaration accompanied by general or preliminary conclusions and covering all the points which had been accepted by consensus, was suggested.
The starting point for such conclusions could be that international law attributed certain legal effects to acts freely undertaken by States without other States necessarily being involved.
The conclusions could also address the form (written or unwritten) of unilateral acts, their effects, their considerable variety, their relationship to the principle of good faith, when they were performed and when they produced effects, and the conduct by which States evidenced an intent entailing legal consequences.
It was pointed out that other factors also needed to be taken into account in arriving at such preliminary conclusions, such as addressees' reactions and the domestic procedures for performance of the unilateral act.
It was also important not to overlook the need to ensure that States were still free to make political statements at any time without feeling constrained by the possibility of having to accept legal commitments.
Another view expressed was that so-called unilateral acts were so diverse, and so various and complex in nature, that they could not be codified in the form of draft articles.
It would not be possible to compile an exhaustive list, and the value of such an undertaking was therefore questionable.
It might even be wondered whether the underlying notion of a legal act was sufficiently universal and well recognized.
An “expository” study of the topic would thus be the best way to proceed, since the setting in which acts were performed was crucial to their identification.
Not even the existence of international jurisprudence responding to particular needs or arguments in each case was sufficient justification for taking a fundamentally theoretical approach to unilateral acts.
Producing draft articles could lead to misunderstandings and further confuse an already complicated and difficult topic.
It was also pointed out that unilateral acts could only be identified as such ex post facto.
They were in essence a triggering mechanism which could result in rights (but not obligations) being attributed to third States.
That was what distinguished them from treaties, which operated in a strictly reciprocal framework.
In fact, they appeared at a necessary but insufficient threshold for the establishment of an appropriate analytical model.
Where that threshold, by nature vague and variable, actually lay would be extremely difficult to determine.
On the other hand, it was observed that the task at hand was precisely to determine exactly where the threshold lay, uncertain and difficult though it appeared to be to grasp beyond what point States would be bound.
Even if that point were to be identified ex post facto, it would at least not be identified arbitrarily.
But the important thing was to establish, by means of codification, a mechanism for identifying such acts even before the fact.
It was, moreover, untrue to say that States could not impose obligations on other States by means of unilateral acts.
Acts having to do with the delimitation of maritime areas proved the contrary.
The opinion was also expressed that, in essence, the Commission needed to define the lawfulness or validity of unilateral acts.
It was also pointed out that States' intentions were still crucial.
While the intent to enter into commitments or create legal obligations depended on the circumstances and the setting, it could often be identified only by the form it took.
On the other hand, the fact that form per se did not appear to be decisive in the identification of a unilateral act differentiated unilateral acts from international treaties.
According to some members, it would in any event be difficult to agree on general rules, and the Commission should therefore aim in the direction of guidelines or principles which could help and guide States while providing for greater certainty in the matter.
It was also pointed out that, besides States' intentions and the conditions, the authorization, the authority or the competence and capacity of the author and the deciding factors which gave an act its legal effect, if the topic was to be thoroughly studied, consideration must be given to the revocability of a unilateral act.
If such acts were not accepted by other States or did not raise any legitimate expectations for these States, or treated as a basis for valid legal engagements by other States, they could in theory be revoked at will.
Some members remarked that the unilateral acts par excellence that ought to be examined, were autonomous acts qualifying as sources of international law and not as those stemming from a customary source.
The term autonomous act should not be confused with auto-normative acts (imposing obligations on the author) and hetero-normative acts (imposing obligations on other States).
Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
Summarizing the discussion, the Special Rapporteur mentioned the great difficulty of identifying unilateral acts as sources of international law.
Although some members saw no value in codifying unilateral acts, the establishment of principles for identifying the legal regime applicable to such acts would without question make for greater certainty and stability in international relations.
Besides, guaranteed confidence and stability needed to be kept in balance with States' freedom of action.
When taking States' freedom of action into consideration, it went without saying that there were political acts by which States did not intend to enter into legal obligations.
Although it was sometimes difficult to tell the two kinds of acts apart, it was nevertheless true that the intent of the State to commit itself was an important feature of the identification.
The fact that by a unilateral act a relation may be established with one or more States, it does not mean that we are necessarily in the presence of an act of conventional character.
The conduct of the State should also be considered in relation to the unilateral act, though that could be done at a later stage.321.
Reaching a common position on the definition did not seem easy; at all events, a number of factors or elements unrelated to the act itself would have to be taken into consideration.
On the question of legal effects, these, although highly diverse (promises, renunciation, recognition, etc.), needed to be considered in the light of their conformity with international law.
The 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties might provide a framework and guidance for the formulation of a number of principles on unilateral acts, but they should not be transposed or reproduced wholesale given the difference in kind between treaties and unilateral acts.
The Special Rapporteur had deliberately reached only limited conclusions in his report; they were the outcome of a study of specific, practical cases, and could be supplemented and fleshed out by studies of further cases or by the comments and observations of Commission members.
The Special Rapporteur concluded by suggesting that he would be entirely in favour of the proposal that he should submit general conclusions or proposals the following year.
The Working Group on Unilateral Acts could consider the points that had arisen out of debate, and put forward recommendations as to the orientation and substance of the proposals which would thus reflect the outcome of several years of work on the subject by the Commission.
Conclusions of the Working Group
The open-ended Working Group on Unilateral Acts of States, chaired by Mr. Alain Pellet, was reconstituted on 11 May 2005.
The Working Group held four meetings, on 11 and 18 May, 1 June and 25 July 2005.
The first three meetings were devoted to an analysis of specific cases in accordance with the grid established at the fifty-sixth session of the Commission (2004) and the conclusions that could be drawn from that analysis.
At its 2855th meeting, on 21 July 2005, at the conclusion of the debate on the topic “Unilateral acts of States”, the Commission requested the Working Group to consider the points raised in the debate on which there was general agreement that might form the basis of preliminary conclusions or proposals on the topic that the Commission could consider at its fifty-eighth session.
The Working Group began its consideration of elements that could be included in preliminary conclusions without prejudice to their subsequent qualification.
At its 2859th meeting, on 28 July 2005, the Commission took note of the oral report of the Working Group.
The Working Group acknowledged that, while it could be stated in principle that the unilateral conduct of States could produce legal effects, whatever form that unilateral conduct might take, it would attempt to establish some preliminary conclusions in relation to unilateral acts stricto sensu.
The Working Group also briefly considered questions relating to the variety of unilateral acts and their effects, the importance of circumstances in assessing their nature and effects, their relationship to other obligations of their authors under international law and the conditions of their revision and revocability.
The Working Group stands ready to assist the Special Rapporteur, if necessary, in the elaboration and development of preliminary conclusions, which could then be submitted to the Commission at the fifty-eighth session (2006), together with illustrative examples of practice drawn from the notes prepared by members of the Group.
Introduction
The General Assembly, in its resolution 48/31 of 9 December 1993, endorsed the decision of the International Law Commission to include in its agenda the topic “The law and practice relating to reservations to treaties”.
At its forty-sixth session (1994), the Commission appointed Mr. Alain Pellet, Special Rapporteur for the topic.
At its forty-seventh session (1995), the Commission received and discussed the first report of the Special Rapporteur.
Following that discussion, the Special Rapporteur summarized the conclusions he had drawn from the Commission's consideration of the topic; they related to the title of the topic, which should now read “Reservations to treaties”; the form of the results of the study, which should be a guide to practice in respect of reservations; the flexible way in which the Commission's work on the topic should be carried out; and the consensus in the Commission that there should be no change in the relevant provisions of the 1969, 1978 and 1986 Vienna Conventions.
In the view of the Commission, those conclusions constituted the results of the preliminary study requested by the General Assembly in resolutions 48/31 of 9 December 1993 and 49/51 of 9 December 1994.
As far as the Guide to Practice was concerned, it would take the form of draft guidelines with commentaries, which would be of assistance for the practice of States and international organizations; these guidelines would, if necessary, be accompanied by model clauses.
In 1995, the Commission, in accordance with its earlier practice, authorized the Special Rapporteur to prepare a detailed questionnaire on reservations to treaties, to ascertain the practice of, and problems encountered by, States and international organizations, particularly those which were depositaries of multilateral conventions.
The questionnaire was sent to the addressees by the Secretariat.
In its resolution 50/45 of 11 December 1995, the General Assembly took note of the Commission's conclusions, inviting it to continue its work along the lines indicated in its report and also inviting States to answer the questionnaire.
At its forty-eighth session (1996), the Commission had before it the Special Rapporteur's second report on the topic.
The Special Rapporteur had annexed to his report a draft resolution of the International Law Commission on reservations to multilateral normative treaties, including human rights treaties, which was addressed to the General Assembly for the purpose of drawing attention to and clarifying the legal aspects of the matter.
At its forty-ninth session (1997), the Commission adopted preliminary conclusions on reservations to normative multilateral treaties, including human rights treaties.
In its resolution 52/156 of 15 December 1997, the General Assembly took note of the Commission's preliminary conclusions and of its invitation to all treaty bodies set up by normative multilateral treaties that might wish to do so to provide, in writing, their comments and observations on the conclusions, while drawing the attention of Governments to the importance for the International Law Commission of having their views on the preliminary conclusions.
From 1998 until its fifty-sixth session in 2004 the Commission considered 7 more reports by the Special Rapporteur and provisionally adopted 69 draft guidelines and the commentaries thereto.
At its fifty-sixth session the Commission, at its 2822nd meeting, on 23 July 2004, after having considered the ninth report of the Special Rapporteur decided to refer draft guidelines 2.6.1 “Definition of objections to reservations” and 2.6.2 “Objection to the late formulation of widening of the scope of a reservation” to the Drafting Committee.
Consideration of the topic at the present session
At the current session, the Commission had before it the tenth report of the Special Rapporteur (A/CN.4/558 and Add.1) on validity of reservations and the concept of the object and purpose of the treaty.
The Commission considered part of the tenth report of the Special Rapporteur at its 2854th, 2856th, 2857th, 2858th and 2859th meetings, from 20 to 28 July 2005.
At its 2859th meeting, held on 28 July 2005, the Commission decided to send draft guidelines 3.1 (Freedom to formulate reservations), 3.1.1 (Reservations expressly prohibited by the treaty), 3.1.2 (Definition of specified reservations), 3.1.3 (Reservations implicitly permitted by the treaty) and 3.1.4 (Non-specified reservations authorized by the treaty) to the Drafting Committee.
The Commission also decided to send draft guidelines 1.6 and 2.1.8, which had already been provisionally adopted, to the Drafting Committee with a view to their revision in the light of the terms selected.
The Commission also decided to continue its consideration of the tenth report during its fifty-eighth session (2006).
At its 2842nd meeting, on 20 May 2005, the Commission considered and provisionally adopted draft guidelines 2.6.1 (Definition of objections to treaties) and 2.6.2 (Definition of objections to the late formulation or widening of the scope of a reservation).
Those draft guidelines had already been sent to the Drafting Committee at the fifty-sixth session (2004).
At its 2865th meeting, on 4 August 2005, the Commission adopted the commentary relating to the aforementioned draft guidelines.
The text of the draft guidelines and the commentary thereto are reproduced in section C.2 below.
Introduction by the Special Rapporteur of his tenth report
The Special Rapporteur introduced his tenth report by explaining that he had initially planned to include an introduction summing up developments since the ninth report; a first part, which would have dispatched once and for all the problem of formulation and the procedure for objections and reservations to treaties; and a second part, on the validity of reservations.
For lack of time, and having already begun work on the latter question, to which he had given priority, it had not been possible to adhere to that plan.
Accordingly, the report had begun in medias res, with the section on validity of reservations.
The Special Rapporteur had first sought to defend the expression “validity of reservations” before addressing, in section A, the principle derived from the chapeau of article 19 of the Vienna Convention and the problems raised by express or implicit prohibitions of reservations, covered in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of that article.
The other questions addressed in the report related to the compatibility of reservations with the object and purpose of the treaty, stipulated in article 19 (c) (validity or invalidity of reservations relating to the application of internal law, customary rules or the rules of jus cogens).
The last part of the report addressed the determination of the validity of reservations and the consequences thereof.
Returning to the phrase “validity of reservations” used in his report, the Special Rapporteur recalled that the replies from States in the Sixth Committee to the question that the Commission had put to them concerning that expression had been inconclusive, having been split between those States that had doubts about the expression and those that accepted it.
The Special Rapporteur clearly preferred the words “validity/invalidity”, which were entirely neutral, to the other terms proposed, such as “admissibility/inadmissibility”, “permissibility/impermissibility” or “opposability/non-opposability”, which had strong doctrinal connotations.
The doctrinal battle pitted the proponents of permissibility, who thought that a reservation could be intrinsically invalid by being contrary to the object and purpose of the treaty, against the advocates of opposability, for whom the reservations regime was governed in its entirety by the reactions of other States.
In using one or the other of those expressions, the Commission would be taking a position in favour of one of those schools, which did not do justice to the complex reality of the regime of reservations.
Although Mr. Derek Bowett had urged the Commission to use the terms “permissible/impermissible” and the Commission had initially followed his lead, the Special Rapporteur thought that a reservation could be valid or invalid on grounds other than “permissibility”.
Furthermore, the French terms “Licéité/illicéité” which are translated in English as “permissibility/impermissibility” could be misleading, given their relationship to the topic of State responsibility.
It was unreasonable to affirm that a reservation not valid for reasons of form or substance entailed the responsibility of the State or international organization that had formulated it, and no precedent to that effect existed in State practice.
Such a reservation would simply be null and void.
The Commission should therefore revert to the neutral terms “validity/invalidity”, including in the draft guidelines that had already been adopted (1.6 and 2.1.8), in which the words “permissible/impermissible” had been left in square brackets.
The section of the report entitled “Presumption of validity of reservations” was based on the chapeau of article 19 of the Vienna Conventions, which established the general principle that the formulation of reservations was permitted.
However, the freedom to formulate a reservation was not unlimited.
In the first place, it was limited in time (signature of the treaty or expression of consent to be bound by it).
In addition, by its nature a treaty could require that a reservation should be unanimously accepted.
Moreover, States could themselves limit the power to formulate reservations to a treaty, as envisaged in article 19, subparagraphs (a) and (b).
Consequently, the right to formulate reservations was not an absolute right.
That was suggested by the very title of article 19, since the fact that a reservation was formulated did not mean that it was “made”, i.e. that it would actually produce effects.
That was suggested by the wording of article 21, paragraph 1, of the Vienna Conventions (“a reservation established with regard to another party in accordance with articles 19, 20 and 23”).
Compliance with article 19 was one of the conditions for the validity of a reservation, but it was not the sole condition, and it therefore seemed that neither the permissibility school (which focused on article 19 to the exclusion of all other considerations) nor the opposability school (which was interested solely in article 20) provided an account of the legal regime of reservations in all its enormous complexity.
The freedom to formulate reservations being the basic principle, the Special Rapporteur had considered whether it might be useful to make the presumption of validity of reservations the subject of a separate draft guideline.
However, he had decided not to in order to keep the Guide to Practice user-friendly.
He had chosen to reproduce article 19 of the Vienna Convention of 1986 (because it included international organizations) in its entirety in draft guideline 3.1.
Although that solution was not ideal, given that article 19 was poorly drafted, he had thought it better to reproduce the article as it stood than to “correct” it.
Section B of the report dealt with reservations prohibited, either expressly or implicitly, by the treaty, which corresponded to article 19, subparagraphs (a) and (b), of the Vienna Conventions.
It appeared from the travaux préparatoires for those Conventions that a treaty could prohibit all reservations or only certain reservations.
The first case appeared simpler, although it was still necessary to decide whether or not a unilateral declaration constituted a reservation.
However, that was a problem of the definition of reservations and not of validity.
The second case was more frequent: a treaty might prohibit reservations to specific provisions of the treaty or prohibit categories of reservations, which was much more complicated.
The three cases of prohibitions were covered by article 19, subparagraph (a), and that was exactly what was stated in draft guideline 3.1.1.
Moreover, all those cases concerned reservations that were expressly prohibited and not implicit prohibitions.
The latter category referred in particular to treaties concluded between a limited number of parties and the constituent instruments of international organizations (art.
The term “specified reservations” was not as simple as it appeared.
It nevertheless followed that reservations formulated by virtue of a reservation clause that did not specify what reservations were permitted were subject to the test of compatibility with the object and purpose of the treaty.
For all those reasons it was very important that the Commission should define the term “specified reservations” in draft guideline 3.1.2.
He had tried to provide a definition that was neither too lax nor excessively strict, which would be tantamount to likening the notion to “negotiated reservations” (A/CN.4/508).
The Special Rapporteur recalled that the Commission had met with all the human rights treaty bodies with the exception of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, which was based in New York.
He had proposed that a one- or two-day seminar should be organized on the subject of reservations to human rights treaties so that the Commission could review its preliminary conclusions of 1997.
Introducing the second part of his report (A/CN.4/558/Add.1), the Special Rapporteur explained that it dealt with reservations that were incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty.
That condition was an element of the flexible system stemming from the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 1951 and the 1969 Vienna Convention.
By virtue of that clarification, the right of States to make reservations was balanced by the requirement to preserve the “core contents” or raison d'être of the treaty.
The criterion of compatibility with the object and purpose of the treaty applied only to reservations, as States were not required to justify their objections under article 20 of the Vienna Convention, even though they often did so.
The compatibility of a reservation with the object and purpose of the treaty was a customary norm, although it was not a peremptory norm of international law.
A reservation expressly prohibited by a treaty could not be considered valid on the pretext that it was compatible with the object and purpose of the treaty.
As they expressly authorized by the treaty, specified reservations were automatically valid and were not subject to the test of compatibility with the object and purpose of the treaty.
The same did not hold for two other cases, namely reservations that were implicitly authorized and those that were expressly authorized but not specified.
In both cases, it was clear that a State or an international organization could formulate reservations that were not contrary to the object and purpose of the treaty.
The travaux préparatoires for the Vienna Convention and case law (the 1977 ruling of the Arbitral Tribunal in the Mer d'Iroise case) seemed to substantiate that argument, which had first been set out insofar as implicitly authorized reservations were concerned by the Special Rapporteur on the law of treaties, Mr. Humphrey Waldock.
The two cases formed the subject of two separate draft guidelines, 3.1.3 and 3.1.4 respectively, which the Special Rapporteur preferred to the version consisting of a single draft guideline combining the two hypotheses.
The Special Rapporteur then took up the definition of the concept of the object and purpose of the treaty, which was one of the most sensitive issues of the law of treaties.
That concept, which legal writers were virtually unanimous in qualifying as highly subjective, appeared not only in article 19 of the Vienna Conventions but in several other provisions of those instruments; clearly it had the same meaning throughout the Conventions.
That was why the competence of the interpreter of the concept had assumed great significance.
The subjectivity of the notion was not, however, sufficient reason for abstaining from an effort to define it; other legal notions (“public morals”, “reasonable”, “good faith”) were equally subjective or changed with time and did not pose insurmountable problems in their application.
In order to guide the (necessarily subjective) interpretation of the notion in good faith, the Special Rapporteur had endeavoured to rely on case law and doctrine without hoping to achieve absolute certainty.
He believed that the object and purpose were one and the same notion and not two separate concepts; draft guideline 3.1.5 merely sought to provide a useful definition of the notion.
It was a very general guideline, but he did not believe it was possible to go much further.
Draft guideline 3.1.6 sought to offset the general character of guideline 3.1.5 by suggesting a method for determining the object and purpose of the treaty, which was prompted by the principles applicable to the interpretation of treaties set out in articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Conventions.
In that connection, the Special Rapporteur believed that the object and purpose of the treaty were not fixed at the time the treaty was concluded, and that the subsequent practice of the parties should therefore be borne in mind, although he was aware that there were views to the contrary.
As another way of addressing concerns about the general character of draft guidelines 3.1.5 and 3.1.6, the Special Rapporteur had proposed a large number of guidelines in the section of his report on application of the criterion.
The Special Rapporteur admitted that he was not claiming to have covered all possible cases or hypotheses, which was not in fact the purpose of codification; he had endeavoured to include the most useful cases, but the draft guidelines could always be supplemented if members of the Commission had other examples.
The situations considered were fairly heterogeneous but offered a representative sample of reservations.
He was also aware that reservations could fall into several of the categories envisaged, in which case it would be necessary to combine the rules included in the draft guidelines.
Turning to the different categories of reservations, the Special Rapporteur recalled that dispute settlement clauses had been consistently found to be not contrary to the object and purpose of the treaty in the case law of the International Court of Justice.
However, that view had not been shared by human rights treaty bodies, which held that the rules for monitoring the implementation of the treaties constituted guarantees for securing the rights set forth in the treaties and were thus essential to their object and purpose.
Draft guideline 3.1.13 sought to reconcile the two apparently contrasting views.
As to the problems associated with reservations to general human rights treaties, guideline 3.1.12 was sufficiently flexible to allow interpreters a degree of leeway.
A question that frequently arose, particularly in the field of human rights, concerned reservations formulated to safeguard the application of internal law.
The answer to that question was much more nuanced than the categorical views expressed by some would imply: it seemed to the Special Rapporteur that it was impossible to deny a State the right to formulate a reservation in order to preserve the integrity of its internal law if the State did not undermine the object and purpose of the treaty.
That was spelled out in draft guideline 3.1.11.
Reservations relating to the application of internal law must not be confused with vague and general reservations that by their very nature made it impossible for other States to understand or assess them.
Indeed, such reservations were contrary to the object and purpose of the treaty, which was exactly what draft guideline 3.1.7 said.
The Special Rapporteur had begun his consideration of reservations relating to provisions embodying customary norms with the judgment of the International Court of Justice in the North Sea Continental Shelf cases.
States made reservations to such provisions, in order to avoid the consequences of “conventionalization” of the customary rule.
In addition, as practice showed, States also made reservations to codification treaties.
Draft guideline 3.1.8 sought to enunciate the fundamental principles deriving from case law and practice in that regard.
The situation was different with reservations to provisions setting forth norms of jus cogens or non-derogable rules.
The Special Rapporteur was convinced that such reservations were prohibited only if one acknowledged that jus cogens produced its effect outside the confines of articles 53 and 64 of the Vienna Conventions.
Consequently the invalidity of such reservations derived mutatis mutandis from the principle set forth in article 53 of the Vienna Convention.
That was the sense of draft guideline 3.1.9.
As to reservations to non-derogable rules, while such rules often set out principles of jus cogens, the Special Rapporteur proposed draft guideline 3.1.10, which had been inspired by the practice of the human rights treaty bodies and the case law of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
Summary of the debate
Several members praised the theoretical and practical importance of the tenth report, which was extremely detailed, analytical and rich.
It was noted that invalid reservations could not by definition achieve the result desired by the State that made them.
At the same time, the invalidity of a reservation generally invalidated ratification of the treaty itself.
It was also noted that the problems with terminology were not solely linguistic, given that the terms used had different meanings in different languages.
In addition, some members were opposed to the use of the terms “permissible/impermissible”, which were associated with the notion of responsibility.
The term “validity” did not appear to be as neutral as it was claimed to be, but reflected a subjective value judgement that operated a posteriori and had to do with the existence or absence of legal consequences of the act in question and not with the process of completion or formulation.
It was recalled in that connection that in the Sixth Committee several arguments had been put forward in opposition to the use of the term “validity” to qualify reservations.
The terms “permissible/impermissible”, meanwhile, managed to convey the sense the Commission wished to give to reservations at the current stage and were neutral, notwithstanding their association with a particular school of thought.
The view was also expressed that the question of validity was essential in the regime of reservations and constituted its basis in principle.
However, the very definition of validity posed problems, especially with regard to what determined it.
Since validity was a quality that determined compliance with the reference norm, namely the Vienna regime, it was obvious that the determination of validity occurred after the reservation was formulated, by other States or, where appropriate, by a judicial body.
The variables inherent in validity also comprised the reference norm (the Vienna regime), the de facto situation (formulation of the reservation) and the possible reaction to the reservation, expressed either in the form of an objection or through a third body, judge or arbitrator.
The question of validity was linked to a substantive problem, which was the limitations ratione materiae of the freedom to formulate reservations under article 19 of the Vienna Conventions.
It was also pointed out that the very concept of the validity of an act was one of the requirements for its “legality” or its “permissibility” and that it retained the necessary neutrality.
Nevertheless some members wondered whether, given the significance of objections in assessing validity, it might be possible to contemplate including the draft guidelines on objections in the section of the Guide to Practice dealing with the validity of reservations.
The view was also expressed that the question of the validity of reservations should be considered together with the question of the legal consequences of invalid reservations.
The question of the separability or inseparability of invalid reservations from the act expressing a State's consent to be bound to a treaty remained fundamental.
It was pointed out that as the term “validity” was essentially related to requisite conditions, the term “admissibility” might be more acceptable and less restrictive, because a reservation that was permitted or accepted was not necessarily valid.
Several members nevertheless expressed a preference for the terms “validity/invalidity”.
It was pointed out that the meaning of the term “validity” included the quality of the elements of a legal order that had to meet all conditions as to form and substance required by that order for legal effects to be produced by an act.
It was the conformity of the act with those conditions that made it possible to determine whether it was valid.
That was why the Commission should not lose sight of those conditions and deal only with the legal effects of the act.
From that standpoint the mere formulation of a reservation had nothing to do with its validity, which was determined after the prerequisite conditions had been met.
Consequently, the words “and effects” should be deleted from draft guideline 1.6 with a view to its revision, given that validity was simply the ability of the reservation to produce effects.
Another point of view held that it was premature to take a decision at the current stage, before the effects of reservations had been considered, on the question of validity, which could have an impact on the international responsibility of States.
Other members, however, expressed doubts as to the use of the term “validity” in draft guidelines that had already been adopted.
With regard to draft guideline 3.1, it was noted that the title did not accurately reflect its content.
It would seem justified to use the text of article 19 of the Vienna Convention of 1986 in order to indicate the conditions of validity.
However, the fact that that provision reiterated the conditions ratione temporis that the formulation of a reservation must meet, and did so immediately after the section of the draft guidelines on procedure might seem somewhat strange.
The concept of the presumption of validity of reservations seemed neither convincing nor useful to some members.
It was pointed out that article 19 of the Vienna Conventions established, at the most, the presumption of freedom to formulate reservations which was substantially different from the presumption of validity of reservations.
Other members observed that the title of the draft guideline ought to read “The right to formulate reservations”, for both linguistic and substantive reasons, since it sought to define a right that was nevertheless dependent on certain conditions established by the Vienna regime.
According to another view, the title that might best correspond to the content of article 19 is “limits to freedom of the formulation of reservations”.
As to draft guideline 3.1.1, it was noted that the term “expressly” in the title did not appear in the wording of article 19.
It was rare, but not impossible, for treaties not to permit reservations by implication, as was the case, for example, with the Charter of the United Nations.
The wording of the draft guideline should also be revised because the chapeau did not entirely correspond to the provisions that followed.
Furthermore, if a treaty permitted only certain reservations, it was clear that other reservations were prohibited.
It should also be made clear that if a treaty prohibited reservations to specific provisions or certain types of reservations, only those reservations were expressly prohibited.
In order not to introduce a high degree of subjectivity, the Commission should limit itself to implicit prohibitions or authorizations that could logically and reasonably be deduced from the intention of the parties at the time they concluded the treaty.
Others took the view that this guideline should be limited to express prohibitions.
It was further noted that it was difficult to establish every type of prohibited reservation with certainty.
The case was also mentioned of a treaty prohibiting any reservations except those expressly authorized by it: it was felt that such a situation should be covered by the draft guidelines.
With regard to draft guideline 3.1.2, it was suggested that according to article 19 (b) of the Vienna Conventions, one needed to determine whether the treaty permitted only specific reservations and, if so, to determine whether or not a reservation that was formulated fell into that category.
Questions were also raised as to the relevance of the term “authorized”.
The last part of the sentence in the English version, in any event, was not clear or seemed far too elliptic.
It was felt that the categories of prohibited reservations established by the Special Rapporteur was useful; however, in practice, which was rich and varied, it often proved difficult to distinguish among the different categories.
The view was expressed that in the case of a general authorization of reservations, the other parties could always object to them, and that also expressly authorized reservations were subject to the test of compatibility with the object and purpose of the treaty.
It would appear to be extremely difficult to distinguish implicitly prohibited reservations with certainty, as they were indeterminate by nature.
They should be dealt with in a separate draft guideline.
Several members expressed their preference for two separate draft guidelines, 3.1.3 and 3.1.4.
With regard to draft guideline 3.1.4, the view was expressed that the Commission should opt for clearer wording affirming that reservations were subject to the criterion of compatibility with the object and purpose of the treaty if there was a general authorization or if the treaty did not contain any provisions on reservations.
Several members stressed the notion that the object and purpose of the treaty played a central role in the law of treaties as a whole.
The Vienna Conventions were silent on the meaning of that notion.
States expected the Commission to address that problem.
The Special Rapporteur was commended for his efforts to define that nebulous and elusive concept.
The object appeared to be the content of the treaty, while the purpose had to do with the end the treaty sought to achieve.
Any reservation contrary to those two notions was not permitted.
While draft guideline 3.1.5 represented an attempt at clarification, the term “raison d'être” in the text provided little clarification.
This term was also seen by others as too restrictive leading to the result that only very few reservations would be prohibited.
It was suggested that in endeavouring to pinpoint the concept the terms object and purpose should not be separated.
It was the object and purpose of the treaty that made it possible to say what the essential provisions of the treaty were, and not vice versa.
The view was also expressed in respect of both draft guidelines 3.1.5 and 3.1.13 that a reservation to a “secondary” provision that was linked to the raison d'être of the treaty could be equally risky.
Distinguishing between the essential provisions of a treaty became a dangerous and random exercise.
Another point of view maintained that if determining the meaning of the notion of the object and purpose of the treaty was part of the interpretation of treaties, it could not be governed by pre-established definitions or rules.
From that perspective it became very difficult to pinpoint notions such as “raison d'être” or “core content”, which were equally vague, elusive or uncertain.
Treaties expressed the intention of the States that had concluded them, and one could only conjecture as to the real meaning of that intention, as the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on reservations to the Convention against Genocide had made clear.
The notion of the object and purpose of the treaty was determined subjectively by each State.
Very often it was questionable whether a treaty had a specific object and purpose, since it was the outcome of a complex process of negotiations or exchanges.
Accordingly, some members wondered whether a definition of that notion was possible or even necessary.
In any event, it would be extremely difficult to define; there would always be a part that would remain a mystery.
As to the categories of examples of provisions cited by the Special Rapporteur, some members wondered what his criteria had been, given that the importance of such provisions varied from treaty to treaty, depending on the interests of the concluding States.
Distinguishing human rights treaties was equally difficult, in part because of the difficulty in defining exactly what constituted such treaties and also because there were other categories of treaties that were also based on common interests.
It was pointed out that it might be useful to make express the rationales that the Special Rapporteur's examples sought to illustrate, namely cases where the reservation undermined either the legitimate expectations of the parties or the nature of the treaty as a common undertaking.
As to draft guideline 3.1.6, the view was expressed that articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Conventions mentioned therein gave an important role of the object and purpose in the interpretation of the treaty.
It was also pointed out that agreements relating to the treaty (art. 31, para.
2) or subsequent practice could be included.
The Commission should not attempt to find a general rule for determining the object and purpose of the treaty, as the two concepts varied in accordance with the great diversity of treaties as well as with the necessarily subjective idea that the parties had of them.
Other members questioned the usefulness of draft guidelines 3.1.5 and 3.1.6.
It was pointed out that the Commission ought to approach the question covered in draft guideline 3.1.7 from the standpoint of procedure and ask whether a reservation drafted in vague and general terms could be said to intend to exclude or modify the legal effect of certain provisions of the treaty in their application to the reserving State.
Attention was also drawn to the importance of context and specific circumstances.
Several members stressed the usefulness of draft guideline 3.1.8.
With regard to draft guideline 3.1.9, the view was expressed that there might be cases in which a reservation to a provision setting forth a rule of jus cogens was possible and not necessarily incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty for reasons identical to those put forward in the case of customary rules (draft guideline 3.1.8).
The prohibition of such reservations should be categorical only if the reserving State, by modifying the legal effect of such a provision, intended to introduce a rule that was contrary to jus cogens.
The view was also expressed that the draft guideline was not really necessary because a reservation contrary to jus cogens would be automatically incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty.
Several members stressed the usefulness of draft guideline 3.1.9.
Draft guideline 3.1.11 needed to be worded more precisely.
The Commission should indicate that the reservation would be acceptable only if it was formulated in respect of a specific provision that was fundamental to internal law.
It was even suggested that the draft guideline should be combined with draft guideline 3.1.7, given their similarity.
Several key provisions of draft guideline 3.1.12 were said to relate also to the exercise of protected rights.
Moreover, the two criteria seemed to be too general to be really useful.
Draft guideline 3.1.13 was said to be more restrictive than article 19, subparagraph (c), of the Vienna Convention.
It was also noted that the two cases mentioned (dispute settlement and monitoring of the implementation of the treaty) were sufficiently different and warranted two separate draft guidelines.
The proposal to hold a “seminar” was welcomed by several members.
It was proposed that the seminar should focus in particular on the problem of the compatibility of reservations with the object and purpose of the treaty and, subsequently, on the role of human rights treaty bodies in determining compatibility.
Some members expressed a desire for the debate on the section of the report dealing with the compatibility of reservations with the object and purpose of the treaty to be continued during the fifty-eighth session (2006) and in the meantime reserved their position with respect to the issues raised by this section of the report.
Special Rapporteur's concluding remarks
At the conclusion of the debate, the Special Rapporteur expressed his satisfaction that so many of his draft guidelines had been favourably received in such a constructive manner by most members of the Commission.
Referring to a few negative views based on theoretical positions, he recalled that the function of the exercise that the Commission had undertaken was not to create a work of doctrine in the abstract but rather to provide States with coherent answers to the whole range of questions they might raise with regard to reservations.
He observed that some of the criticisms that had been directed at him, however brilliant in theoretical terms, had not included concrete proposals for draft guidelines that could replace those that his critics would delete.
The draft guidelines, together with the commentary thereto, still constituted the surest way to guide practitioners and States.
In undertaking that useful pedagogical exercise, the Commission should not be guided by abstract considerations that had to do with the allegedly progressive or conservative character of proposals, but should instead adopt a pragmatic, moderate, “happy medium” attitude, while recalling that the Vienna Conventions, within the framework of which the exercise was taking place, were extremely flexible even if they tended to reflect a high degree of tolerance where reservations were concerned.
It was in that spirit that he had prepared the tenth report and proposed the 14 draft guidelines.
With regard to the question of validity, he was of the view that the Commission was dealing not only with a purely terminological question or a problem posed by the differences in the French and English languages.
Having noted the relatively varied positions of members on that subject, he remained convinced that the Commission should not wait until it considered the effects of reservations to define their validity; he also believed that validity could not be assimilated to permissibility.
In addition, given that validity was a question not only of substance but also of form, either the third section of the Guide to Practice should be preceded by a very general guideline that would specify that a reservation was considered to be valid if it fulfilled the conditions of substance and form established in the Vienna Conventions and spelled out in the Guide to Practice, or else the title of the third part of the Guide should be modified.
In his view, the French term “validité” applied both to conditions of form (dealt with in the second chapter of the Guide to Practice) and to those of substance, whereas draft guideline 3.1 as currently worded dealt only with the conditions of substance covered by article 19.
Conversely, the English term “permissibility” (and not “admissibility”) adequately defined the content of article 19.
He therefore proposed that the “Validity of reservations” should be retained as the title of the third part of the Guide to Practice, on condition that the expression was understood to cover both conditions of form and conditions of substance, and that only the latter would be dealt with in that part of the Guide (with conditions of form dealt with in the second part); meanwhile, draft guideline 3.1 could be entitled “Permissibility of reservations” in English and “Validité substantielle des reserves” in French.
With regard to draft guidelines 1.6 and 2.1.8 (already adopted), the Commission could replace the word “permissibility” with “validity” in the former and the word “impermissible” with the word “invalid” in the latter.
In the first paragraph of draft guideline 2.1.8, the first sentence would begin “When, in the opinion of the depositary, a reservation is manifestly invalid …”, subject to an appropriate modification of the commentary.
Concerning draft guideline 3.1 and the observations made regarding its title, the Special Rapporteur agreed that it should be worded more clearly; that, however, was a drafting problem which the Drafting Committee could address.
He also thought that the wording of draft guideline 3.1.1 could be improved.
However, he was not convinced that the possibility of implicitly prohibited reservations should be included, as such reservations had more to do with article 19, subparagraph (c) - in other words, they were invalid because they were incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty, and not because they were implicitly prohibited.
He noted that draft guidelines 3.1.2, 3.1.3 and 3.1.4 had been generally endorsed, even though they would benefit from editorial improvements.
Accordingly, the Special Rapporteur proposed that the Commission should send draft guidelines 3.1, 3.1.1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3 and 3.1.4 to the Drafting Committee, together with draft guidelines 2.1.8 and 1.6 (already adopted), the latter two with a view to their amendment in the light of the terms selected.
The Special Rapporteur thought that the other draft guidelines contained in the tenth report should be considered again at the fifty-eighth session, given that the Commission had not been able to discuss them in depth for lack of time.
He nevertheless was of the view that the Commission must absolutely define the notion of the “object and purpose” of the treaty (draft guidelines 3.1.5 and 3.1.6).
The Special Rapporteur reiterated his desire to organize a meeting with the human rights treaty bodies during the fifty-eighth session, although he was aware of certain practical difficulties (not all bodies met at the same time) and budgetary constraints.
C. Text of draft guidelines on reservations to treaties provisionally adopted so far by the Commission
Text of draft guidelines
The text of the draft guidelines provisionally adopted so far by the Commission is reproduced below.
Guide to practice
Explanatory note
Some draft guidelines in the present Guide to Practice are accompanied by model clauses.
The adoption of these model clauses may have advantages in specific circumstances.
The user should refer to the commentaries for an assessment of the circumstances appropriate for the use of a particular model clause.
Definitions
1.1 Definition of reservations
“Reservation” means a unilateral statement, however phrased or named, made by a State or an international organization when signing, ratifying, formally confirming, accepting, approving or acceding to a treaty or by a State when making a notification of succession to a treaty, whereby the State or organization purports to exclude or to modify the legal effect of certain provisions of the treaty in their application to that State or to that international organization.
1.1.1 [1.1.4] Object of reservations
A reservation purports to exclude or modify the legal effect of certain provisions of a treaty or of the treaty as a whole with respect to certain specific aspects in their application to the State or to the international organization which formulates the reservation.
1.1.2 Instances in which reservations may be formulated
Instances in which a reservation may be formulated under guideline 1.1 include all the means of expressing consent to be bound by a treaty mentioned in article 11 of the Vienna Conventions of 1969 and 1986 on the law of treaties.
1.1.3 [1.1.8] Reservations having territorial scope
A unilateral statement by which a State purports to exclude the application of a treaty or some of its provisions to a territory to which that treaty would be applicable in the absence of such a statement constitutes a reservation.
1.1.4 [1.1.3] Reservations formulated when notifying territorial application
A unilateral statement by which a State purports to exclude or to modify the legal effect of certain provisions of a treaty in relation to a territory in respect of which it makes a notification of the territorial application of the treaty constitutes a reservation.
1.1.5 [1.1.6] Statements purporting to limit the obligations of their author
A unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international organization at the time when that State or that organization expresses its consent to be bound by a treaty by which its author purports to limit the obligations imposed on it by the treaty constitutes a reservation.
1.1.6 Statements purporting to discharge an obligation by equivalent means
A unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international organization when that State or that organization expresses its consent to be bound by a treaty by which that State or that organization purports to discharge an obligation pursuant to the treaty in a manner different from but equivalent to that imposed by the treaty constitutes a reservation.
1.1.7 [1.1.1] Reservations formulated jointly
The joint formulation of a reservation by several States or international organizations does not affect the unilateral nature of that reservation.
1.1.8 Reservations made under exclusionary clauses
A unilateral statement made by a State or an international organization when that State or organization expresses its consent to be bound by a treaty, in accordance with a clause expressly authorizing the parties or some of them to exclude or to modify the legal effect of certain provisions of the treaty in their application to those parties, constitutes a reservation.
1.2 Definition of interpretative declarations
“Interpretative declaration” means a unilateral statement, however phrased or named, made by a State or by an international organization whereby that State or that organization purports to specify or clarify the meaning or scope attributed by the declarant to a treaty or to certain of its provisions.
1.2.1 [1.2.4] Conditional interpretative declarations
A unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international organization when signing, ratifying, formally confirming, accepting, approving or acceding to a treaty, or by a State when making a notification of succession to a treaty, whereby the State or international organization subjects its consent to be bound by the treaty to a specific interpretation of the treaty or of certain provisions thereof, shall constitute a conditional interpretative declaration.
1.2.2 [1.2.1] Interpretative declarations formulated jointly
The joint formulation of an interpretative declaration by several States or international organizations does not affect the unilateral nature of that interpretative declaration.
1.3 Distinction between reservations and interpretative declarations
The character of a unilateral statement as a reservation or an interpretative declaration is determined by the legal effect it purports to produce.
1.3.1 Method of implementation of the distinction between reservations and interpretative declarations
To determine whether a unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international organization in respect of a treaty is a reservation or an interpretative declaration, it is appropriate to interpret the statement in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to its terms, in light of the treaty to which it refers.
Due regard shall be given to the intention of the State or the international organization concerned at the time the statement was formulated.
1.3.2 [1.2.2] Phrasing and name
The phrasing or name given to a unilateral statement provides an indication of the purported legal effect.
This is the case in particular when a State or an international organization formulates several unilateral statements in respect of a single treaty and designates some of them as reservations and others as interpretative declarations.
1.3.3 [1.2.3] Formulation of a unilateral statement when a reservation is prohibited
When a treaty prohibits reservations to all or certain of its provisions, a unilateral statement formulated in respect thereof by a State or an international organization shall be presumed not to constitute a reservation except when it purports to exclude or modify the legal effect of certain provisions of the treaty or of the treaty as a whole with respect to certain specific aspects in their application to its author.
1.4 Unilateral statements other than reservations and interpretative declarations
Unilateral statements formulated in relation to a treaty which are not reservations nor interpretative declarations are outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice.
1.4.1 [1.1.5] Statements purporting to undertake unilateral commitments
A unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international organization in relation to a treaty, whereby its author purports to undertake obligations going beyond those imposed on it by the treaty constitutes a unilateral commitment which is outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice.
1.4.2 [1.1.6] Unilateral statements purporting to add further elements to a treaty
A unilateral statement whereby a State or an international organization purports to add further elements to a treaty constitutes a proposal to modify the content of the treaty which is outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice.
1.4.3 [1.1.7] Statements of non-recognition
A unilateral statement by which a State indicates that its participation in a treaty does not imply recognition of an entity which it does not recognize constitutes a statement of non-recognition which is outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice even if it purports to exclude the application of the treaty between the declaring State and the non-recognized entity.
1.4.4 [1.2.5] General statements of policy
A unilateral statement formulated by a State or by an international organization whereby that State or that organization expresses its views on a treaty or on the subject matter covered by the treaty, without purporting to produce a legal effect on the treaty, constitutes a general statement of policy which is outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice.
1.4.5 [1.2.6] Statements concerning modalities of implementation of a treaty at the internal level
A unilateral statement formulated by a State or an international organization whereby that State or that organization indicates the manner in which it intends to implement a treaty at the internal level, without purporting as such to affect its rights and obligations towards the other Contracting Parties, constitutes an informative statement which is outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice.
1.4.6 [1.4.6, 1.4.7] Unilateral statements made under an optional clause
A unilateral statement made by a State or by an international organization, in accordance with a clause in a treaty expressly authorizing the parties to accept an obligation that is not otherwise imposed by the treaty, is outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice.
A restriction or condition contained in such statement does not constitute a reservation within the meaning of the present Guide to Practice.
1.4.7 [1.4.8] Unilateral statements providing for a choice between the provisions of a treaty
A unilateral statement made by a State or an international organization, in accordance with a clause in a treaty that expressly requires the parties to choose between two or more provisions of the treaty, is outside the scope of the present Guide to Practice.
1.5 Unilateral statements in respect of bilateral treaties
1.5.1 [1.1.9] “Reservations” to bilateral treaties
A unilateral statement, however phrased or named, formulated by a State or an international organization after initialling or signature but prior to entry into force of a bilateral treaty, by which that State or that organization purports to obtain from the other party a modification of the provisions of the treaty to which it is subjecting the expression of its final consent to be bound, does not constitute a reservation within the meaning of the present Guide to Practice.
1.5.2 [1.2.7] Interpretative declarations in respect of bilateral treaties
Draft guidelines 1.2 and 1.2.1 are applicable to interpretative declarations in respect of multilateral as well as bilateral treaties.
1.5.3 [1.2.8] Legal effect of acceptance of an interpretative declaration made in respect of  bilateral treaty by the other party
The interpretation resulting from an interpretative declaration made in respect of a bilateral treaty by a State or an international organization party to the treaty and accepted by the other party constitutes the authentic interpretation of that treaty.
1.6 Scope of definitions
The definitions of unilateral statements included in the present chapter of the Guide to Practice are without prejudice to the permissibility and effects of such statements under the rules applicable to them.
1.7 Alternatives to reservations and interpretative declarations
1.7.1 [1.7.1, 1.7.2, 1.7.3, 1.7.4] Alternatives to reservations
In order to achieve results comparable to those effected by reservations, States or international organizations may also have recourse to alternative procedures, such as:
The insertion in the treaty of restrictive clauses purporting to limit its scope or application;
The conclusion of an agreement, under a specific provision of a treaty, by which two or more States or international organizations purport to exclude or modify the legal effects of certain provisions of the treaty as between themselves.
1.7.2 [1.7.5] Alternatives to interpretative declarations
In order to specify or clarify the meaning or scope of a treaty or certain of its provisions, States or international organizations may also have recourse to procedures other than interpretative declarations, such as:
The insertion in the treaty of provisions purporting to interpret the same treaty;
The conclusion of a supplementary agreement to the same end.
Procedure
2.1 Form and notification of reservations
2.1.1 Written form
A reservation must be formulated in writing.
2.1.2 Form of formal confirmation
Formal confirmation of a reservation must be made in writing.
2.1.3 Formulation of a reservation at the international level
Subject to the customary practices in international organizations which are depositaries of treaties, a person is considered as representing a State or an international organization for the purpose of formulating a reservation if:
(a) That person produces appropriate full powers for the purposes of adopting or authenticating the text of the treaty with regard to which the reservation is formulated or expressing the consent of the State or organization to be bound by the treaty; or
(b) It appears from practice or other circumstances that it was the intention of the States and international organizations concerned to consider that person as competent for such purposes without having to produce full powers.
By virtue of their functions and without having to produce full powers, the following are considered as representing a State for the purpose of formulating a reservation at the international level:
(a) Heads of State, heads of Government and Ministers for Foreign Affairs;
(b) Representatives accredited by States to an international conference for the purpose of formulating a reservation to a treaty adopted at that conference;
(c) Representatives accredited by States to an international organization or one of its organs, for the purpose of formulating a reservation to a treaty adopted by that organization or body;
(d) Heads of permanent missions to an international organization, for the purpose of formulating a reservation to a treaty between the accrediting States and that organization.
2.1.4 [2.1.3 bis, 2.1.4] Absence of consequences at the international level of the violation of internal rules regarding the formulation of reservations
The determination of the competent authority and the procedure to be followed at the internal level for formulating a reservation is a matter for the internal law of each State or relevant rules of each international organization.
A State or an international organization may not invoke the fact that a reservation has been formulated in violation of a provision of the internal law of that State or the rules of that organization regarding competence and the procedure for formulating reservations as invalidating the reservation.
2.1.5 Communication of reservations
A reservation must be communicated in writing to the contracting States and contracting organizations and other States and international organizations entitled to become parties to the treaty.
A reservation to a treaty in force which is the constituent instrument of an international organization or to a treaty which creates an organ that has the capacity to accept a reservation must also be communicated to such organization or organ.
2.1.6 [2.1.6, 2.1.8] Procedure for communication of reservations
Unless otherwise provided in the treaty or agreed by the contracting States and contracting organizations, a communication relating to a reservation to a treaty shall be transmitted:
If there is no depositary, directly by the author of the reservation to the contracting States and contracting organizations and other States and international organizations entitled to become parties to the treaty; or If there is a depositary, to the latter, which shall notify the States and organizations for which it is intended as soon as possible.
A communication relating to a reservation shall be considered as having been made by the author of the reservation only upon receipt by the State or by the organization to which it was transmitted, or as the case may be, upon its receipt by the depositary.
The period during which an objection to a reservation may be raised starts at the date on which a State or an international organization received notification of the reservation.
Where a communication relating to a reservation to a treaty is made by electronic mail or by facsimile, it must be confirmed by diplomatic note or depositary notification.
In such a case the communication is considered as having been made at the date of the electronic mail or the facsimile.
2.1.7 Functions of depositaries
The depositary shall examine whether a reservation to a treaty formulated by a State or an international organization is in due and proper form and, if need be, bring the matter to the attention of the State or international organization concerned.
In the event of any difference appearing between a State or an international organization and the depositary as to the performance of the latter's functions, the depositary shall bring the question to the attention of:
(a) The signatory States and organizations and the contracting States and contracting organizations; or
(b) Where appropriate, the competent organ of the international organization concerned.
2.1.8 [2.1.7 bis] Procedure in case of manifestly [impermissible] reservations
Where, in the opinion of the depositary, a reservation is manifestly [impermissible], the depositary shall draw the attention of the author of the reservation to what, in the depositary's view, constitutes such [impermissibility].
If the author of the reservation maintains the reservation, the depositary shall communicate the text of the reservation to the signatory States and international organizations and to the contracting States and international organizations and, where appropriate, the competent organ of the international organization concerned, indicating the nature of legal problems raised by the reservation.
2.2.1 Formal confirmation of reservations formulated when signing a treaty
If formulated when signing a treaty subject to ratification, act of formal confirmation, acceptance or approval, a reservation must be formally confirmed by the reserving State or international organization when expressing its consent to be bound by the treaty.
In such a case the reservation shall be considered as having been made on the date of its confirmation.
2.2.2 [2.2.3] Instances of non-requirement of confirmation of reservations formulated when signing a treaty
A reservation formulated when signing a treaty does not require subsequent confirmation when a State or an international organization expresses by its signature the consent to be bound by the treaty.
2.2.3 [2.2.4] Reservations formulated upon signature when a treaty expressly so provides
A reservation formulated when signing a treaty, where the treaty expressly provides that a State or an international organization may make such a reservation at that time, does not require formal confirmation by the reserving State or international organization when expressing its consent to be bound by the treaty … .
2.3.1 Late formulation of a reservation
Unless the treaty provides otherwise, a State or an international organization may not formulate a reservation to a treaty after expressing its consent to be bound by the treaty except if none of the other Contracting Parties objects to the late formulation of the reservation.
2.3.2 Acceptance of late formulation of a reservation
Unless the treaty provides otherwise or the well-established practice followed by the depositary differs, late formulation of a reservation shall be deemed to have been accepted by a Contracting Party if it has made no objections to such formulation after the expiry of the 12-month period following the date on which notification was received.
2.3.3 Objection to late formulation of a reservation
If a Contracting Party to a treaty objects to late formulation of a reservation, the treaty shall enter into or remain in force in respect of the reserving State or international organization without the reservation being established.
2.3.4 Subsequent exclusion or modification of the legal effect of a treaty by means other than reservations
A Contracting Party to a treaty may not exclude or modify the legal effect of provisions of the treaty by:
(a) Interpretation of a reservation made earlier; or
(b) A unilateral statement made subsequently under an optional clause.
2.3.5 Widening of the scope of a reservation
The modification of an existing reservation for the purpose of widening its scope shall be subject to the rules applicable to the late formulation of a reservation.
However, if an objection is made to that modification, the initial reservation remains unchanged.
2.4 Procedure for interpretative declarations
2.4.1 Formulation of interpretative declarations
An interpretative declaration must be formulated by a person who is considered as representing a State or an international organization for the purpose of adopting or authenticating the text of a treaty or expressing the consent of the State or international organization to be bound by a treaty.
[2.4.2 [2.4.1 bis] Formulation of an interpretative declaration at the internal level
The determination of the competent authority and the procedure to be followed at the internal level for formulating an interpretative declaration is a matter for the internal law of each State or relevant rules of each international organization.
A State or an international organization may not invoke the fact that an interpretative declaration has been formulated in violation of a provision of the internal law of that State or the rules of that organization regarding competence and the procedure for formulating interpretative declarations as invalidating the declaration.
]
2.4.3 Time at which an interpretative declaration may be formulated
Without prejudice to the provisions of guidelines 1.2.1, 2.4.6 [2.4.7], and 2.4.7 [2.4.8], an interpretative declaration may be formulated at any time.
2.4.4 [2.4.5] Non-requirement of confirmation of interpretative declarations made when signing a treaty
An interpretative declaration made when signing a treaty does not require subsequent confirmation when a State or an international organization expresses its consent to be bound by the treaty.
2.4.5 [2.4.4] Formal confirmation of conditional interpretative declarations formulated when signing a treaty
If a conditional interpretative declaration is formulated when signing a treaty subject to ratification, act of formal confirmation, acceptance or approval, it must be formally confirmed by the declaring State or international organization when expressing its consent to be bound by the treaty.
In such a case the interpretative declaration shall be considered as having been made on the date of its confirmation.
2.4.6 [2.4.7] Late formulation of an interpretative declaration
Where a treaty provides that an interpretative declaration may be made only at specified times, a State or an international organization may not formulate an interpretative declaration concerning that treaty subsequently except if none of the other Contracting Parties objects to the late formulation of the interpretative declaration.