# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
This is politically impractical from an Irish perspective, as indeed it would be from the perspective of other EU Member States such as Portugal, Greece and Spain.
Mr President, I want first of all to say thank you to Mrs Lienemann for her report.
It is here and now that we decide to what extent the EU countries are to work effectively for a cleaner aquatic environment in the years to come.
We can do this by, as a Parliament, amending the Council' s common position and showing the way forward in working for a cleaner environment.
In its unaltered form, the present directive could, in fact, have very unfortunate and long-term consequences for the environment and for our drinking water.
It would be to send out the wrong signals both to European industry and to the European people.
It is crucial to adhere to a limit upon total discharges of chemicals into our waters.
The directive quite obviously provides too extended a time frame within which time is to be spent measuring every single one of the approximately 100,000 chemicals in circulation.
We cannot afford to wait.
In this connection, I would ask Parliament to support Amendment No 108, in which the words "water pollution caused by individual pollutants" are replaced by "prevention of water pollution through the continuous reduction in discharges" .
We cannot delay environmental work by going into inordinate detail rather than working on reducing total discharges of hazardous substances into the environment.
The EU' s Ministers for the Environment must therefore stand by their affiliation to the OSPAR Convention, which now already defines what is hazardous to the environment.
This Convention should be our guide in working for the clean environment which we owe to ourselves and, not least, to our descendants.
Mr President, it is difficult to summarise the areas covered by such a large and complex directive.
The Treaty of Amsterdam reiterates the priority criteria for prevention, for the implementation of the 'polluter pays' principle and for sustainable development through an environmental impact assessment.
Clearly, the importance of recognising the economic value of ecological factors in setting prices and making operators accountable through the adoption of incentives for non-polluting systems, seems unquestionable in the light of events that characterise the relationship between economic development and the protection of our environmental heritage, particularly our water resources.
This situation is loudly echoed in many sectors of the economy, and especially in the agricultural sector.
The concept of good agricultural practice has been introduced in amongst the complexity of the current relationships between agriculture, environment and water resources, and between positive and negative effects, and amongst the wide range of local realities and production systems and so on.
This concept indicates which agricultural production method to use in order to satisfy the Community expectation of an environmental protection of water resources that surpasses basic standards, along with the subsequent costs and reductions in income.
The obligation to develop and consolidate a strategy for integration derives from this notion, with the aim of keeping the management of water resources at the heart of the sustainable economic production model in the light of current conditions.
We must not, with this in mind, pursue a strategy of separating the objective of preventing a deterioration in the state of surface water and groundwater from the objectives of protecting, improving and restoring their quality, as this would create a superfluous hierarchy of priorities detrimental to the overall functioning of interventions and specific measures that target a combined approach and the use of the best available techniques.
As regards eliminating the pollution generated by dangerous substances in the aquatic environment, an optimum approach should provide a regulation at both national and Community levels, which enables clearer identification of the various classes of bodies of water polluted as a result of human production activities.
Finally, we need to set up a system which prepares an objective list of potentially dangerous substances, using the increased information available on their chemical, physical and biological properties, in such a way as to create an integrated model for intervention at a range of strategic levels in order to protect our water heritage, which is fundamental to us all.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, if we are to take the principle of sustainability enshrined in the Treaty of Amsterdam seriously, then our long-term objective must be to achieve zero inputs in our water because we need to safeguard water so that future generations do not pay the price for our water consumption.
We can achieve this long-term objective by developing measures with demanding standards.
In this respect, I fully support the amendments proposed by Mrs Lienemann to develop a reasonable approach using quality standards so that we can eventually say that, when people use water, they are not consuming it but maintaining present stocks.
This directive contains a number of very positive elements which are worth highlighting.
First there is wide information for and involvement by the public, a rarity in a European directive.
Secondly, there is compulsory cooperation.
I am glad a holistic approach to water is being taken here and that authorities in the individual national states and beyond the borders of the national states are at last obliged to work together and ensure that water is of a high quality.
Thirdly, I should like to address the question of the timetable.
I am firmly convinced that we need a strict, tight timetable in order to work towards our long-term objective.
Compare it with what happens in December.
We all know in December that Christmas Eve falls on 24th December and we start buying presents.
But what would we do if we knew in December that Christmas was in thirty years' time.
We all know what we would do, which is why we need a tight timetable for our water policy.
I emphatically support the rapporteur' s proposals and think that we need a tight timetable for all areas of the directive, from the list of measures to the question of employment measures.
Mr President, the purpose of the present objective ought to be to ensure that the Member States work together to protect groundwater, drinking water and surface water and that the level of protection corresponds to existing EU environmental legislation.
May I take this opportunity to remind you that previous resolutions concerning the Nitrates Directive have still not been implemented in all Member States, in spite of the fact that there is a common EU resolution.
The present proposal tightens up the protection of the aquatic environment in a number of ways which exceed our current environmental objectives.
It is proposed that a target should be achieved for concentrations in the aquatic environment which is close to the background values for naturally occurring substances and close to zero for humanly produced synthetic substances.
This cannot be done, and it also, in any case, goes against nature.
Adopting this report would have serious consequences for agriculture in the EU if concentrations of, for example, phosphorus and nitrogen could not exceed the background values for these substances in the aquatic environment and if a limit of zero were to be established for pesticides in the aquatic environment.
European agriculture would not, for example, be able to grow bread grain with a high enough protein content for it to be used for making bread.
As a result, agricultural production would move to other countries outside the EU, with consequent high socio-economic and employment costs.
I cannot vote in favour of the sections in the Water Framework Directive which deal with these states of affairs.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, water is a precious raw material.
Millions of people do not even have clean water - a absolute necessity for survival - at their disposal.
It should, therefore, not surprise us that water is the cause of wars.
The capitalist world too sends out its pawns in order to gain maximum control over water reservoirs.
General interest or solidarity often do not come into the equation.
Europe is therefore facing an arduous task; that of combining a Community water policy which is fragmented in terms of objectives and means into more coherent framework legislation.
I have to admit that in Flanders, where I come from, we still have a long way to go too.
We were recently rapped on the knuckles by the Commission regarding this matter.
Anyone with any sense would like to see this framework directive used as a big stick for those pursuing policies who are now failing in some way.
The common position is in this respect a farce, a document with no strings attached and a true affront in the light of the OSPAR agreements.
The period of implementation can even be extended up to 34 years.
By then, my children will be older than I am now.
You have to admit: this is a joke.
Tomorrow, we might opt in favour of a weak and permissive framework which ruins the future of our children.
Either we opt for the amendments of my group, of the rapporteur or the Committee on the Environment.
I would like to finish off with this observation.
In the past couple of months, we have witnessed a great deal of lobbying in Belgium.
What was remarkable about this dossier was the enormous pressure from the Council of Ministers.
In our own country, this pressure was exerted by both Flemish and Wallonian Environment administrations.
They have opted for the weak common position in favour of our Parliament' s more drastic positioning.
I really do wonder whether this is an approach of which the green Environment Ministers in my country are aware.
Ladies and gentlemen, fine words are no longer sufficient.
We need to change tack completely.
During the vote tomorrow, we can make it clear that Europe is drafting a responsible and future-orientated water policy.
This can only benefit our credibility.
The debate is suspended and will resume at 9 p.m.
The dialogue on Europe - institutional reform
The next item is the Commission communication - The dialogue on Europe - institutional reform: the issues at stake.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission is discussing this issue right now but it will be very surprising if its work is completed today.
I am basically here to speak to you, as indicated by your agenda, on a new initiative which the Commission is proposing as just one of its responses to the major challenge of institutional reform.
This reform must involve all the actors in European construction, with yourselves as MEPs at the forefront but also myself as a Commissioner, the Council ministers and national MPs.
It must also involve the officials who work in our various institutions and who are committed to and motivated by this European construction.
This morning, in the lengthy debate which I attended with Mr Prodi, many of you mentioned the lack of democracy and remoteness of the European institutions.
Yet it is not just a question of who does what, as one of you said very clearly and forcefully.
Ensuring that our citizens understand who does what in our various institutions is the very least we can do.
We must also now explain what we are doing together and what we want to do together in the future, particularly with the countries which will be joining us.
We too are concerned about this lack of democracy, and the Commission has therefore decided to launch the 'Dialogue on Europe' in order to play its part in this direct contact with the people.
This initiative will be launched on the day after the opening of the Intergovernmental Conference.
During the IGC I will have the honour of representing the Commission together with Mr Prodi and of working closely with your two representatives, Mr Brok and Mr Tsatsos.
All the Commissioners have undertaken to use some of their time when they go to any country or region, and not just their own, which in my case happens three or four times a month, to engage in direct dialogue with the public, and not just with the élite or those in power whom we meet as a matter of course.
We also plan to establish direct contacts in universities, schools and factories, to meet the people, answer their questions and listen to them.
In this way we will play our part, as will you, in making the necessary effort and meeting the urgent obligation to reduce the democratic deficit and the remoteness of our citizens from what we do.
We hope to conduct this initiative in cooperation with the Member States and in conjunction with the European Parliament.
We will produce a regular summary of this initiative so that public opinion can be measured and we can adjust or reorient the work.
We also hope to conduct this initiative in consultation with the national parliaments, local elected representatives, non-governmental organisations, socio-professional organisations and the media.
Opinion multipliers, political groups and parties, MEPs and national MPs, elected representatives, as I have just said, local authorities or national parliaments, the Committee of the Regions, the Economic and Social Committee, organisations stemming from civil society and university and education circles will all be involved.
Need I remind you that the European Parliament itself took the initiative on 1 February?
I must again thank Mr Napolitano for organising an initial working meeting with the representatives of the national parliaments who are, of course, the representatives of the people in each Member State.
The Commission will propose that the Member States become involved in this exercise either as part of ad hoc cooperation or a more structured partnership.
We are setting up a media plan and close contacts with the European Union Presidency and the European Parliament.
I have indicated the conditions under which the Commissioners will play their part through public meetings and visits.
We want to encourage debate among the people.
Without presuming to lecture you - God forbid - or even advise you, may I just point out that, when it was my honour to be Minister for European Affairs in my own country, I saw the need to establish a direct dialogue with the people?
Each week, when engaging in this dialogue in each region, I realised that there was a real need for the European Union to have a face.
I therefore took a European Commissioner, and not just the French ones, or ambassadors posted in Paris or MEPs to engage in this dialogue each week.
This made me realise that people had many intelligent questions and that they needed to be respected, listened to and informed.
So this is what we are going to do.
We will have a budget of approximately EUR 4 million for 2000 which you will hopefully approve.
Financing from the 2001 budget must also be negotiated as we want this initiative not just to be an experiment but to last throughout both 2000 and 2001.
It will therefore be ongoing throughout the negotiation of the Intergovernmental Conference and the ratification process.
We will launch this dialogue on 8 March in Brussels in the presence of 700 young Commission stagiaires.
Your President, Mrs Fontaine, has agreed to take part with Mr Prodi and several Commissioners in this initial dialogue.
I can assure you that, whenever a Commissioner intends to engage in dialogue, the most immediately available MEPs will also be able to take part in order to give their point of view and explain the work and role of the European Parliament.
That is all I have to say for the moment.
I welcome any questions, suggestions or proposals from the Members present.
Colleagues, you know the rules.
You are expected to ask questions, not necessarily make lengthy statements.
You have one minute each in which to ask your question.
Mr President, I think I also speak for the Committee on Constitutional Affairs that I chair, in expressing my appreciation of this Commission initiative.
Moreover, this initiative is consistent with recommendations made by Parliament itself in its resolution of 18 November.
I have also heard Commissioner Barnier' s clarification of relations and links with the European Parliament during the implementation of this programme.
If I may make a suggestion, Commissioner Barnier, would it be possible for the communication to say something more on this subject, in addition to the straightforward and slightly clinical phrase which indicates that it will be carried out in conjunction with the European Parliament?
It would be helpful to stress this convergence of intentions and efforts because I can see a particular problem with coordination, specifically between the Commission initiative - which certainly does not only address members of national parliaments, but also members of national parliaments - and our committee' s programme.
Following the working meeting of 1 February, which Commissioner Barnier referred to and which benefited from the weighty contribution of the Commission, the committee intends to take stock of developments at the Intergovernmental Conference at all of its meetings.
We therefore hope to benefit from the capable and consistent participation of members of national parliaments at all of our meetings, and this will be a channel which will ably supplement the ones in the Commission' s initiative.
Thank you, Mr Napolitano.
I can confirm that our proposal is completely within the spirit of the resolution of 18 November.
I also want at this stage to say that I was able to propose this initiative to the Commission thanks to the cooperation and understanding of my colleague, Viviane Reding.
This initiative was also established in conjunction with Günter Verheugen as it involves all the major challenges of enlargement, both its opportunities and risks, and of institutional reform.
These challenges must be explained to our citizens who are concerned about them and questioning them.
I understand your concern, Mr Napolitano, and an interinstitutional working group will be set up.
Its first meeting should take place in March.
I will ensure that we go further than the rather dry terms of the Commission' s text and it will certainly be more a question of sharing the work than working in liaison with each other.
I will also ensure that over the next two years we can coordinate the initiatives taken by yourselves and ourselves which will be separate but joint.
You realise that making a success of this dialogue means work for everyone concerned.
Mr President, Commissioner, it is music to my ears to hear you use the word 'citizen' so often.
We are increasingly concerned in this House about public opinion.
The fear of public opinion is a rather paternalistic concept but our House is what it is and we must do what we can with it.
In terms of the IGC issue, I have a specific question for you.
I believe that the Court of Justice in Luxembourg is currently looking very closely at the important issue of the fight against fraud and OLAF.
As you know, there are problems which not only concern this House but also the European officials who are also European citizens.
Given the urgency surrounding this issue, has the Commission considered the possibility of completely changing the structure of the anti-fraud office by moving to a solution which would entail the fight against fraud, in the Member States and in the European institutions, coming under the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice?
Mr Dupuis, first of all I attach a great deal of importance in my public life to the word 'citizen' .
It is one of the most wonderful words in a democracy and must be used.
We will conduct this dialogue with our citizens, including the most disadvantaged and those isolated from decision-making or information centres.
With regard to the IGC and this issue of the fight against fraud, and specifically fraud against the Community budget and interests, we have retained the idea in our proposals of creating a new and specific post of a European public prosecutor.
We have done this in the spirit of this House' s work and perhaps by going down the same road.
This public prosecutor would have the authority, recognised by the EU Treaty and therefore by the Member States, to investigate thoroughly any case threatening the Community budget and interests.
We can clearly and almost clinically see that legal cooperation is now no longer enough to fight against this fraud whether it originates from inside or outside the Community.
This is why we have proposed the creation of a European public prosecutor who could, having investigated a case from start to finish, then have this investigated and ruled on by the most appropriate national court.
In reply to your second point on the Court of Justice, we have not yet established our position on the Court of Justice because we were waiting for the Dur report which was published a few days ago.
The Commission, as I have promised, will complete its proposals on the IGC opinion about the legal system and the Court of Justice within the next few weeks.
Mr President, Mr Commissioner, the day before yesterday, there was a leading news item in the most popular Danish news programme, which I would ask you to comment on.
The story went that an official in the Commission had apparently told an Austrian businessman that, because he was Austrian, he would possibly be excluded from being able to participate in a scientific development project together with businesses in other countries, including Denmark.
I would ask you to confirm that, if an official has said that an Austrian company is in some way excluded from participating in joint development projects, then this official has got the wrong end of the stick, and that, if he has not said this, then there is no story.
Will you confirm what is the case?
Mr Haarder, to my knowledge no official has been authorised to say such a thing.
My personal opinion is that it would be wrong and unfair to penalise the Austrian people, businesses and employees because of concerns prompted by the establishment in Austria of a new government coalition.
Therefore, subject to verification which I or someone else will give immediately after this sitting, I can confirm what you have just said, that the Commission has never said or authorised anything of this sort.
Generally speaking, there are other lessons to be learnt from what is happening in Austria.
I have myself suggested various possible responses to this challenge which serves to remind us all once more what we have been doing together since 1957.
This is an economic community, of course, but it is also, primarily, a community of values.
This is why we are drawing up a Charter of Fundamental Rights which will more widely and more clearly protect our citizens on an individual basis.
This is why we have Article 13 of the EC Treaty on discrimination which we proposed, in our opinion of 26 January even before the Austrian crisis, should be applied after the IGC by qualified majority rather than by unanimity.
This is why I personally have an idea to supplement Article 7 of the EU Treaty with a new paragraph which would give the democratic warning or monitoring procedure a legal basis.
Finally, this is why we have public debate.
The only way to eliminate misconceived ideas is to offer alternatives, which brings me back to the subject of our discussion.
I firmly believe in the democratic force and value of debate, particularly to fight against demagoguery.
Commissioner Barnier, you laid great stress in your statement on the importance of dialogue with the citizens of Europe.
With reference to the IGC, as you know, under the Helsinki decisions the Portuguese Presidency was given the specific entitlement to add to the agenda of the IGC during the course of the IGC.
Clearly, Parliament has its own representatives present, Mr Brok and Mr Tsatsos.
But would you, Commissioner, also be in a position to give an undertaking that if and when the agenda is enlarged by the Council you would report this to Parliament so that we could discuss it amongst ourselves and indeed with you, with the intention of continuing that dialogue with the citizens on which you have laid such stress?
Mr Beazley, my answer is clearly yes but that is no surprise.
Mr Napolitano, the chairman, and many other members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and even more MEPs in this House know that, on behalf of the Commission, I will be available to tell you how things are going as they happen throughout these negotiations, in a spirit of transparency.
I will perhaps say this differently from Mr Tsatsos and Mr Brok who are your direct representatives but it is also probable that, in many cases, we will say this together.
It is very important that these negotiations is not secretive with the European Parliament or the national parliaments which, when all said and done, will have their opinions to give and their positions to take in the ratification process.
This is why I congratulate Mr Napolitano' s initiative for regular joint consultation between the national parliaments of the Fifteen and the European Parliament.
Having said that, the duty of transparency and debate starts here with regard to the reform of the institutions.
I will therefore be available whenever you want in order to inform you of our positions and the progress being made in these negotiations throughout this year.
Mr President, firstly I would like to compliment the Commission on its approach.
I think it is extremely useful to open up the communication channels with the citizen at an early stage.
This did not really happen for the Treaty of Amsterdam or the Treaty of Maastricht and this has only led to a great deal of mistrust.
I have two questions.
Firstly, you mentioned that you will start a two-way dialogue with the citizens and I am already making a start with the 700 placement students at the European Commission.
Do you intend to address the citizens via the media as well, that is to say via the television and Internet?
My second question is of a critical nature.
The European Commission has just issued a proposal on transparency.
If I compare this with the transparency proposal which pertains to legislation in the Netherlands, then the European model is vastly overshadowed by the Dutch model, and that proposal has met with a lot of criticism in the Netherlands.
My question is really: how do you intend to organise transparency with regard to the IGC, because the present directive is not a good example of this.
Mrs Maij-Weggen, given that we are talking about ensuring transparency in the IGC, it is clear how business will be conducted and the negotiations are starting right now.
The group of representatives is currently meeting in Brussels and I will try to join them as soon as possible.
The documents will in the main be open working documents.
Although the negotiation sessions which will take place throughout the year between ministers and the European Council will not be open to the media, I am committed, as I must be at this stage, to ensuring this transparency and reporting in the most appropriate arenas on these negotiations and the Commission' s viewpoint.
I can confirm, and thank you for having asked me about this, that we will use all the most modern means, television in particular, to broadcast our public debates in each country and even across Europe.
We will open an Internet forum and create permanent discussion forums.
The Commissioners will undertake to respond rapidly to any questions raised.
These are the modern means to be used.
However, I believe we must also make the effort to get as close as possible to the people.
Although this may be a rather Utopian ideal, I want a Commissioner, when he can, an MEP, a minister to attend public debates in all the regions of Europe.
I have evidence that this is possible.
The majority of you hold these debates in your constituencies and regions.
Although this may seem rather egotistical, I want the Commission, in the minds of the people, to have a face and for those people forming the Commission to be able to meet our citizens as often as possible.
Mr President, I welcome Mr Barnier' s commitment to go to the regions, both to explain and to listen to what citizens have to say.
I would like to invite him to my own region of Yorkshire, a major European region that is a full participant in the single European market and a major recipient of European structural funding.
He can come with both the hats that he wears as a Commissioner.
I would like to ask him how vigorous the Commission will be in this information campaign?
In some Member States it is not just a matter of providing information to a public that is not as well informed as it might be.
That is certainly important but it is also a question of combating the misinformation that is put around by a very active anti-European movement and anti-European organisations that exist.
The Commission will have to be very vigorous in the responses that it puts out to some of the comments that it will be receiving as part of the campaign.
Mr Corbett, thank you for your comments.
I willingly accept your invitation.
If I have understood you correctly, you want me, when I come to Yorkshire, to talk not only about the reform of the European institutions but also the Structural Funds.
I can perform this dual task.
I forgot to mention my intention to go before the national parliaments, as I have already done, not only by meeting their representatives here but by going to see them in situ.
Ten days ago I was in Westminster, so you can see, Mr Corbett, that I am not afraid of the difficulties.
Next week I will go to the Bundestag in Berlin.
I have already appeared before the French Senate.
Therefore, throughout this debate, whenever I can, I will go directly to see the national parliaments too.
With regard to the dialogue with our citizens, it is not a question of propaganda or marketing, nor even of communication.
I want this dialogue to be a real dialogue.
So, after a short film objectively explaining the challenges of institutional reform, those in the public gallery can participate in an open discussion.
I will say again that we are going to conduct this dialogue initiative through specific cooperation or a more structured partnership with the Member States.
I sincerely hope, with your support, that the governments of the Fifteen will participate in this dialogue initiative in the manner which they consider most appropriate.
Mr President, I should like to join Mr Barnier' s study group with the 700 trainees so that he has some people to discuss matters with.
It is not much fun, of course, having to discuss transparency and intergovernmental conferences with yourself.
In connection with the Intergovernmental Conference, Mr Barnier said, during his presentation in Parliament, that social policy was not to be subject to majority decision-making but, when I look at page 63, I see that rights of travel and of residence - that is to say, the Residence Directives - ,combating discrimination, the whole of social security and the renewal of Regulation No 1408 and, with a few exceptions, of arrangements in the socio-political sphere are to be subject to qualified majority voting.
Is not Mr Barnier nervous about penetrating the inner workings of the Member States' election processes?
It is, of course, these issues which people go to the polls about and which lead to new majorities in the Folketing and other parliaments.
Can such matters be controlled from Brussels?
Is this an element in the radical decentralisation which Mr Prodi talked about this morning?
I was very glad to learn last week that the Commission is giving close attention over a number of years to the concept of subsidiarity and its reference, not merely to relations between the Union and Member States, but also the Union, the Member States, regions and cities.
I hope that in his pursuit of dialogue around the regions of Europe, Commissioner Barnier will expand upon that thought and learn from what he hears.
Commissioner, I want to go back to one of your previous answers.
In this you mentioned what I would refer to as the possibilities of protecting the EU Treaty against any risks of deviation and, in particular, the variation of penalties which may be imposed on a Member State, pursuant to Article 7, for the violation of fundamental freedoms.
Do you believe that these proposals, or proposals of this type, form part of the mandate of the IGC as defined in Helsinki?
I do not think so.
Are you not afraid that such penalties might get out of hand and serve to punish not violations of human rights but simple differences of opinion, unpopular opinions or deviations from the dominant European thinking?
Yes, Mr Bonde, we will be starting this debate with 700 young people in Brussels who are going to be working in the institutions and with the Commission.
I believe that it will be good to start this dialogue with young people who are motivated.
In terms of social protection, I can confirm that we have made proposals about qualified majority or unanimous voting but these are regardless of ideology.
In your country, Mr Bonde, like everywhere else, I believe people are keen for the internal market to work properly under the fairest conditions of competition and movement of goods and people.
This will therefore be our rule.
We are proposing that decisions on certain policies or measures involving taxation or social protection and social security should be taken by qualified majority voting when there is a direct link with the proper operation of the internal market.
Our proposal is not general or systematic.
I am well aware of the sensitivity of these taxation and social protection issues.
I do not believe that all the national systems of social protection should be made identical.
This has never been the case.
We are simply trying to ensure, in a Europe with 30 or 27 Member States, the best conditions for the operation of the internal market without one country being able to block the other 26 or 27.
Mr MacCormick, I agree that this dialogue must reach beyond the national capitals.
It must get as close as possible to the people, where they live and where they have their roots.
If I said anything different I would be contradicting myself as Commissioner for Regional Policy which is one of the most specific and most visible policies for increasing employment and improving the quality of life of people in their regions.
You will often hear me say that this policy does not just have one main objective of achieving cohesion and solidarity between the regions but that it is intended in addition to help people, where they live, to preserve their roots, traditions, soul and identity.
We will therefore conduct this dialogue with the towns and regions.
Mr Berthu, the Helsinki mandate is clear and we are working within this.
It specifies that we must deal firstly and as a priority with the three basic issues which were left out in Amsterdam.
It also adds related institutional questions and issues which may be included in the negotiations depending on the Portuguese and French presidencies.
The Commission is acting correctly if, on a particular point, it believes it must add to its opinion which covers many institutional questions.
I am not yet sure that we will do this on Article 7.
However, if we do, this will not be solely in response or as a reaction to an economic situation which is sufficiently serious that the fourteen governments of the Union must mobilise together to give their response.
We will also do this with regard for the future in general.
We will use all the means available to permanently strengthen the community of values which we have been building together since the founding of the Union in 1957, and even before that, on the rubble of the Second World War.
Everything which can be done will be useful.
I am sure that you and I, Mr Berthu, can at least agree on this.
Thank you, Commissioner.
You have answered the questions precisely and also opened the dialogue for Europe that you referred to.
You have set a very good example of time-keeping today.
That concludes the debate.
Question Time (Commission)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0009/2000).
We will examine questions to the Commission.
First part
Question No 36 by (H-0025/00):
Subject: High infant mortality in Kosovo According to the latest UN data received from the World Health Organisation, Kosovo has the highest rate of infant mortality in Europe; almost 50% of babies born prematurely die, while the war has produced a steep rise in miscarriages and children who manage to go to term are smaller than the norm.
In the context of the humanitarian aid provided by the Union and the efforts of its envoy Bernard Kouchner, will the Commission say what measures have been taken to safeguard the women of Kosovo's right to motherhood and the health of pregnant women, women in childbirth and babies?
Mr President, the Commission is conscious of the very difficult situation concerning health and health facilities in Kosovo, not just for pregnant women but across the board.
This results both from the recent conflict and from the years of neglect and lack of maintenance that preceded it.
The statistics quoted on child mortality speak for themselves and are wholly unacceptable.
However, the situation is hardly better for other parts of the population.
The Commission' s response has been as follows: firstly, the health sector has been a significant beneficiary of ECHO funding.
ECHO is currently focusing on the provision of medical supplies and emergency health care, on support to institutions as well as vaccination.
However, efforts are increasingly oriented towards the establishment of a self-sufficient healthcare system in the province.
UNMIK has already taken a significant role in this field.
Secondly, under the reconstruction programme, urgent intervention at the hospital in Mitrovica has already been initiated with a EUR 1 million rehabilitation programme.
Progress is slow due to the tense relations between the ethnic groups of this divided city.
However, the Commission is maintaining its efforts with the support of UNMIK for this project.
We hope that one day it may become a symbol promoting the benefits of ethnic reconciliation.
Under the European Community' s damage assessment, estimated costs of the reconstruction of healthcare facilities and provision of equipment to dispensaries and health houses amount to EUR 4 million.
The Commission is now turning to the programming of 2000 funds.
We expect to dedicate a considerable sum to improving the healthcare system.
The emphasis will be on long-term reforms covering health financing as well as training and procurement.
Work is already under way with UNMIK to determine an appropriate contribution from the Commission to this enterprise.
Commissioner, this morning President Prodi, among others, stressed that the Balkans are testing our ability to act effectively, the very credibility of the European Union is on trial, and the gap between words and deeds must finally be closed.
Commissioner, do you really think that the facts we have about high infant mortality in Kosovo - the highest in Europe - and more generally the picture of human misery and destruction that prevails in Kosovo, are not already damaging our credibility and casting doubt on our ability to live up to our promises?
Besides, Commissioner, is so-called humanitarian military intervention justified by the present picture of human destruction in Kosovo?
Do you think that so much inaction is excusable when, on the continent of Europe itself, the right to life is at risk?
I do not think that our reconstruction agency or the task force before it, which have been working incredibly hard in Kosovo, would regard it as an adequate description of their labours to suggest that they had been standing idly by.
I am sure the honourable Member did not mean that.
Of course, she is entirely correct in saying that the Union' s credibility is on the line with what happens, not just in Kosovo but in the Balkans as a whole.
I am very concerned that the assistance we provide should arrive expeditiously and in a way which can maximise our assistance.
I would just make two points about the situation in Kosovo which we are addressing as enthusiastically as we can along WHO lines.
First of all, I am sure that the honourable Member recognises that over the period of the 1990s the government in Belgrade underfunded the health service in Kosovo, and many Albanians found that they were not really receiving any health care at all.
As a result of that, a parallel health care system was put in place through the Mother Teresa Society.
So what we are dealing with is not just the consequences of conflict but the consequences of years of neglect and chronic under-investment.
Secondly, and I am sure that the honourable Member recognises this as well, some of the tragic stories to come out of Kosovo in recent weeks have not been about child mortalities during carriage of a baby, but child mortality after a healthy baby has been born.
Those were cases in which women who during the hostilities, or before the hostilities, tragically killed their own children.
We are dealing with a horrific story in Kosovo.
We have to work as well as we can in the health care field and in others to restore something approaching civilised standards and civilised behaviour, but it is not going to be easy.
Commissioner, I would like to thank you for your response to the Member' s first question and the supplementary question.
However, I still have some contacts in Kosovo who have informed me that food packages which are distributed by ECHO, among others, are often of inferior quality.
In some cases, there have been incidents of food containing insects and such like.
Are you aware of this?
Are you prepared to act upon it?
This is my first additional question.
My second question pertains to the reconstruction of the hospital in Mitrovica.
You are perhaps aware that this hospital is located in the Northern part of the city and that, given the tense situation, Albanian Kosovars do not have any access to this section at all.
What does the Commission intend to do in order to ensure that Albanian Kosovars too can get to hospital?
On the first question, I am going myself to Kosovo at the beginning of next month for another visit and I will certainly look into the allegation made by the honourable Member about the ECHO food package.
I have not heard that suggestion before, but it is an important point and I will certainly investigate it when I am there.
Secondly, I do understand exactly what the honourable Member is saying about Mitrovica.
I was in Mitrovica a couple of months ago, I saw the situation there for myself.
I had discussions with municipal leaders from both communities, including the leader of the Albanian side who had himself in the past been a doctor and was generally recognised for the medical work he had done during the hostilities and subsequently.
So I know the very serious problems that exist in that hospital and I can assure the honourable Member that we will be doing all that we can to see that adequate health facilities are available for everybody in Kosovo, whatever ethnic group they come from.
The particular difficulties in Mitrovica - for example, it is not just a question of Albanian patients having difficulty getting to hospital, Albanian staff have had difficulty working there - are particularly acute problems.
We will try to address them, but it is not easy.
Question No 37 by (H-0029/00):
Subject: Turkish blockade of Armenia Given that the European Union is actively promoting social, economic and political relations with Armenia through the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement signed on 12 October 1999, what steps is the Commission taking to persuade the Turkish Government to lift the economic blockade of Armenia?
The Commission supports any effort aimed at the settlement of the disputes between Turkey and Armenia and regrets that there has not yet been any normalisation of relations between these two countries.
In the present political circumstances it is however unrealistic to imagine that the border between Armenia and Turkey, as well as the one between Armenia and Azerbaijan could be opened without settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
Mr President, the Commission will be holding negotiations in the future on the accession of Turkey to the European Union.
Will it make it a condition that negotiations can only start if the blockade is lifted because, in the final analysis, we are all neighbours and we want to cultivate positive neighbourly relations inside the European Union?
My question therefore is this: will the Commission make this one of the conditions in order to improve future discussions?
The key issue is to support the efforts of the OSCE Minsk group to find a settlement to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and we stand ready to help in any way we can.
We have also been substantial contributors of development assistance under the TACIS programme to Armenia.
Let me relate my answer specifically to the question of Turkish accession to the European Union.
The situation of Turkey's relations with its neighbours will, as the honourable Member asks, be closely examined in the framework of the pre-accession strategy.
As stated in Agenda 2000 - and I quote: "Enlargement should not mean importing border conflicts".
That statement could not be much clearer.
But I repeat that the most important contribution we can make is to try to assist in the resolution of that conflict which has had such harmful economic and humanitarian results.
Question No 38 by (H-0040/00):
Subject: Implications for human rights of the construction of the Ilisu Dam in Turkey Given that Turkey has recently been granted applicant country status, what is the Commission's view of the implications for human rights of the construction of the Ilisu Dam, given the massive displacement of the Kurdish and the other people of the region that will result?
The Commission has no information regarding the impact of the construction of the Ilisu Dam on the population of the region.
We will, however, consider raising the matter with the Turkish authorities, together with other issues concerning regional development policies in the framework of the new pre-accession strategy for Turkey.
I have a related point.
It concerns the implications of the dam on access to fresh water in the region as a whole.
As you know, the dam will limit the supply of fresh water to Syria and to Iraq in particular.
Given the extreme volatility of this region and given the very real concerns of many commentators that we will see an increased incidence of conflict, of so-called "water wars", in the coming decades, what is the Commission's view about the potential destabilisation, both in Turkey and in the wider region, that will be caused by this dam?
Can you say whether you will indeed raise this point as well?
We will certainly raise the point made by the honourable Member.
We have heard anxieties expressed on that point and I will ensure it is taken up.
There have also been considerable anxieties expressed about the potential danger to the archaeological heritage in the area.
We will raise that, too, in the representations we make.
A number of other hydro-electric schemes planned over the last 30 years in Turkey have raised matters of concern, such as the effect on displaced farmers.
On the whole those seem to have been dealt with relatively satisfactorily and I hope that the same can be true of this project which - just to make the point clear - is not a project in which the Commission is participating in any form.
We thank Mr Patten for having replied on behalf of the Commission.
Question No 39 by (H-0036/00):
Subject: Drafting of Charter of Fundamental Rights The general public welcomes the fact that a Charter of Fundamental Rights is to be drawn up.
It is also to be hoped that it will meet the challenges of Europe in the 21st century.
What are the Commission's views on the substance of the Charter?
What type of rights will the Charter set out (economic, social and cultural)?
Which citizens will it cover (those of the European Union or the citizens of all European countries with a view to enlargement?
Will it cover immigrants etc.?)
Will it set out established social rights in the European Union or will it set a broader agenda?
What means will the Charter use to ensure that it clearly guarantees equality between the sexes?
What are the Commission's views on incorporating the Charter into the Treaty on European Union?
Like the honourable Member, the Commission welcomes the decision taken by the Heads of State and Government to start the process of drawing up a European Charter of Fundamental Rights.
In the conclusions of the Cologne European Council the Heads of State and Government even established the broad outlines of the Charter' s content.
According to these conclusions, the Charter must contain three categories of rights.
The first category is rights of freedom and equality and procedural rights, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The second is the rights reserved for citizens of the European Union.
The third is economic and social rights, as contained in the European Social Charter and the Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers, insofar as they do not merely establish objectives for action by the Union.
The Commission considers that the Convention responsible for drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights must respect the mandate given by the Cologne European Council.
Having said that, this does not mean that the Convention should be limited to a codifying role of simply compiling the existing rights from various sources.
As I have said before in this House, the Commission is convinced that the Convention must be able, if necessary, to adapt and develop these rights in view of current circumstances, particularly technological and social changes.
However, given the mandate and the final objective of the text to be submitted to the Heads of State and Government, this power must be exercised with caution and on a case-by-case basis.
The rights conferred by this Charter will have at least two types of beneficiary.
Some rights will apply to anyone present in the EU territory while others will benefit only citizens of the European Union.
It may also be envisaged that some economic and social rights could be guaranteed only for citizens of the European Union and third-country nationals meeting certain conditions.
It is not possible at this initial stage of the process of drawing up the Charter to prejudge its content in more detail.
However, I can confirm that the principle of equal opportunity and equal treatment between men and women will certainly be included among the rights guaranteed by the future European Charter of Fundamental Rights.
This is because this principle already figures among the rights guaranteed by the EC Treaty and by secondary legislation and because it undoubtedly constitutes a common constitutional tradition in the Member States.
As I have also said before to this House, the Commission is favourable to inserting the Charter in the EU Treaty.
However, we are fully aware that the final decision on this matter will fall to the Heads of State and Government.
The difficult part, which will fall to the Convention, is therefore to draw up an ambitious and politically significant text which can be integrated as such into the Treaties.
In its opinion on the holding of an Intergovernmental Conference to amend the Treaties, the Commission noted that the European Council must decide during the year 2000 on the inclusion of certain items on the IGC agenda, in particular the European Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Commissioner, it is quite significant that at the beginning of this new century people in Europe, men and women, are being called upon to redefine their rights and obligations.
We hope that this important Cologne Council decision will become a reality.
Globalisation on the one hand and enlargement on the other, make it urgently necessary to define those rights.
Seattle is a real source of concern in that context and we hope that the European Council in Nice will not be a wasted meeting.
But if we are to secure the public' s participation in this new planning, we would like to learn what plan the European bodies and specifically the Commission are proposing as the social and democratic model of Europe in the twenty-first century.
I listened to your general guidelines and I would like to ask you what is the position of children, as entities in their own right, in the Commission' s plans for the new model of society in the twenty-first century.
Mr President, Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, in my opinion, and as Mr Prodi said this morning, the drawing up of the Charter is an exercise with great political significance.
This is because it shows that the Union places the fundamental rights of citizens at the top of the political concerns for the future of our common project.
In this context, the criteria by which these rights are to be chosen must be clearly indicated.
The essential criterion is the rights of citizens with regard to the European institutions, as contained in the European project enshrined in the Treaties of the European Union.
I understand your concern about the rights of children.
Many elements of our work, and particularly of my work as Commissioner for Justice and Home Affairs, involve protecting the rights of children.
This is an area in which the principle of subsidiarity applies fully.
Each Member State is principally responsible for defining its responsibilities towards children.
As for the EU' s responsibility, the rights of children must be recognised in the Charter according to the areas in which the Union can give added value to the promotion of the social and economic situation and even the citizenship, in its broadest sense, of children.
I hope we can meet the challenge which the honourable Member has posed for the Commission and the whole Convention.
Mr President, I have had the privilege of hearing the Commissioner a number of times on this issue and I very much agree with his approach.
However, I should like to ask a slightly different question.
We have just heard Commissioner Barnier say that he is anxious to communicate better with the people and to aim the information policy of the Commission towards the major issues that the Community is dealing with this year.
Would the Commissioner argue for some of the information budget of the Commission to be put towards informing and consulting the citizens on this issue of a Citizens Charter?
It is very important that the people feel engaged in this process.
I know that the Convention itself will do much in this area but it does not have the resources that the Commission has.
Will the Commission look at using its information budget to ensure people are engaged in this debate?
It is the policy of the Commission to promote an open and wide debate on the Charter of Fundamental Rights, not only with non-governmental organisations but also with the citizens in a project as far-reaching as the Charter is.
I can assure you that the Commission will do its best to promote the debate on the future Charter of Fundamental Rights.
We can achieve the best of both worlds by having a clear text, a text that can be easily read by the citizens, and at the same time a text that can be used as a legal instrument.
There is no contradiction between the two.
The challenge we have is to bring them together in the final version of the Charter.
I am very glad to know that I can count on your support here.
Question No 40 by (H-0095/00):
Subject: Articles 6.1, 7.1 and 7.2 of the Treaty on European Union Article 6.1 of the Treaty states that the Union is based on principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
It is clear from statements over the past years that Jörg Haider and the Freedom Party do not respect human rights and fundamental freedoms with respect to third country nationals and minority groups living in Austria.
Therefore, will the Commission state when they intend to propose under Article 7.1 that there is 'the existence of a serious and persistent breach by a Member State of the principles mentioned in Article 6.1.' , and urge the Council acting by qualified majority to suspend certain rights deriving from the application of this Treaty to Austria including the voting rights of the representative of Austria in the Council?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to begin my answer by reminding you of the position adopted by the Commission with regard to the formation of the new Austrian Government.
This was reiterated this morning in President Romano Prodi' s speech on that government which includes Ministers from Jörg Haider' s Freedom Party.
I am referring ,of course, to the statement made by the Commission on 1 February 2000, the basic elements of which I would like to restate.
The Commission confirmed then, as it does today, that it shares the concerns underlying the Portuguese Presidency' s statement of 1 February 2000.
These concerns are legitimate and there are good reasons for them.
There is no need for me to remind you of Jörg Haider' s political bias and of his many xenophobic and racist public statements, which are also anti-European.
The fact that an openly extremist, racist and xenophobic party can reach power in a Member State of the European Union will inevitably be a source of concern to the other States that are taking part in the European project.
The European Commission is certainly not indifferent to the matter either.
Secondly, the Commission reiterated and reiterates again its commitment to continue fulfilling its duty as guardian of the Treaties, specifically with regard to Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union.
One of the most important innovations provided by the Treaty of Amsterdam was to clarify the basic principles which represent the shared heritage of the Member States.
Another innovation was the establishment of a mechanism which would monitor whether these principles are being fulfilled, and which would react if any of them were violated.
The Commission thereby gave a practical demonstration of its commitment to one of the essential pillars: that of the rule of law.
This principle means that the Commission must act within the limits laid down by the Treaties and it is in this context that the statement of 1 February was made.
The Commission is not a State.
It cannot and must not act as if it were one.
In order to give a precise answer to your question, Mr Ford, I must remind you that in order for the mechanism established by Article 7.1 of the Treaty on European Union to be applied, there must be proof of the existence and I quote, of a "serious and persistent breach by a Member State of the principles mentioned in Article 6."
I repeat, a "serious and persistent breach" is the condition necessary for the Commission to be able to propose to the Council that measures be adopted against a Member State.
I think that it is obvious that conditions have not been met which would apply to the current situation in Austria.
As a matter of fact I think that I am right in saying that we all hope that these conditions of a serious and persistent breach of human rights and of democracy are never fulfilled, either in Austria or in any other Member State.
I would like to assure you of my personal commitment and of that of the Commission, as stated once again by President Prodi this morning, to doing everything to ensure that we do not have to apply the mechanism stated in Article 7.
I would also like to assure you though that we will not hesitate to apply it should it prove necessary.
The values at stake are too central, too fundamental for us to accept dithering or compromises.
Individuals and governments should be judged by what they do rather than by what they say.
In Austria' s case, the statements are contradictory to say the least.
On the one hand, any of us could pick up on a whole cluster of inflammatory remarks by the leader of the Freedom Party.
On the other hand, the new Austrian Government' s programme reaffirms its commitment to defend democracy and human rights.
We will soon have our first opportunity, and an excellent opportunity it will be, to see which one of these two faces of the Freedom Party is the real one.
I am referring to the position the Austrian Government will adopt at the Council with regard to the Commission' s proposals for the establishment of an action programme to combat discrimination and for two directives.
One applies to the principle of treating people equally, without differentiating on the grounds of race or ethnic origin.
The other proposal will provide protection at work against discrimination on the grounds of ethnic or racial origin, religion, handicap or sexual persuasion.
These are significant texts, adopted in accordance with Article 13 of the Treaty, which gave the Community jurisdiction to fight discrimination on the grounds of race, ethnic origin, sex etc.
Lastly, I would like to assure you, Mr Ford, that the Commission will remain vigilant and will not fail to act in accordance with its responsibilities, should it prove necessary.
I thank the Commissioner for his reply to my question.
But is Commissioner Vitorino aware, not only of Mr Haider's and the Freedom Party's words, but also of their deeds?
Mr Haider has actually been in government in the southern province of Carinthia where he has led a racist and xenophobic campaign against the Slovene-speaking minority in that region who are Austrian citizens, where he has attempted to abolish dual language education and where there has been clear discrimination against the Roma and immigrant communities.
Could the Commissioner answer two questions.
Firstly he talked about verification.
Can he tell us how that verification will take place and who will do it?
Secondly, does he not agree that were the current government, at a national level, to pursue the kind of policies that Mr Haider and the Freedom Party have pursued at regional level, then there clearly would be a breach of Article 6(1) of the Treaty with regard to fundamental freedom and human rights and it would be incumbent upon the Commission to take the necessary action?
We are not talking about words here.
We are talking about deeds by the Freedom Party and Mr Haider.
It is quite clear to me that it is the responsibility of the Commission to closely monitor the evolution of the situation in the Member States according to the procedures and standards that are enshrined in Article 6 and justify the use of Article 7 of the Treaty.
Therefore I am fully confident that the Commission will be able to follow very closely the evolution of the situation in Austria, as in any other Member State.
If any concrete case of persistent violation of human rights perpetrated by the government of one Member State occurs, we will be entirely capable to react and to act accordingly.
I also rely not only on the cooperation of the Members of the European Parliament, but also on the cooperation of non-governmental organisations, which have always made an important contribution to the anti-discrimination policy of the Commission.
Regarding the situation in Carinthia, we need to look at this in detail.
The honourable Member raised the question.
The protection of ethnic minorities and of minorities that speak a specific language is an element of the programme and of the two directives that the Commission has put before the Council.
We should not only focus this debate on the Austrian question.
That question calls for reflection, for debate and, if necessary, for action.
I sincerely hope that all Member States will take the opportunity of this action plan and these two directives that the Commission has presented to the Council to reiterate in clear and concrete terms their approval for the action plan and for the directives and their commitment to fight against discrimination, racism and xenophobia wherever it might occur.
Thank you very much, Mr Vitorino, for your valuable contribution to this Question Time.
Second part
Questions to Mrs Wallström
Question No 41 by (H-0021/00):
Subject: Surplus electrical and electronic equipment Each year the European Union has to deal with a growing volume of surplus electrical and electronic equipment (6 million tonnes' worth in 1998), mainly on account of the speed with which such equipment becomes obsolescent.
The environmental problems stemming from the incineration and the dumping of such waste are mainly attributable to the presence of hazardous substances (lead, cadmium, mercury, hexavalent chrome, PVC and halogenated flame retarders).
A preliminary draft directive intended to regulate the management of such waste has been through three successive versions, the most recent of which dates from July 1999.
Can the Commission account for the lengthy gestation of this draft, which should in theory have emerged in its final form in 1998?
Is it true that the US Government is disputing most of the provisions of the current draft and is even threatening to appeal to the World Trade Organisation (for infringement of Article XI of the GATT and Article 2(2) of the Agreement on technical obstacles to trade) if it is adopted?
The Commission agrees with MEPs that the current method of dumping electrical and electronic waste is causing major environmental problems.
Consequently, the Commission decided to prepare a proposal on the subject and, since 1997, has been involved in discussions with the parties concerned.
The outcome of the discussions, as well as of the in-depth investigations which are being carried out in this area, are now being examined by the Commission.
Some parts of the proposal have been criticised, among them the phasing out of some heavy metals and brominated flame retardants, as well as the application of the principle of making manufacturers responsible for the disposal of electrical and electronic waste.
The United States' delegation to the European Union is concerned about certain points in the last consultation paper, inter alia the phasing out of the materials already mentioned, as well as certain questions arising from the principle of manufacturers' responsibility for the disposal of electrical and electronic waste.
The main argument put forward by the United States in this context is that the present provisions are, they say, incompatible with international trade law.
The Commission is currently carefully reviewing the United States' arguments.
I should just like to add that my intention is that the Commission should be able to present a proposal on the dumping of electrical and electronic waste before Easter.
My question specifically concerned the reaction of the US Government to the text of the preliminary draft.
There have in fact been three preliminary draft texts with the last one, to my knowledge, dating from July 1999.
Is this the text which you will be submitting, or an amendment to the original version?
Version 3 is already much weaker than Version 2 following the comments of US industry as relayed by the US Government.
I note in particular that when you talk about the international law with which the text would not be compatible, you are referring in fact to the rules of the World Trade Organisation.
The arguments of the US Government concern the fact that a future ban on the presence of dangerous substances in electrical and electronic waste would be contrary to the WTO rules.
This worries me because this means that, when adopting texts, we are going to be continually threatened by attack from the World Trade Organisation.
This will fundamentally weaken European environmental legislation and particularly this proposal.
Thank you for the follow-up question.
It is important for me to have a chance to answer it.
It is clear that in a process such as this, where we are discussing the disposal of a considerable stream of both electrical and electronic waste in Europe, there is an on-going dialogue between the different parties concerned.
The dialogue has been fruitful and has led to our preparing a proposal.
Parts of it have been strengthened, but other parts may well contain too many compromises.
We are still in the process of preparing a text, and the dialogue with the relevant parties will continue up until the last moment.
I do not think that the intervention of the United States should push us in a direction that would lead to our taking insufficient account of environmental considerations.
I strongly oppose using the WTO and trade rules as a pretext for preventing the EU from introducing radical environmental standards.
I start from the assumption that we should in fact introduce these.
However, I do want to listen to all the points of view.
For example, I recently met representatives of the electronics industry who put forward suggestions - including practical ones - for improving our own proposal.
However, I totally reject any suggestion that I would allow the United States to determine the shape of our directive.
In fact, I believe that we should be showing the way, an intention that will also characterise the final proposal.
Question No 42 by (H-0026/00):
Subject: Gender and environment Practically all the contributors involved in the Rio and Kyoto processes - individual organisations, civic action groups, governments, the World Bank, the UN and relief organisations - believed that women should take a greater part in decision-making on the environment.
More women in decision-making positions on various environmental bodies would extend the predominantly male terms of reference beyond business alone to embrace social justice as well.
Is the Commission prepared to adopt an action plan to increase the active participation of women in decision-making in the environmental field?
In 1988, the Commission introduced an action plan to promote equal opportunities for women and men.
Through the current programme, which covers the period 1997 to 2000, we are endeavouring to encourage a workplace culture in which the value of both men and women is integrated and where gender-specific needs are taken into consideration.
One of the programme's aims is to develop and supervise methods, strategies and measures for promoting gender equality in the decision-making process and in positions of responsibility.
Within the framework of the action plan, each individual directorate general is to prepare its own programme of measures.
One of the goals of those programmes is to increase the number of women in managerial positions.
The new Commission's own objective is to double the number of women managers before the end of its term of office.
The same line is being pursued with particular vigour in the Directorate-General for the Environment, where nearly 60 per cent of directors and 20 per cent of unit heads are women.
Our policy is to encourage the recruitment of women to administrative posts in order to create a reserve of suitable candidates for future promotion to managerial positions.
Currently, women hold 24.5 per cent of our A-grade posts, and we hope the number will increase steadily.
Moreover, we are trying hard to attract qualified women to participate in our consultation groups.
As regards our external partners, all we can do is set them a good example and encourage their efforts to democratise their decision-making processes.
With respect to the general principle of incorporating a perspective of equality, as you know, this principle is included in the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Article 3 of the Treaty states that, in all the activities referred to in this Article, the Community shall aim to eliminate inequalities, and to promote equality, between women and men.
The Commission gives its full support to the efforts being made in this area and is continuing its investigations into whether specific measures can be implemented in the environmental field.
I should, of course, like to take this opportunity to say that I appreciate the role played by the European Parliament' s Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, particularly its chair.
I should just like to recall that, during the lengthy process of approving the present Commission, every Commissioner was questioned by the Women' s Committee on how they would tackle the issue of equality within their own particular field.
We shall be monitoring each Commissioner carefully, so the other Commissioners have now been forewarned.
Thank you for your reply.
I interpret it as saying that you agree that what is needed is an action plan to enable more women to take part in specific environmental fields.
I should also like to point out that the Beijing Declaration emphasises the importance of having the institutional capacity to introduce a perspective of equality into all environmental programmes.
Environmental agencies often do not have the required knowledge or procedures for incorporating such a perspective into their daily work.
I naturally want to know whether the Commissioner is willing to incorporate the idea of equality into environmental policy and programmes.
This is a crucial goal.
In order for all policies to be similarly permeated by the concept of equality, it is especially important that people in key posts should have the basic knowledge required.
.
(SV) My understanding of mainstreaming is, of course, that this should characterise everything we do.
In the action plan prepared by my Directorate-General, issues of equality play a very important role.
For example, I am prepared to give seminars on leadership or other subjects myself to encourage women to take on further tasks within the Commission.
If we are to be able to motivate everybody, I believe it is extremely important for this message to be sent all the way from the top down or, if you prefer, from the bottom up.
My impression of environment-related work, broadly speaking, is that in many instances it is dominated by women.
This state of affairs must be encouraged so that women have a chance to secure managerial posts or reach high-ranking positions in the environmental field.
I should like to make it plain that our programme reflects that intention, but there is certainly room for improvement.
I have some experience in drawing up plans and following them up.
I hope that this will be of benefit.
Question No 43 by (H-0045/00):
Subject: The Boyne Estuary and the Drogheda Port Company The Boyne Estuary is designated a Special Protection Area (SPA) under the Wild Birds Directive and is under consideration for designation as a Special Area of Conservation under the Habitats Directive, as it is an area of international importance.
However, the Department of the Marine, Louth County Council and Drogheda Corporation have allowed the development of a new port in the SPA and even the elimination of a mudflat at Stegrennan recently added to the SPA specifically at the Commission's insistence.
What is more, a very large warehouse has been constructed, in respect of which it is proving difficult to secure access to the planning permission and other infrastructures are planned by the Drogheda Corporation.
How can the Commission ensure that this sort of development financed through the Structural Funds does not conflict with the nature conservation needs of the area?
Is the Commission ready to suspend funding completely, pending a review of the development plans of the area?
The Commission is aware of the construction of the harbour, but we know nothing about the warehouse or the rest of the infrastructure mentioned by the honourable Member.
The harbour construction project is receiving support from the Structural Funds and chiefly involves dredging the river Boyne Estuary and depositing the mud on the mudflats at Stegrennan.
The Boyne Estuary is designated a special protection area under the Wild Birds Directive.
That means that any development that takes place in or near the Boyne Estuary and that is likely to affect the special protection area must take account of the protection criteria for the area laid down in the Community' s Habitats Directive.
Since 1998, the Commission has received a number of complaints alleging that the harbour will damage the mudflats at Stegrennan, which are now designated a part of the special protection area, and that the relevant protection criteria have not been observed.
After investigating these complaints between 1998 and the beginning of 1999 - during which time the project did not receive support from the Structural Funds - the Commission became convinced, in the summer of 1999, that the relevant protection criteria had been observed during the building of the harbour.
An in-depth environmental impact assessment had been carried out.
The most serious harm caused by the project, the damage to the Stegrennan mudflats, was only to be temporary, and the developers were liable for completely restoring the mudflats.
At the Commission's suggestion, the mudflats at Stegrennan were formally included in the Boyne Estuary special protection area, from which they had previously been excluded.
Furthermore, to compensate for the negative effects on the bird populations caused by the temporary disappearance of the mudflats, the intention was that other habitats in the estuary should be improved.
However, since last summer the measure just mentioned has been in dispute.
Firstly, the Irish authorities withdrew their earlier commitment to carry out improvements.
They then renewed their commitment after an Irish non-governmental organisation began a legal challenge in the Irish courts.
However, the new commitment included some minor changes which, in turn, led to a further complaint.
In view of the fact that the Irish authorities have undertaken to make compensatory improvements and that other issues have already been resolved, the Commission will not, for the present, propose that financial support from the Structural Funds should be suspended.
However, it wishes to discuss the question of compensatory measures with respect to improved habitats with the Irish authorities, particularly in the light of the continuing legal challenge in the Irish courts.
- I do not quite understand what the Commissioner said.
The mudflat at Stregrennan, which was made a special protection area at the request of the Commission, has been completely destroyed at this stage.
It is clear that the activities that have taken place there are in clear breach of EU directives.
You say there will be no further funding.
I would like to know whether you are going to stop completely the funding at this stage until there is a proper investigation.
If not, why not?
If you are, when exactly are you going to do it?
Is it correct and proper that the department which owns the company is also the authority which issues the licence, and also the authority which basically takes the money from the EU and gives it to a company that it owns 100%?
Is this right and proper?
What is your opinion on that?
Any EU funding for the project must be stopped because it is in clear breach of EU directives.
Even the area designated by the Commissioners as a special protection area has been destroyed.
Compensation afterwards is not going to make up for the damage that was done.
The first legal challenge followed the start of work on the port of development in early autumn 1999 without the compensatory habitat improvements being in place.
As a result, the Irish authorities agreed to reinstate the cord grass removal but this time by direct mechanical means.
The use of mechanical means led to a further legal challenge - that is what I referred to also in my first answer - based on the argument that mechanical removal would damage the underlying mudflats and would cause the ecologically-harmful spread of cord grass in the estuary.
There is to date no conclusive outcome to this legal challenge.
The adoption of the necessary compensatory measures is a matter for the national authorities, and does not require prior Commission approval.
The Commission' s role is to make sure that the standards required by the Birds Directive are fully met, and clearly there would be a problem with compensatory measures which were themselves damaging.
In this case, the Commission proposes to seek further clarification from the Irish authorities on the up-to-date position on the compensatory measures and possible problems with the mechanical removal of cord grass.
We are not at the moment ready to propose to stop the financing from the Structural Funds.
Mr President, sadly, the specific case raised by Mrs McKenna is not an isolated one.
There are other examples of conservation in special scientific areas being damaged as a result of EU funding.
Will the Commission consider issuing instructions to all Member States saying that, if in future it discovers that European environmental directives have been breached or proper environmental assessment has not been carried out, it will not only stop future funding but will withdraw the funding already granted, in other words, reclaim the money from the Member States?
It is only such action which will discourage this practice in the future.
.
(SV) This is a very important question.
As MEPs are well aware, in the course of last year a joint text was issued by our predecessors in the Commission, Ritt Bjerregaard and Monika Wulf-Mathies concerning the relationship between the Structural Funds, money from the Structural Funds and protection under the Habitats and Birds Directives.
The message contained in the joint text is still valid.
We cannot hand out money with one hand and, with the other, take countries to court, where they may well be fined.
It is therefore important that there be a coordination strategy.
The result may, of course, be some difficult questions of priorities.
In my view, the most important consequence, however, is that countries should do some careful thinking and, above all, make sure they send in their lists of Natura 2000 sites.
Then we will be in a position to carry out methodical monitoring and follow-up procedures.
In that respect, Ireland falls short, like other Member States, but we hope that the pressure we are exerting will produce results.
I should just like to point out once again that the joint text still holds good.
The Rules of Procedure do not allow this.
You will have to discuss this outside the Chamber.
Questions to Mr Barnier
-
Question No 44 by (H-0020/00):
Subject: Partnership arrangements and the third community support framework for Greece The recent Regulation (EC) 1260/1999 laying down general provisions on the Structural Funds places greater emphasis than the previous regulation on stronger partnership, involving the regional and local authorities and other public bodies, the economic and social partners and all other relevant bodies not only in the preparation but also in the funding, monitoring and assessment of the measures taken.
However, local authorities have repeatedly expressed the view that 'partnership' arrangements under the new CSF for Greece have remained unchanged and are singularly lacking in substance.
Has the Greek Government introduced any changes so as to extend the scope of partnership arrangements to the local authorities and other representative bodies?
In what way have the local authorities be given a greater say in the preparation and administration of the third CSF and what steps will the Commission take to ensure greater participation by the 'partners' in all measures taken under the new CSF?
May I quickly add something to the answer given just now by Mrs Wallström to Mr Martin?
This was a joint letter between our two predecessors and I consider, as the successor to Mrs Wulf-Mathies, that this letter is still valid.
I will actively endeavour with Mrs Wallström to verify the compatibility of the projects financed by the Structural Funds with the EU environmental directives and policies.
I am also saying this as a former environment minister.
Turning now to the question posed by Mr Alavanos, who I hope will pardon me for this brief diversion onto another subject, the Commission has been monitoring and will continue to monitor, during the preparation of the new programming period, the application of the partnership principle.
The involvement of regional and local authorities in the Community' s action is, as you know, one of the essential elements of the new post-Berlin Structural Funds Regulation.
With regard to the specific application of this partnership principle within the next Community support framework for Greece, the Commission has noted that the public authorities were largely involved during the preparation of the Greek regional development plan for the 2000-2006 period.
Mr Alavanos knows that I have been to Greece twice under the quite tragic circumstances of the earthquake disaster.
During these visits, I held discussions with the Greek Government and raised this concern about the correct implementation of the partnership objective and requirement.
As for subsequent phases, in other words the preparation of national and regional programmes, it is not enough for this objective to be taken into account at national and theoretical level.
It must also be specifically included in the programmes establishing the CSF at national, regional and local level.
As for the monitoring and management of these programmes, I have not yet received the national provisions proposed by the Greek Government pursuant to Article 8 of the new Regulation.
In the current negotiations on this third Community support framework, I have asked for the provisions on the partnership principle to be fully respected, with regard to both regional and local authorities and to non-governmental organisations and associations.
Within the third CSF, this principle must specifically lead to the participation of all these partners in the monitoring committee.
This is all I can say.
I thank the Commissioner, and do not at all question his intentions and interventions, which adopted a positive line.
However, things are really quite different.
The operation of the Community Support Framework is ruled by a centralising hand and indeed at this time we are experiencing state, government and party delirium as regards the European Union' s funding.
I cannot show you the television programmes here but I can show you the Greek newspapers from a few weeks before the elections.
In the Sunday papers all over Greece: the Ministry of Public Works concerning the structural fund: the Minister' s work; the Ministry of Agriculture: the Minister' s work - just a few weeks before the elections - the Ministry of Telecommunications: the work of the Minister for Telecommunications; the Ministry of Education: the work of the Minister for Education and a photograph of the Minister; the Ministry of Employment: the work of the Minister for Employment, a photograph of the Minister and a photograph of the State Secretary, and behind them all the symbols of the Community Support Framework.
There are only a few weeks to go before the elections.
This is both propaganda by the party and propaganda by the candidates, financed by the European Union, the CSF.
My question to the Commissioner is this: what is to be done?
Will the Commission remain silent?
Will it discuss the matter?
Will it bring it up with the Greek Government or will we persist with the pathological situation we had with the previous Commission?
Mr Alavanos, I see that you have thrown to your left all the documents which you have just cited.
Would you let me have these documents so that I can read them, after I have had them translated?
I can then determine what they contain in terms of information and communication, which I can only welcome as the Commissioner for Regional Policy, and what is propaganda.
Then if it is really necessary for me to do this, I will make comments or recommendations to the Greek Government.
I would therefore be very pleased if you could pass me these documents or I will come and get them from you later on.
Having said that, I thought your question related more to the partnership issue.
Further to your questions on the pre-electoral period, I can only repeat my intention that local and regional authorities should be involved together with non-governmental organisations.
I can only quote what is contained in the general Structural Funds Regulation which specifies that the Commission will work with the governments of the Member States.
It is therefore the Greek Government which is my primary partner.
Subsequently, if I need to ensure that this partnership is disseminated and decentralised, then I will do this.
I cannot do other than work with the Greek Government.
I think that my colleague Mr Alavanos will be giving all these particulars to the Commissioner so that he may be aware of them, because this really is propaganda and not just some way of promoting Community programmes.
However, turning to the substance, I should like to ask the Commissioner to bear in mind the following: that for all national and regional programmes, Greece is regarded as a region which expresses itself - at the level of its partnership relations with the European Union - via its central administration, its central government.
From that point of view, neither local governments and much less non-governmental organisations, for example the farming cooperatives which would be interested in further development of the farming sector, have any involvement in the formulation of proposals for the third Community Support Framework, nor have they had any involvement in the previous CSFs.
What can the Commission do about that?
Mr Theonas, I can only repeat what I said to Mr Alavanos.
I will monitor this situation very closely.
If necessary, within and pursuant to the Structural Funds Regulation, I will make comments on the use made, not of Structural Funds which are not yet committed, but of the negotiations prior to the allocation of these Structural Funds.
However, I am obliged to respect the national authority with which I must conduct these negotiations.
Having said this, I will look at the situation objectively.
As for the rest, if you have any recommendations or suggestions on the involvement of a particular structure - I think you spoke of a cooperative structure - I am ready and willing, on the basis of suggestions from MEPs - you will be acting within your role and I within mine - to relay these suggestions, provided that they respect the spirit and letter of the Structural Funds Regulation.
Why would I not say that we have noticed in previous years, on the part of the Greek Government, some shortcomings in the application of the new Regulation and the previous regulation in terms of involving representatives of civil society?
I am saying this objectively and when a problem or shortcoming is noted, this must be remedied.
I will therefore monitor this in the implementation of the new Community support framework.
-
Question No 45 by (H-0041/00):
Subject: Structural Fund financing of research in the civil nuclear technology field Can the Commission confirm that in the last Structural Fund programming period, 1994-1999, no assistance was granted to research in the nuclear fusion or fission areas?
Can it also undertake to rule out any measures providing financing for research of this type during the negotiations in progress with the Member States on the plans and programmes for the new 2000-2006 period?
What role will aid from the Structural Funds play, on the other hand, in the promotion of renewable energy?
Can we expect that Structural Fund financing relating to energy policy will focus on the promotion of regional, renewable energy sources?
Will the Structural Funds also finance the large-scale energy transmission networks?
On Mrs Isler Béguin' s first point I must remind her that the improvement of the scientific basis and technical capacities of the regions in order to increase their competitiveness was one of the Community' s priorities during the previous programming period.
The support allocated by the Structural Funds for technological cohesion, or research and technical developments, within the Community support frameworks for that period is estimated at approximately EUR 7.5 billion.
This is about 6% of the whole Community contribution.
With regard to your specific concern, I can say that, as in the previous period, the Commission does not intend to directly finance through the Structural Funds research and technical development in the area of nuclear fusion or fission.
However, it is still the responsibility of the Member States' management authorities to select the projects to be implemented within these CSFs.
Consequently, even though this is not a Community priority, a Member State can decide to finance research and development projects in the civil nuclear technology area, provided that these projects contribute to regional development.
The Commission does not have to be systematically informed of these.
On your second point of renewable energy which, as you know, is of great interest to me, the Commission' s approach is given in the document on the Structural Funds and their coordination with the Cohesion Funds.
These Funds specify that investments in the renewable energy sector must be encouraged where they favour the development of local resources, where they contribute to reducing dependency on energy imports and where they create jobs at local level.
I was able to verify this, for example, during a visit I made to the Azores in Portugal a few days ago with regard to a natural source of renewable energy.
The Structural Funds contribution which has enabled greater penetration of the renewable energy market was also underlined in the campaign to promote renewable energy sources launched by the Transport and Energy Department.
Finally, on large-scale energy transmission networks, the guidelines also provide for financial participation from the Funds to develop these networks where this helps to reduce dependency on an external supplier or to combat the effects of isolation.
This is particularly valid for the region of the Azores which I have just mentioned and also for all most remote regions.
It is also valid for certain regions handicapped by their isolation due to mountains, for example.
Commissioner, thank you for your answer.
However, I asked this question because we are rightly concerned that the report on the third framework programme for research contains a project entitled 'International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor' .
This project amounts to several billion ecus and areas eligible for Structural Funds, such as those listed in Objective 1, might welcome this type of installation.
We would like to know whether the Commission would be likely to finance this type of project in terms of the installation of this research site rather than directly in the specific 'nuclear research' context.
You did not fully answer the last part of my question on large-scale energy transmission networks.
Could you please give an answer on this issue?
You are concerned about whether the Structural Funds will be used to finance the installation of nuclear plants anywhere.
Quite simply there is no question of this.
I said that the selection of projects remains the responsibility of the Member States pursuant to the Structural Funds Regulation.
As a result, the Commission services are not systematically informed of all projects selected.
However, you are right to question me as this is your task, as mine is to answer you.
As has happened in the past, the Member States are required to provide answers when the Commission questions them or asks for clarification.
I will therefore step beyond the confidence usually shared between Member States and the Commission and I will find out exactly what is happening on this specific point.
The Member State or States concerned will then be required to answer me and I will send you this answer as soon as possible.
I thought I had answered your question on large-scale energy transmission networks.
The energy situation varies widely from region to region in the European Union.
Assistance from the Structural Funds could be justified in certain cases and for certain regions, particularly in the case where the connection to basic energy networks is still underdeveloped.
This is the only answer I can give you on the link between large-scale energy transmission networks and the Structural Funds.
-
Question No 46 by (H-0052/00):
Subject: Structural Funds and additionality In the light of the Commission's recent helpful response to my priority Written Question about Structural Funds and additionality, I wish to ask whether the Commission has any plans to seek amendment of the rules concerning additionality.
In particular, would the Commission look favourably on a change in the rules to ensure that additionality operates not only at the level of Member States but also within Member States, with regard to budgetary provisions between central government and internally autonomous regions or countries?
Mr MacCormick, the Commission has no plans to amend the rules concerning additionality which were stipulated, for the 2000-2006 period, in Article 11 of the general Regulation on the Funds.
As in the past, these rules state that the additionality principle applies to the relationship between the Structural Funds and all development expenditure of the Member State.
In this respect, it must be stressed that it is the expenditure financed by the Structural Funds which must be additional.
The cofinancing provided by the Member State does not need to be additional to its existing expenditure.
Provided that the Member State does not reduce all its own expenditure, the Structural Funds are added to the national expenditure and the principle of additionality is therefore respected.
As for the budgetary provisions within the Member States, between central government and internal autonomous regions or countries, these are determined according to exclusively national considerations and are therefore not affected by additionality within the meaning defined in the rules.
Please excuse this very legal answer.
However, after verification it is precisely in this legal manner and specifically according to the post-Berlin Structural Funds Regulation that we must define and read the additionality principle.
- I am grateful for a clear answer though naturally a little disappointed by its content.
We are left with Article 11(1) which says that the appropriations of the funds may not replace public or other equivalent structural expenditure by the Member States.
Very well: that is to be the unchanging rule.
Does section 11(1) conceivably authorise the following practice.
When an autonomous region's or country's funding from European structural funds increases, the state makes a concomitant reduction in central funding to that region, so that the total funding package available matches a formula set nationally without regard to the quantum of structural funds granted by the Union.
Is that really authorised?
Unfortunately I do not have time to go into depth on this issue.
If Mr MacCormick would be satisfied with my partial agreement with his reasoning, I will give him a full answer in writing by restating the legal bases of both Article 11 in general and Article 11(1) in particular.
I am aware of the Member' s competence on these matters.
I also know the particular problems in your constituency in Scotland where disputes and discussions are occurring on these subjects.
However, on a general level, I would say that in all cases it is the Structural Funds expenditure which must be additional.
This is how, provided that the Member State does not reduce all its own expenditure, the Structural Funds can be added to the national expenditure and we can consider that the additionality principle is respected.
I will go further in the written answer which I have promised in order to set things out more objectively and precisely.
- Additionality is a major issue too in Wales, which I represent.
Just last week it was one of the issues that brought about a vote of no-confidence and the resignation of the First Secretary of the National Assembly of Wales.
As recently as 1991 and 1992 the Commission won a battle with the UK over additionality, at that time linked to the RECHAR funding.
This led to an agreement being signed whereby the UK Government agreed to introduce procedures to ensure that EU spending reached the areas for which is was intended and was actually additional.
And yet we still have these problems in Wales and in Scotland.
Could the Commission look at this particular situation in relation to the agreement that was signed with the UK Government?
I take this to mean that the debate of which I was aware in Scotland is also occurring in Wales.
I will verify this point and, if you wish, I will give you a written answer at the same time as the one I have promised to Mr MacCormick.
Question No 47 by (H-0088/00):
Subject: Amount which Andalusia will receive from the Structural Funds for the 2000-2006 period According to the Commission' s estimates and on the basis of the criteria established at the Berlin Summit (which include per capita GDP, the unemployment rate and the population census updated in accordance with the 1996 register of inhabitants), what amount is to be allocated to Andalusia from the Structural Funds for the 2000-2006 period?
Questions to Mr Bolkestein
Mr President, I will try to be brief in answering the Member' s question.
The regional development plan submitted by the Spanish authorities on 29 October does not indicate how the Community funds will be allocated among the Spanish Objective 1 regions and therefore what your region of Andalusia will receive.
As I did not fully understand the plan, I contacted the Minister for Economic and Financial Affairs, Mr Rato, in a letter of 14 December which I have here, to ask him for more information on the document submitted.
In the coming weeks, the Commission will start negotiations with the Spanish authorities with a view to drawing up the Community support framework for the new period of 2000-2006.
During these meetings I can assure you that the Commission will obtain the clarifications required on the regional allocation.
Therefore, if you wish, as soon as I have this information by sector and region, I will personally send you the information on Andalusia.
Mr Commissioner, the problem is that when Mr Aznar comes to the European Union to receive money for all the people of Andalusia, he counts all of them, but when he goes to the Andalusia Council to pay for services, he fails to notice 400 000 Andalusians, and this is very serious, because 400 000 children are the equivalent to the whole of Strasbourg or a city larger than Granada, full of children.
This question is very important and I would like to know - since this is a kind of 'baby fraud' - whether the Commissioner will see to it that these funds are not taken away from the Andalusians, so that the funds which the European Union are going to pay to Andalusia, based on the census, will take into account these 400 000 children which Aznar does not count when it comes to providing them with schools and services.
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I would ask all of you - and do not take this as a warning - to deal with strictly Community matters.
I know that these are very important issues in Spain and there are differing viewpoints.
I would point out to the Commissioner that Mr Aznar is the President of the Spanish Government.
You may answer the question.
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I hear that you have a strong voice.
I hope it is loud enough to be heard in Madrid for I realise that what you have said was not strictly intended for me.
I have given you my answer.
I am keen that the Structural Funds, particularly those in Objective 1, are allocated where needed.
We have criteria which are applied and we know roughly what each of the regions of Europe should or could receive.
I can only say that I must discuss these matters with the national authorities and government of each country.
I am not avoiding the issue but I must abide by the general Regulation.
It is the responsibility of these authorities and governments to allocate the funds as objectively and fairly as possible.
I need to know about this allocation, however, and this is why I said that I could not answer today.
As I did not have an answer, I wrote to the Minister for Economic and Financial Affairs on 14 December.
I am about to lose patience at not having received an answer from him but I will send you this when I get it.
I regret that the Commissioner has once again become involved in an imaginative and, in this case, passionate intervention.
I would like to remind all of you that Spain is about to hold elections, and in fact there are just 25 days left before the elections.
It should be of comfort to the Commissioner that these elections will take place in 25 days time, since after that he will probably not have to deal with this type of question again.
I do believe it is important to say that Andalusia is going to receive 50% more within the Community support framework and that Spain also holds the record for the use of the Structural Funds, which means that the distribution is based strictly on the implementing regulations and is decentralised by means of the regional development plans and different Community support frameworks.
Lastly I would like to ask the Commissioner a specific question: Do you consider it necessary to change the implementing regulations for the Structural Funds or do you consider the current distribution criteria to be acceptable?
This is a fascinating debate which I realise is not totally Community-related.
Having said this, we must accept that elections are always taking place in the countries of the European Union.
I am pleased that the Structural Funds are the subject of discussions in Greece and Spain.
We were talking a short while ago in this House about debates involving our citizens, about public debates.
The more we talk about Europe and what Europe is doing for daily life, even when we disagree, the better this will be, provided that we talk about this objectively.
I am not going to give an opinion on any amendment to the Structural Funds Regulation.
This Regulation was adopted just last year in Berlin and I will be applying it for the next seven years.
We will talk about this issue during the cohesion report which I regard as an important time for making an assessment with and before this House and for outlining future prospects.
The time will come at the beginning of next year for any amendments to be highlighted.
For the time being, please let me apply the Regulation which has not yet been applied as it was only approved in Berlin.
This is all I can say today.
Thank you very much for your replies, Mr Barnier.
Questions Nos 48 to 50 will be replied to in writing.
Question No 51 by (H-0049/00):
Subject: New premises for the OHIM At present the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (OHIM) is still operating from the same temporary premises, even though its new building was opened in June 1999.
In view of this unusual situation, will the Commission say why the OHIM has not yet moved to its new premises?
The honourable Member asked a question on this topic in November 1999 and I would like to refer him to the answer given at the time.
Furthermore, I have asked the president of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market, that is to say the Office in Alicante, to comment further on this new question and I can, as a result, inform the honourable Member as follows, on behalf of the Office:
The Office is not yet ready to move into the new building.
Unfortunately, a number of deadlines have been exceeded.
A number of technical provisions need to be made, such as the installation of a computer network, archives, a canteen and furniture.
The OHIM is now in the process of arranging this and is expecting to move into the new premises by June.
During the previous question, we were discussing electoral issues.
I believe that this issue is relevant to my question.
Commissioner, you were not present at the extraordinarily named 'official opening' of the headquarters of the OHIM on 9 June, in the middle of an election campaign in Spain leading up to both the European elections and the local and regional elections.
If you had been there, I am sure you would have been ashamed.
The President of the Commission and some secretaries were present.
In the middle of an election campaign, a series of authorities, all of them run by the party in government, made clearly electioneering speeches which, furthermore, were broadcast live on television.
It was bizarre to see the President of the Region of Valencia praising the work of the Spanish Government, as well as his own work, although it was irrelevant to that event.
The opening of a building which was not finished, in the middle of an election campaign, which eight months after the opening can still not be occupied, makes the Spanish Government look ridiculous.
I am not worried that the Spanish Government should look foolish, because at the end of the day it was their responsibility, but it does worry me that the Commission should look foolish by endorsing, through its presence, this absurd event.
I would therefore like to ask you, Mr Commissioner: does it seem normal to you that an unfinished building should be opened during an election campaign?
Does it seem normal to you that the Commission should attend such an absurd event organised by the Spanish Government?
It does not fall within my remit to make statements about internal political situations within one Member State or another.
As such, I would prefer to withhold any comment on the situation which Mr Berenguer has just described.
I have to confess that I fail to comprehend why a certain opening ceremony was held in Spain.
What I can say is that I hope that this building will now be occupied as soon as possible.
May I also add that I hope to be in Alicante myself at the end of May to speak at a conference.
I hope that this building will then be occupied.
I would like to point out to the Commissioner that it is not an electoral question.
As members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, we have followed the creation of that institution and it is clear that it was established for electioneering reasons.
A year later, it is still not functioning, which means that the Commission spent money on a false opening.
We should ask ourselves to what extent this spending of funds was justified.
I would like to reiterate that the Commission is unconcerned with the underlying motivation of Member State actions.
It is, however, interested in official statements and actions.
We do not intend to go in the direction of what is termed in French un procès d'intention.
We are concerned with public official actions and events, rather than any possible underlying motivation.
This is why I find it also difficult to meet Mr Medina halfway and respond to his question.
Once again, the Commission does not speculate why something is happening earlier or later than planned.
It only appreciates that a building for this Office is opened and occupied as soon as possible.
Also, the Commission does not engage itself in finding out whether certain expenditure was real or virtual.
As far as I am concerned, all expenditure is real.
And any remaining skeletons, I intend to leave them in the cupboard.
As the author is not present, Question No 52 lapses.
As they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 53 and 54 will be taken together.
Question No 53 by (H-0057/00):
Subject: Swedish derogation regarding the import of alcoholic beverages At present, Sweden has a derogation until 2004 allowing restrictions on alcoholic beverage imports.
The Swedish Government and a large percentage of the Swedish people want the derogation to be extended on public health grounds.
What is the Commission's position on the Swedish derogation concerning these imports?
Question No 54 by (H-0117/00):
Subject: Alcohol monopoly and the internal market What action does the Commission intend to take in order to prevent the extension of the State alcohol monopoly apparently being planned by Sweden, and the associated import restrictions, and to ensure that the rules of the single market are applied?
I would like to answer these two questions as follows.
When Sweden joined the European Union, it was allowed to retain quantitative restrictions on alcoholic beverages which travellers can bring into the country from other Member States.
This derogation from the principle of the free movement of goods lapses on 30 June of this year.
Sweden now wants to extend this measure by another five years, as this would be necessary to protect public health.
My position on this is clear.
Sweden has now had sufficient time - since its accession to the Union - to adapt its policies to a situation where such import restrictions do not exist.
I cannot see a reason, therefore, why a further extension for this measure should be proposed.
European citizens have the right to buy goods for their own use, including taxes, in any Member Sate and to take them to another Member Sate without having to subject these goods to controls and without possibly having to pay another set of taxes on them.
That is a basic principle governing the internal market and derogations from this principle must be exceptions and must be limited in time.
We want to guarantee that Swedish citizens too can enjoy the benefits of the internal market, just like other citizens of the European Union.
This certainly does not mean that I do not share the concern in Sweden surrounding the possible health problems which can be caused by alcohol abuse.
A recent study, carried out by Professor Lindgren of the University of Lund, however, has shown that abolishing the restrictions would not lead to a higher alcohol consumption in Sweden.
I have already had a chance to discuss my position with Mr Ringholm, the Swedish Finance Minister on two occasions.
I also discussed this matter with the Swedish parliamentary Finance committee last week.
It is now up to the Swedish government to take the necessary measures.
Thank you for your reply.
I should just like to apologise for the error in my question to the Commission.
Instead of 2004, it should, of course, be 1 July 2000.
I have some sympathy with the Commission's standpoint that derogations should only be granted occasionally.
Such a rule is only normal.
Nevertheless, I should like to ask two questions: Are you thinking of embarking upon continued discussions with the Swedish Government about extending the derogations, for example for as long as Denmark and Finland have derogations?
My second question concerns the whole policy on alcohol.
This may, of course, be seen as an issue concerning the internal market, but also as a public health matter for the whole EU.
What are the respective roles of alcohol policy and public health considerations in the Commission's work?
A Europe-wide policy on alcohol is not just an issue concerning the internal market.
It also has important implications for public health.
If we had considered these aspects in their overall context, then it might have been easier to carry on a dialogue with Sweden.
May I thank Mr Andersson for the supplement to his first question and may I answer that question as follows?
Firstly, Finland and Denmark are subject to exemptions to the basic rule of the free movement of goods until 2003.
These countries are in the process of taking measures in preparation of free access of alcoholic products in the year 2003.
However, in the case of Sweden, the situation is different.
In 1995, a five-year derogation period was decided upon, which is now lapsing.
I have as yet not heard any arguments on the basis of which the Commission would need to extend this period.
Secondly, the Swedish Government is being consulted all the way.
I can inform Mr Andersson that I will leave for Stockholm on Monday, 6 March, in order to talk to Minister Ringholm, to members of the Swedish parliament, and, if necessary, also to the Prime Minister or other ministers, in order to continue discussions on this matter.
I am fully aware that emotions are running high in the political arena in Sweden regarding this issue.
Thirdly, I understand very well that the health aspect of this matter is naturally important.
I would repeat at this juncture what Professor Lindgren of Lund University has stated, namely that whatever happens in terms of import restrictions, the consumption of alcohol will remain the same.
The question is then, of course, where does the volume of alcohol originate from which is not imported by travellers?
The answer is that this is smuggled into the country or made by the Swedes themselves, and as Mr Andersson knows, this is an extremely dangerous and unhealthy activity.
Well now, Mr Andersson seems to think that the health situation will improve if we restrict the import of alcohol.
But in that case, not only Sweden, but all EU countries, should then be subject to a total ban on alcohol.
We can cast our minds back to a similar situation in the United States.
Mr Andersson will be familiar with what was termed then 'prohibition' .
He will also be aware of the effects the ban had on Mafia activity within the United States, where, eventually, prohibition was withdrawn.
All this means that we need to protect health, of course, but not by banning alcohol, because that does not work.
Mr President, the question at issue is the income from the Swedish alcohol monopoly and when the Swedish Government says that it must cover health costs, then this is proof of a distortion of competition because other countries must cover their health costs themselves, with no alcohol monopoly at their disposal.
My question refers to whether you too know of studies which state that a moderate intake of good quality alcohol such as Franconian wine or Bavarian beer is good for you and would therefore also be good for the Swedish budget.
I gather that Mr Posselt has hinted at the fiscal aspects of this matter.
I also happen to know that the high tax on alcohol products in Sweden goes back to the year 1638 and that since then, the sale of alcohol products has accounted for a significant portion of the state' s tax revenue.
As is known, this has led to a state monopoly in Sweden which, in itself, is at odds with Union legislation.
As to the healing effect of alcohol - to which, I believe, Mr Posselt also made reference - I could not agree more with him: I think that a good bottle of wine can be extremely good for your health and is also socially extremely pleasant, and perhaps Mr Posselt, Mr Andersson and myself could meet in the bar of this Parliament one of these days to share an aquavit.
Mr President, I listened with interest to the Commissioner's reply about the need to apply the laws of the single market.
I wonder whether he can say whether he considers his reply to be compatible with the failure by the Commission to take the French Government to the European Court of Justice on the application of France's Loi et Vin, which effectively prevents single market rules applying to the sale of alcohol products in France?
Can we now expect the European Commission to take action against the French Republic before the European Court of Justice?
I should like to reply very briefly to the question raised by the honourable Member, since this matter is now under active consideration by the Commission.
The Commission has to take a decision on whether the matter is closed or whether it should refer it to the European Court of Justice.
My reply is perhaps not satisfactory right now, but I would like to assure the honourable Member that the Commission will take that decision within a matter of weeks.
I ask for the Member's understanding for this small delay in the Commission's decision.
Commissioner, do you have any reason, on public health grounds, for a difference in the taxation rates on, for example, Scotch whisky or French Bordeaux wine or even my colleague's Bavarian beer?
Can you envisage applying an alcohol - equivalent basis for taxation in Europe?
The matter of excise taxes, to which the honourable Member is referring, is the prerogative of the Member State concerned.
The Commission has no instruments to enforce any particular decrease or increase in excise taxes on alcoholic products or on any other products.
Towards the end of this year the Commission will submit a report on the differences in excise taxes between Member States.
It will no doubt engage in a discussion both with Parliament and the Council on this state of affairs, which indicates that there are quite a lot of differences in excise rates between Member States.
For example - I believe the honourable Member referred to this - no excise taxes are applied on wine in France, whereas they are applied in the United Kingdom.
That leads to a distortion of the internal market because wine is smuggled from France to the United Kingdom.
The question specifically refers to the relation between excise taxes and the alcohol content of the goods subject to excise tax.
The Commission has no means of influence here.
In the case of Sweden, the instrument of excise taxes is indeed used to reduce the consumption of alcohol.
Although this leads to a disparity in excise taxes between Sweden and other Member States of the Union - and that by itself increases cross-border smuggling of alcoholic products - it is a legitimate instrument to decrease the consumption of alcohol.
There is ,of course, elasticity of demand, in this case a price elasticity of demand.
I am not sure exactly what it is, but it is not zero, therefore it must have some effect.
My question would have been almost exactly the one raised by Mr Purvis, but I would like to press the point further.
Granted, as you say, that excise duties lie within the prerogative of Member States, nevertheless the use of that prerogative in a way which is unfairly discriminatory against producers in one part of the Community versus others might still conflict with the single market principle.
For example, if we take what Mr Purvis and I would be thinking of, the malt whisky producing parts of the Highlands - a very peripheral part of Europe, very hard-pressed, a whole farming community as well as a distilling community dependent upon it - a general practice of taxing the alcohol in Scotch whisky, Dutch gin or Danish aquavit more than the alcohol in beer or the alcohol in wine, seems to me to be discriminatory and a discriminatory use of something which is admittedly within the prerogative of the Member States.
May I assure Mr MacCormick and other Members of this Parliament that the present situation where excise taxes differ between Member States is indeed something which is not conducive to the proper functioning of the internal market.
We need not restrict ourselves to alcoholic products.
If one looks at petrol, for example, one sees that excise taxes in Germany are different from those of Holland, and consequently Dutch motorists cross the border and fill up their tanks in Germany.
That is indeed distortion of the internal market.
If I had my way, I would wave a magic wand and equalise excise taxes across Europe.
As a result, smuggling would no longer take place except if products were intrinsically more expensive in one Member State than another.
But I do not have a magic wand and I do not have my way.
This is an area of unanimity, as Mr MacCormick knows, and unless all Member States agree on the equalisation of excise taxes, it will not happen.
Once again, towards the end of this year, the Commission will forward a report on the state of affairs on excise taxes, and I am obviously available for any discussion with Parliament on that report.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
Today we will take note of what you say and have a glass or two of Alsace wine, although we do not know how much tax is put on it, but I suppose it is a lot.
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed, Questions 55 to 114 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes Questions to the Commission.
(The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)
Community policy in the field of water (continuation)
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the recommendation for second reading of the Community action in the field of water policy.
Mr President, the situation regarding fresh water in Europe is not as serious as in other parts of the world but, in general terms, it is a fact that the demand for water has continued to grow and its quality has continued to decrease.
To this we must add the water pollution problems which afflict the potential new Member States in the East.
In fact, a reservoir containing cyanide has just burst its banks in Romania, threatening aquifers which supply the population of Yugoslavia.
I understand that Mrs Wallström, whose presence here tonight I appreciate, is going to visit the area.
I believe that no country, no government and, of course, no member of this Parliament can fail to recognise the need for this directive in order to end the current fragmentation of water policy and facilitate the implementation of a programme of specific measures for each river basin.
The development of this directive has been difficult and complex, involving diverse interests and divided opinions.
I have no doubt that the rapporteur for this legislature, Mrs Lienemann, has made great efforts and shown great dedication in reconciling positions, and has succeeded to a large extent.
However, it is almost impossible to understand and correctly assess all the different situations and expectations.
I come from a country whose southern half is on the Mediterranean and the availability of water historically depends on the whims of an unpredictable climate and a difficult terrain.
The Mediterranean region has had to fight for its development by trying to overcome this adversity, century after century, year after year, day after day, and is still doing so today.
Therefore, it seems essential to us that the directive complies, in practice, with the obligation laid down in article 164 of the Treaty on the need for Community legislation to take account of the diversity of its regions.
In accordance with this principle, the Spanish delegation of the European People' s Party will oppose Amendments Nos 4 (Recital 21), 13 and 49 (Article 11(d)), since they imply a serious limitation in an area of management exclusive to the Member States, that is, the regulation of water resources.
It would be very difficult for the Community to determine the conditions for the regulation of water in the different regions, given the different internal balances which are always in play and which require profound knowledge of the different areas and the relevant interests.
We also reject the amendments which aim to incorporate the integral cost of water for 2010.
We must clearly set water prices which promote its efficient use but which, at the same time, safeguard the competitivity of the producing industries in the less-favoured regions and do not hinder their legitimate development.
I would lastly like to refer to the amendments on dangerous substances which establish that we must achieve a zero, or close to zero, degree of pollution.
In no field of human activity have we ever discovered a zero degree of pollution.
We will be doing a general disservice to the objectives of this important directive if we are not able to provide it with the necessary flexibility and adaptability to guarantee compliance with its provisions.
I hope that, once again, this House will vote with a sense of reality and respect for the principle of subsidiarity, seeking a suitable balance between the environmental objectives and economic and social considerations, the three essential elements in achieving the sustainable development which we all wish to see so much.
Mr President, Commissioner, this is a very important directive.
Its aim is to improve the quality of water and the reliability of the water supply and sewage systems.
The public must have a right to clean water.
It is important not only for the environment but also for public health.
I am not speaking so much for myself, as I happen to be one of those few lucky people in Europe who can drink water directly from their own lake at home.
We must make sure that we get started quickly with the programme to improve water quality.
Action must get under way immediately.
We cannot afford to waste time.
It is important that the timetable is an ambitious one.
In my opinion, the timetable is not too ambitious if we believe that by 2020 we will no longer allow impurities in water and we aim at zero level quantities of impurities and toxic matter by then.
It is a question of doing what is technically possible; obviously it is not possible to do anymore, but we must be sufficiently ambitious.
I would like to comment on one issue, which was spoken about earlier.
I believe the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has restricted too tightly the debate on the transfer of water.
This is not merely a problem for Spain; it is one for the Nordic countries, and I sincerely hope that we can rely on national solutions in these matters, when they are better for the environment and the economy than what is proposed in the directive.
Mr President, Madam Commissioner, congratulations, Mrs Lienemann on an excellent piece of work.
Water and air surround us everywhere.
We share them with everyone on this earth.
Water is a prerequisite for human life.
And there are more and more of us in the world.
Mrs Schleicher intimated earlier today that clean water was an unrealistic goal.
Nothing could be further from the truth!
It is unrealistic to go on causing the quality of our water to deteriorate and so, too, the conditions for life.
It is especially unrealistic in regard to agriculture which is most dependent upon a clean natural environment and unpolluted resources.
I would therefore appeal to Members of Parliament to appreciate that tough demands for a clean environment are a sign of long-term realism of the highest order.
Mr President, we - myself included - support the report by Mrs Lienemann, the targets it sets and the directive under discussion.
However, we should look a little more closely at some points.
For example, a major problem in my country is the diversion of rivers and the consumption of water from lakes, which people try to justify by pseudo-developmental arguments, and which, of course, are a great risk to ground waters, water tables and surface waters.
I therefore think that regardless of whether we finally conclude who should decide whether such diversions take place, the specifications common to us all must be very stringent.
But the key issue is, in my opinion, planning how to restore water tables, the natural flow of rivers and the natural content of lakes, which must be carried out within the ten year period we have in mind.
I think such projects ought to be eligible for funding, because, at the end of the day, that restoration may well prove to be a first-rate development policy.
Mr President, here we have what is basically a good measure.
It sets out achievable standards based on subsidiarity principles and the water basin management.
Its aim of good-quality water for drinking, for wildlife, the environment and economic purposes is right.
The prevention of pollution and water deterioration has to be right as well as the ability to manage water in times of drought and flood.
We have three outstanding problems.
The first is the transfer of water between basin areas.
That is a matter which affects my colleagues from Spain, Ireland and the United Kingdom.
Amendments Nos 4.
49 and 87 would not be acceptable because they would restrict the ability of a country to move water from where it is in supply to where it is needed, be that arid areas or urban areas.
Secondly, we have to have realistic targets, but targets nevertheless.
Looking at Amendment No 7, for example, which calls for the complete elimination of naturally occurring substances, you can see that some of the targets set are unrealistic.
Also, some of the targets which are set at close to zero - in English, that is quite a meaningless term.
We need to look very carefully at those.
The concept of continuing reduction as in Amendment No 58 is much better.
Thirdly, I raise the problem faced by Scotch whisky.
Scotch whisky - especially malt whisky, which is the best - requires water extraction which is used in some quantity and then returned to the water stream.
Some of it ends up in the bottle and is drunk.
We must make sure that Amendments Nos 49 and 87 leave the deletion exemption so that whisky can continue to be drunk in "high quality", which means it must use good, Scottish peat water.
That is my third request - that we look carefully at these measures before passing this measure as a whole.
Mr President, Commissioner, the framework directive which we are considering today at second reading is a kind of constitutional charter for water which will apply across the European Union.
This directive represents both a point of arrival and a point of departure.
It is a point of arrival because it was developed from a range of directives which were fragmentary and diffuse, and applies a unified logic and systematic consistency to water legislation.
It is also a point of departure because a new framework of reference has been created, into which future European legislation on water will converge and flow.
The framework directive seeks to be, and rightly so, both ambitious and realistic, both strong-minded and carefully thought out, and it has, to a large extent, succeeded.
Thanks to Mrs Lienemann' s excellent work, the amendments proposed by the Commission will go some way towards strengthening the directive' s text and making it more rigorous.
Making it more rigorous does not mean making it more rigid, by ignoring the stark differences in climate and geography across Europe.
The rapporteur' s proposal is one which, on the whole, I would wish to support but I would like to express some praise for it and then two concerns.
I would first of all like to praise it because the directive' s demand for the integrated management of water basins is undeniably a step forward.
This also applies to the demand that water only be transferred between basins when this is shown to be absolutely necessary.
This is a principle that will prove beneficial and instructive for the Iberian Peninsula for example.
My first concern is about the timetable laid down in the directive: it may prove to be a straitjacket although I think that it also represents a powerful challenge.
My second concern is easy to guess: it turns on the difficulties in establishing water charges and in setting prices, particularly when taking environmental costs into account.
This is something that causes anxiety, particularly among farmers.
Paying a fair price for water may also result in injustices.
This framework directive banks on a considerable gamble: that in 2020 European waters will have returned to their natural state, free of pollution and dangerous substances.
Is this a Utopian ideal?
Is this a return to pre-industrial society?
I think not.
I give this framework directive my vote of confidence and of optimism.
The recent catastrophe on the Danube has illustrated, as in a nightmare, that a long-term policy and strategy for the ecological protection of our water, however much it may cost, is not a luxury of the rich but a necessity for civilisation.
Mr President, first of all, we want to denounce the fathomless hypocrisy of those who claim to be concerned about the environment and water, but whose criminal activities such as the attacks against Yugoslavia, aside from leaving thousands dead and wounded, have also brought about huge ecological disasters for water resources too, making them not only unusable but even extremely hazardous.
Turning to the report, we believe that implementing the principle that the cost of water services should be recoverable must never result in additional taxation of the economically weakest strata, or even in the annihilation of small and medium-scale farmers because of the prohibitive cost of water for irrigation.
We also wish to point out that especially in areas with acute drought problems such as my own country, and especially on the islands, funding must be provided for infrastructure for the saving of water, by increasing not its cost but its quantity.
This should mainly be carried out by collecting the rainwater that now goes to waste, running off into the sea and eroding the soil, with all the problems that creates.
In that spirit, we support Amendment No 107 by Mr Marset Campos.
River waters must also be used more effectively so as to preserve life in areas that suffer chronic drought.
Finally, as regards the Council' s allegation, which the Commission echoes, that there is no need for many specific references and explanations because they are covered by the examples given in the directive or contained elsewhere therein, this is chicanery.
Its purpose is to preserve a semi-transparent field of action, which during the directive' s first implementation period will allow critical choices to be finalised to the benefit of big business.
Mr President, first and foremost, I want to say that protection of the aquatic environment, both surface water and groundwater, is probably one of our most important duties of all.
That is not only because it is about guaranteeing sufficient water resources but also because it is, to a large degree, about safeguarding water resources against pollution so that we can also have clean drinking water in the future.
We are all entitled to clean drinking water.
I should like to express my great appreciation of Mrs Lienemann' s work on this matter.
It has been a huge task, and I should like to express my support for all of Mrs Lienemann' s amendments.
These are all improvements to the common position.
Moreover, I shall only highlight the most important ones.
First and foremost, I think it is important that we should establish some clear objectives concerning the condition we should have achieved for our water within a period of no more than 10 years.
I also think it is important that we should put pressure on the Member States to devise the necessary action programmes more quickly than is proposed in the common position.
And, finally, I want to say that I think that the tighter arrangements which are being introduced in regard to payment schemes and pricing are quite proper if we, as consumers, are to be given an incentive to use water resources efficiently and, at the same time, obtain arrangements which can promote the achievement of those environmental goals about which, I believe, there is broad agreement.
In this regard, too, I think that the 2010 deadline is appropriate.
Finally, I want to say that I attach great importance to making a start on phasing out discharges, emissions and leaks of hazardous materials and to the fact that we can do this gradually but, at the same time, be set a target, namely the year 2020 by which time we should hopefully have reduced such emissions to zero.
If this cannot be adopted as the objective, then I am naturally prepared to support the proposal to the effect that we should have achieved levels very close to zero by the year 2020.
I think that Mrs Lienemann' s proposal is a good basis for further negotiations with the Council.
Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for some excellent work in drafting this important directive.
The second reading of the framework directive on the issue of water is most timely; the shocking news of the environmental catastrophe in Romania must feature in today' s discussions and also more generally when we ponder the environmental dimension of Union enlargement.
First of all we have to find and call to account those who are guilty of the act.
The cyanide and heavy metals in the rivers are gruesome examples of how environmental negligence may ruin the waterways for decades to come.
The event proves that in some countries applying for EU membership the environmental norms and environmental thinking are still light years behind the EU.
The Union ought to reassess how aid for environmental projects can be allocated in a better way in support of a sustainable policy on water.
With regard to the proposal for the directive it is worrying that the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy do not take sufficient account of the importance of unpolluted surface waters to increase the occurrence of clean, natural groundwater.
In Finland surface waters are very clean.
The production of so-called artificial groundwater is an ecological means of filtering a clean supply of fresh surface water through to the groundwater reserves.
The process does not require a chemical sewage plant.
The directive must not be allowed to endanger this work.
Deviating from the Council' s common position, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy is also attempting to restrict further the facilities for the transfer of water.
This would cause problems for those countries where reserves of water are unevenly distributed.
The ecologically sustainable transfer of water must not be restricted by Union acts.
The work should, of course, be regulated and subject to license in the future too, but the same rules cannot apply to, for example, Finland and Greece, which suffers from drought.
Mr President, Commissioner, water is a precious natural asset, a vital necessity, and it is our duty to protect it.
I think it essential to have a framework directive on water policy in the European Union, which will be the basic legal instrument for improving the quality and proper management of water resources, and I congratulate the rapporteur on her attempt to address this thorny issue and take due account of all the points of view.
I must say, however, that, there are discrepancies between the countries in the north and south concerning water, and that is why the matter cannot be dealt with in the same way.
There are parts of Europe with an inherent shortage of water, and that should be taken into account by this directive.
In recent years, climate change has compelled Mediterranean countries to face serious problems of flooding or lack of rain.
We agree with the common position but we also accept several of the amendments tabled, whose aim is to improve it.
However, we cannot accept amendments such as those that refer to the issue of costing water, granted that in my country a high proportion of the users are farmers.
In addition, amendments which ban the transfer of water from one hydrological basin to another would condemn many areas in my country to water shortage.
The issue of eliminating hazardous substances ought, I think, to be made more realistic so that we can achieve it.
As for the time scale demanded for the directive' s implementation, it must be borne in mind that there are countries where creating the infrastructure for this directive' s implementation will take time and considerable resources.
In spite of these remarks however, I believe our common objective of sustainable use of water resources can be maintained.
Mr President, Commissioner, the measures contained in this directive range from drafting water management plans, comprehensive information and hearing rights, and close cooperation between the Member States, to combating water pollution caused by individual pollutants.
And considering how long this Chamber has been trying to introduce a framework directive of this kind, I am pleased to be present here today, and I would like to congratulate Mrs Lienemann on being in the happy position of presenting this report to us.
However, it is also extremely important to me to point something out that many people actually take for granted.
I would still like to highlight this point though: this directive does not constitute any kind of legal basis for diverting water from a Member State' s territory against its will.
And by way of reaffirming this once again, I have introduced an amendment - gratifyingly with the support of a large number of Members - and I would be very pleased if Parliament would endorse my proposed amendment tomorrow.
It is all about making it clear that water - and this is not the first time this has been mentioned today - is no ordinary commodity but a resource which belongs to the individual EU Member States and which must be protected and treated with the respect due to it.
I am aware, and the previous speaker highlighted this, that there are States in the European Union that have problems with water.
I believe that every one of us, in every country, could improve the way in which we manage our water and could make use of it in a cleaner way.
This applies to every country.
But only when each country has done its utmost to conserve its water resources, when literally everything has been done that could have been done in our own countries, only then, in my view, should it be necessary to start thinking in terms of harmonising water usage.
Mr President, Commissioner, we should be pleased that this directive has already reached second reading.
However, I must say that I am not over-pleased because I believe that this directive is not of great quality, it is going to be very difficult to implement and has many shortcomings.
Firstly, I believe that this directive is excessively tough, simplistic and reductionist.
In many cases other existing directives on water have not been complied with and governments and the Commission have often not imposed discipline as they should have done, although I know that this is not pleasant.
It is not a question of having much tougher regulations, because in many cases the problems concern management.
It is not a question of exercising the relevant competences and not referring the big problems of the water systems to the legislative, the complications of which we are all well aware of.
This is a reductionist directive.
We cannot lump countries with navigable rivers together with countries which lack water, where great cracks open up in the ground through a lack of water and which see temperatures of 55ºC or 60ºC in the sun.
I say this because the ball does not need to be in our court.
This issue is in the hands of the governments and the Commission.
In the same way, this damage and these tragedies which are happening, as in Romania, are not the problem of the legislative, but of the executive and of the governments.
Furthermore, it is not a fair directive because it ignores the large uninhabited areas, climatic diversity, desert areas and arid areas.
That is how the common position has been worded.
The same can be said with regard to transfers.
Transfers are an example of the distribution of wealth, of solidarity between peoples and territories, because unfortunately the Earth is not perfect and some areas have more and some have less.
Lastly, I am highly critical of the fact that the directive is not accompanied by a study of its impact.
It is very easy for us to demand that others assess its impact but, on environmental questions, we should demand it of ourselves and consider how many people, how many farmers, could be ruined by having to pay the costs.
Some kind of study has been done which has not even been read, and I believe we should carry out impact studies by way of good political practice, rather than just laying down doctrine.
Mr President, through the consolidation of existing directives this framework directive establishes the basic principle of a sustainable water policy in the European Union.
It is a framework for the protection and management of our water - surface, ground, transitional and coastal - through the establishment of river basin districts at national and, in our case in Ireland, cross-border level.
Ireland is very supportive of the common position and many of the European Parliament amendments.
A 25-year roll-out for legislation, for example, is hardly acceptable.
We have no difficulty with the "polluter pays" principle in relation to the recovery of costs on water usage at industrial, commercial and agricultural level.
However, I feel very strongly that as water is life and access to clean drinking water is a basic human right, this directive must allow for a basic domestic water provision free of charge, a quota per household for drinking, cooking and sanitation.
We must of course pay for wastage and luxury use at domestic level and the recovery of costs can be balanced accordingly.
The introduction of water meters is viewed with great suspicion in Ireland where we have had no domestic water charges and hence no meters since 1977.
Meters could be viewed as a very important tool in water management by the new river basin districts, to help the elimination of water wastage and for the proper planning of future requirements.
The whole purpose of this directive is to promote sustainable use of water in the EU.
Water is a scarce and precious natural resource.
Ideally, I would like Amendment No 45 to fall tomorrow so that the common position on Article 9 would hold on water charges.
That would allow for subsidiarity on a cost policy for water charges, with each Member States drawing up its own scheme, so long as the principles of this directive on incentives for sustainable and efficient use of water are fully protected.
If Amendment No 45 does not fall, I will have to move an oral amendment tomorrow to ensure that Member States may grant exemptions to the provisions of this article in order to allow a basic level of water use for domestic purposes before contributions to the recovery of cost of water services.
All legislation must be enforceable and be based on the general principle of political acceptance.
I believe that access to clean drinking water without charge is a basic human right in the developed as well as the developing world.
Mr President, Commissioner, at this point in the debate I am going to insist on certain aspects which, from an agronomic point of view, and since I come from a southern country, I consider to be absolutely essential to this directive.
These include, for example, costs and transfers.
With regard to costs, I would like clarification of what costs we are talking about.
Are we talking about the distribution and sourcing of water?
Are we talking about the quality of the distribution networks?
Are we talking about the nature of the works required to provide water services?
Or are we talking about large-scale hydraulic works and reservoirs?
All these costs added together would be horrendous and would have repercussions for the agricultural sector.
Transfers are defined as the transfer of surface water between different territorial areas.
Is the Commissioner aware that our country has one of the oldest systems of transfers in Europe?
They already existed in ancient times: they had them in Roman times, although on a smaller scale.
One of the most significant transfers - the Tajo-Segura transfer - which has been in use for many years, almost 30 years, has an allowance of 658 hm3 per year.
The largest volume transferred in one year has been 453 and the average volume over twenty years has been over 200.
We cannot be accused of bad management.
Is the Commissioner aware that, of this 263 hm3, we used 25 for irrigation on the left bank of the Levante, 30 for water supplies in the area of the Júcar, 7 for supplies in the southern area of the Júcar and the rest in the Segura, equally divided between supplies and irrigation?
We are not doing a bad job of management.
We cannot be prohibited from carrying out transfers when our economy and the development of our regions depend on it.
I will not tackle the issue of quality and the best available technologies, because I believe that we will return to a discussion of this directive.
Take good note: in this diverse Europe, which we are building in a spirit of mutual cooperation, we have to find diverse solutions, not single solutions.
I therefore appeal to the common sense of the Commission, the Council and this House so that, when voting, they do not impose uniformity on the different countries of Europe in areas where subsidiarity is required.
Commissioner, Andalusia is not Lapland.
.
(SV) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I want, of course, to begin by thanking the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and, above all, the rapporteur, Mrs Lienemann for the ambitious and constructive work she has put into the present framework water directive.
Water is one of our most important natural resources, as many speakers have already said.
An ambitious and well-balanced European policy in the field of water is an important component of guaranteed sustainable development for Europe.
Water is also one of the issues to which I shall be devoting particular attention during my term of office.
I am pleased about the spirit of agreement which permeates the amendments that have been submitted to Parliament.
Many of them are based upon the very constructive, informal discussions which have taken place between Parliament and the Council in connection with the first reading.
Most of Parliament' s proposed amendments help improve the text and make it more ambitious.
The Commission can approve 72 of the 108 amendments, either in their entirety, partially or in principle.
Many of the amendments which Parliament has submitted show that reconciliation will be necessary.
With a view to these forthcoming negotiations, I would therefore urge Parliament to vote in favour of an ambitious position.
Firstly, I should like to mention some of my most important arguments.
We now have the opportunity to put into practice those measures to which we agreed under the OSPAR Convention.
Rather than make these objectives legally binding, we must consider their political nature.
This is also reflected in many of Parliament' s amendments.
Where water charges are concerned, the present directive will constitute Europe' s water policy for the next three decades.
It is our duty to ensure from the very start that the present directive provides the right incentives and the proper driving force for a pricing system and an efficient structure of charges which will improve our environment in a cost-effective way.
It sounds good, saying that access to water should be a human right and ought to be free of charge.
But water is not free of charge, any more than houses or food are free of charge.
It is only by means of efficient instruments of control that we can arrive at a situation in which water is better managed and more carefully husbanded as a resource.
I also want to add that, when it comes to groundwater and to water which has been heavily modified by human activities, I support a tighter timetable and a clarification of goals and of criteria for allowing exceptions to the rules.
I also support expressly mentioning radioactive substances.
In the course of the debate, many speakers have pointed out how important it is to consult the general public and keep them informed.
I just want to emphasise this further.
It is absolutely crucial that we involve the general public by keeping them well informed and by proceeding to consult them.
This is also expressed in Recital 14.
Allow me also to say to Mr Bowe that, in common with my Scottish colleague, he need have no pangs of conscience about continuing to enjoy a glass of Scotch whisky now and again.
We have not considered it necessary for the Commission to regulate the very limited abstraction of water for whisky production.
Allow me now to comment on some of the areas in a little more detail.
Limiting discharges of hazardous substances into our waters must be one of the most important objectives.
I am glad to see that Parliament' s amendments have focused upon this.
The Commission fully supports the proposal to introduce the commitments under the OSPAR Convention into the text.
We must, however, keep to their precise scope and content.
As I said, their purpose and the timetable for implementing them are political in character.
It would not be in keeping with this to introduce a legally binding timetable.
It must nonetheless be guaranteed that the Member States and the Community are compelled to take measures to achieve the relevant goals and comply with the timetables.
I therefore welcome Amendments Nos 6, 10, 14, 24, 58, 60 and 88 .
The Commission cannot, on the other hand, approve Amendment No 19, in which hazardous substances are defined differently than in OSPAR.
The Commission' s proposal introduces a clear procedure for selecting substances, and so no definition is needed.
Even if I too agree with the contents of Amendments Nos 79 and 106, these go beyond the commitments under OSPAR, and I cannot therefore approve these Amendments.
The Commission can also, in principle, approve Amendment No 60, according to which a timetable is required for implementing the Commission' s proposal to limit discharges of prioritised substances.
Amendment No 59 introduces requirements to the effect that the list of prioritised substances should continually be reviewed.
This would involve legal uncertainty as to the status of the list and cannot, therefore, be approved.
The desire expressed in Amendments Nos 60 and 93 for a list of goals and a list of substances for which no adequate data is available cannot be approved.
Lists of this kind would not have clear legal status and do not fit in with the procedures for adopting the list of prioritised substances.
I would point out in this regard that the OSPAR Convention does not in any way alter existing Community legislation concerning nitrates from the agricultural sector.
The Nitrates Directive will not therefore be influenced by the present framework directive.
I appreciate the fact that Parliament has proved to be flexible over the very sensitive and difficult question of imposing charges for water services.
I can wholeheartedly support the demand that the price of water should be set at a level which creates incentives to use water resources in a sustainable way.
I also support the demand for a suitable contribution from each sector to cover own costs.
I can therefore partly, and in principle, approve Amendments Nos 43-46, together with Amendment No 85.
I believe that we need legally binding requirements stating that the financial costs of water services are to be covered by each economic sector.
This would constitute a clear goal against which progress could be measured.
I therefore support the overall thrust of Amendment No 105, which is in line with the Commission' s original proposal.
I also support a gradual development in the direction of covering environmental costs and the costs of resources.
We are aware of the fact that the price of water and water services is a complicated issue and that account must be taken not only of environmental goals but also of social and economic goals.
This must not, however, be an excuse for subsidising inefficient economic sectors which cause pollution.
We intend shortly to issue a communication from the Commission on precisely this question.
I agree with Parliament that the common position' s sixteen-year timeframe for implementing these measures must be considerably reduced.
The same also applies to the possibility which exists of extending the period of implementation by a further eighteen years.
Amendment No 28, cancelling the third extension period, is an important step in the right direction.
This proposal can therefore be approved.
A period of ten years, as proposed in Amendments Nos 24 and 26, among others, is, on the other hand, too short.
I believe that consideration ought to be given to wording the overall definition of the requirements under the proposal in such a way that it includes a strict and explicit condition to the effect that causing deterioration of the environment must be avoided.
The proposal must also include more stringent criteria for establishing lesser environmental objectives and for extending deadlines in connection with heavily modified or artificial bodies of water.
This applies to Amendments Nos 6, 24, 25, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 78, 80, 102 and 104.
These Amendments may in large part be approved and will be supported until such time as an overall solution can be found.
To comply with the demands in Amendments Nos 27 and 29, to the effect that the Commission should approve every extension, would be going too far, and these cannot be approved.
Another important area is protection of the groundwater.
We need both a starting point and a final goal if we are to reverse the upward trend in pollution.
We also need stricter criteria for interpreting the results of any monitoring.
The most important parts of Parliament' s Amendments Nos 25 and 73 can therefore be approved in principle.
The new definition in Amendment No 72 is, however, too strict and cannot be applied for this purpose.
I would propose that Amendment No 92 should be incorporated into a broader solution.
Amendment No 71 does not take account of seasonal variations and annual changes in the level of the groundwater.
The proposal cannot therefore be approved.
The Commission considers it unrealistic and unnecessary to lay down standards guaranteeing that the least intensive water purification is adequate to ensure that surface water is of drinking water quality.
Instead, we prefer an addition to those measures which are required in accordance with Article 11 to promote activities in this area.
The good status which is required under this proposal ought to guarantee that the demand for surface water of good quality is fulfilled.
This part of Amendment No 41 cannot, therefore, be approved.
The Commission appreciates Parliament' s efforts to guarantee that the so-called combined approach is given a central role.
This approach and its scope, which the Commission can in principle approve, are defined by Amendments Nos 22 and 47.
In order to achieve the greatest possible legal clarity and proportionality, we wish, however, to reformulate Amendment No 47 and to add a de minimis provision.
The transfer of water is already covered by controls, but explicitly mentioning it makes the text clearer.
These parts of Amendments Nos 49 and 87 can, therefore, be approved.
It is nonetheless unnecessary to make it a condition that all the measures for controlling demand should be adopted.
The proposal already specifies that water must be abstracted in accordance with the ecological needs in the river basin district concerned.
These parts of Amendments Nos 49 and 87 cannot, therefore, be approved.
The Commission approves Amendment No 76 to the effect that radioactive substances are explicitly to be included in the proposal.
To summarise, the Commission is able to approve 72 amendments, either in their entirety, partially or in principle.
The following amendments cannot be approved: 1, 4, 9, 11, 13, 15, 19, 23, 39, 40, 51, 59, 61, 64, 66, 70, 71, 71, 72, 74, 77, 79, 81, 83, 87, 89, 90, 91, 95, 97, 98, 100, 101, 103, 106 and 107.
Finally, I want to say that I welcome the efforts which Parliament has made to try to solve the questions on which the Council takes other views.
Important progress has been made, and the constructive tone of the discussions creates a good working climate for future discussions.
A number of obstacles remain, but I am convinced that, as the legislative work progresses, we shall achieve our common goal of creating a water policy we can be proud of.
Parliament' s adopting a clear position will be an important contribution to an ambitious, European water policy for the next three decades.
I would like to hear the Commissioner's view on Amendment No 45.
I may have missed it in the list she gave out.
.
I accept that.
Thank you, Mrs Wallström.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 p.m.
Financial instrument for the environment (LIFE)
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A4-0014/2000), on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Regulation on a financial instrument for the environment (LIFE) (Rapporteur: Mrs Lienemann).
rapporteur.
(FR) Mr President, we have already had the opportunity, at the first reading, to examine this report and I was given to believe in committee that there was a broad consensus within this House.
LIFE is the only budget line for direct assistance for the environment in the Community budget, and one cannot help but note that it does not live up to our ambitions since the amounts allocated to it have been stagnating for years.
Despite the enlargement which has already taken place, when we renewed the first LIFE programme to move on to the second, despite enlargement, the level of appropriations remained the same.
And then we see that, increasingly, the regions, the various operators, businesses, associations, are submitting LIFE projects, both for LIFE-NATURE and LIFE-ENVIRONMENT, projects that are of excellent quality, which following technical assessment by all the competent committees are unanimously found to be worthy of European Union support, but we still cannot fund them, for lack of budget appropriations.
It must also be mentioned that this budget experiences a rate of consumption of appropriations which is quite exceptional within the Community budget.
Patently we have here an instrument that is appropriate for the policies which we wish to implement.
I would stress the LIFE-NATURE strand in particular.
We are well aware that, in the European Union, a whole raft of directives such as the directive on habitats and the directive on migratory birds encounter problems in implementation.
With LIFE-NATURE we should be able to support policies which demonstrate the feasibility, the validity of the objectives of these directives, and their capacity to be implemented.
And, for want of appropriations, we lose this legitimacy and allow the idea that these European directives of ours are not reasonable and are not applicable to develop.
And so the debates taking place today focus on two major issues: firstly, comitology, an ongoing debate within this House, but Parliament wished to implement policies settled rather by management committees or advisory committees which give the Commission some flexibility and which do not give the Council too much scope to obstruct and have their intergovernmental philosophy prevail over the Community philosophy which we are here to stand up for within the European Parliament.
But we have these comitology debates with regard to most of the European Union' s financial programmes and instruments.
I would say that in my opinion - and the experiences we have had in the past tend to show this - that reconciling opinions on comitology is rather easier than reconciling opinions on the budget.
Let me point out that Parliament is asking for 850 million ecus in appropriations, not a vast sum in the Community budget, and that the current proposals are for 613 million ecus.
I feel, at any rate, that for the ultimate application of LIFE, at least, there would be some way for the Union to make a significant budgetary gesture in favour of the environment.
Let me conclude with the matter of our institutions' way of working.
This is the essence of how I understand the situation: we are being told that it is essential for us to reach a conclusion quickly, that, basically, the Members of Parliament should drop their claims, particularly claims on the budget, for if we do not soon, in line with the codecision procedure, get around to establishing the framework of the regulations for LIFE, then its implementation for the year 2000 is going to suffer a delay, and in the meantime the NGOs and the operators at grass roots level are waiting for our appropriations.
I would, however, like to point out that the Council has plenty of time to formulate its ideas and that it is submitting its proposals to us only a few months before the fateful date.
As for us, we our bound by the terms of the texts: a maximum of four months.
We meet our deadlines and afterwards we are told that we should hold on and that in order to be reasonable we must go along with the position of the others, because in the codecision procedure there is just not enough time.
I think Parliament often protests about this method, not to point the finger at any specific party within the Council, and I certainly would not want the Portuguese Presidency to feel responsible for this state of affairs, since, the truth is, it is something of a tradition, which the Council has kept going for a long time.
But I should like to stress the fact that, on this issue of the environment, the budget issue is a central one and Parliament cannot yield to the blackmail which requires it to be the only reasonable party in the deal.
I therefore hope, firstly, that our fellow Members will support us in the conciliation - but votes on this area are always very much in agreement - but also that the Council and the Commission will manage to listen to us and that we shall each take a step towards the other.
Mr President, it is true that we are in open disagreement on some of the choices made by the Council and the Commission, and I will refer to this later on.
It is equally true, however, that we should begin by saying that this regulation is better than those covering LIFE I and LIFE II.
It is better firstly because the framework proposal made LIFE I more rigorous, more transparent and more rational.
Secondly, it is better because the common position includes some fundamental recommendations, which were advocated by the European Parliament at first reading.
Specifically, these are: to promote employment as a factor to be taken into consideration when selecting candidate projects, and to reduce the environmental impact of products at every stage from production to recycling and elimination.
This is one of the aims that LIFE-Environment must achieve.
Thirdly, the fact that the common position has for the first time introduced upgrading and planning for coastal areas as one of LIFE-Environment' s priorities is an extremely positive step.
In spite of all its virtues though, LIFE III' s regulation fails in what is obviously the most important aspect of determining a financial instrument' s impact, which is its budget.
By persisting with their proposal of EUR 613 million as a reference amount for 2000 - 2004, and by refusing to accept the European Parliament' s proposal of EUR 850 million, the Commission and the Council are taking a decision which we do not feel is based on the same criteria of rationality and justice that they introduced, and rightly so, for other measures in LIFE III.
We want the Commission and the Council to know that we will not give up trying to provide LIFE with the budget it deserves and which best guarantees the environmental results that we are seeking to achieve with this kind of instrument.
We have four very straightforward arguments which we feel justify our choice.
Firstly, LIFE is the only direct financial instrument which is designed to promote environmental policy within the European Union.
There is no other such policy.
Secondly, LIFE is an instrument that has already produced good results, and has enabled innovative methods and techniques to be developed and has an excellent rate of implementation.
Thirdly, the LIFE budget has been reduced in real terms has not kept up with the enormous dynamism and creativity of demand.
Fourthly, as Parliament ascribes so much value to LIFE, it has allocated ever-greater appropriations to this project in its annual budget.
This means that approving the proposal put forward by the Council and by the Commission would represent an unacceptable reversal of this trend.
Our concern does not centre purely on the budgetary issue, however.
Climate change and water policy are subjects that are of great concern to the European public and which have deserved considerable attention from this House.
We therefore feel it is crucial that as Amendments Nos 5 and 6 seek to establish as objectives which LIFE-Environment should achieve a plan for the sustainable management of ground water and surface water, as well as for reducing greenhouse gases, they should be adopted.
Lastly, I would like to congratulate Mrs Lienemann on her report and to take the opportunity to say to her that we will be voting in favour of her amendments on comitology even though, as was made clear in the Committee on the Environment, we would prefer LIFE to have been monitored by an advisory committee, we do want to contribute to allowing the solution proposed by the Council to be accepted as quite frankly, it was worse.
Mr President, Commissioner, you are right, Commissioner, to bring pressure to bear on those Member States who have failed to transpose the flora and fauna directive, and that includes the Member State I come from.
You are right to do so because demands are being made on our natural habitats, and we must transpose these Natura 2000 regions at long last.
However, if that happens then of course we will have a huge need for LIFE-Natura funding, because of course we will also have to finance conservation measures in these areas, which are ultimately to be designated, and that at a time when we cannot even stabilise the things we have achieved with LIFE I and LIFE II.
Given this situation, i.e. that flora and fauna areas now have to be transposed with a vengeance, we will definitely need more money for LIFE as well.
This brings me on to the subject of the Council, which is a past master when it comes to decisions on expenditure, particularly in the sphere of foreign policy, which we then have to find the money for in our budget.
I need only mention the aid for Bosnia - we are cutting back on all fronts there.
On the other hand, the Council refuses to take a more long-term view and increase the LIFE budget by what is in fact a derisory amount in the context of the overall budget, for an area which, when all is said and done, is all about us creating sustainable development.
I cannot fathom this at all and expressly call upon all my fellow MEPs to support Mrs Lienemann' s motion on raising the funding to EUR 850 million.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, LIFE is the European Union' s most important instrument and indeed its only financial instrument dedicated exclusively to the environment.
That explains why this instrument must live up to our ambitions, ambitions for which, of course, there is a price.
Obviously, the basic item for discussion with the Council will be the allocation for LIFE III.
The common position stipulates a total appropriation of EUR 613 million for the period 2000-2004.
This is not enough.
The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party is in favour of increasing this amount to EUR 850 million.
We therefore support Mrs Lienemann' s amendment which observes that the allocation for LIFE was not increased when the Union was last enlarged, without even mentioning the next batch of new arrivals.
The amount that we are asking for is no great mountain of useless expenditure.
Quite the opposite, it is still fairly modest in relation to the requirements to be funded.
A drop in the ocean, I might say, in comparison with Europe' s structural policies.
The environment is still the poor relation in the European budget, even though it is primarily an investment.
An investment in natural resources, of course, but also in employment, since it has been demonstrated that an active environmental policy generated new jobs, as shown particularly by the great success of LIFE, a success with NGOs, businesses, local authorities and third countries.
More than one third of the 8,500 requests received meet the required conditions and it has been possible to cofinance approximately 1,300 projects between 1992 and 1998.
A success which Parliament wishes and intends to see perpetuated, and this is why we also support amendment 14 outlining the fourth phase of the LIFE project.
In matters of the environment, investment and ambition come in a variety of forms, and indeed must come in a variety of forms in the long term.
This is the price of the future of generations to come.
Mr President, Commissioner, I am probably going to repeat things my fellow Members have said but I believe that, as far as the Council is concerned, the thing is to repeat over and over what we think of LIFE.
I shall therefore reiterate that, as the rapporteur has already said quite clearly, LIFE is the only specific financial instrument for the implementation of the European Union' s policy on the environment.
This instrument is absolutely essential since it provides the impetus for truly innovative actions in favour of nature and the environment in Europe, which are adopted and expanded upon by the Member States.
This financial instrument is, furthermore, deliberately democratic since it is accessible to both governmental and non-governmental organisations.
That is why, ladies and gentlemen, I would urge you not to vote in favour of the amendments which have no appreciation of the spirit of LIFE.
Through the associations, then, LIFE is a facility that can be used by the European citizen directly, and for the benefit of actions in the interest of the community.
Several million NGO members - millions, I say - recognise in LIFE the Union' s determination to build up an ambitious policy in favour of our natural heritage.
LIFE is, moreover, the fundamental instrument of the Natura 2000 network in Europe into which the Member States have put a lot, pursuant to Community directives on the habitats of rare and endangered fauna and flora and on migratory birds, and which makes it possible to set up the protection of sites of high biological value in our States.
I should like to say that those who run down this policy in their own States bear the responsibility for obstructing European nature conservation policies.
This is a pity because everyone within this Chamber knows that LIFE is a financial instrument which is not sufficient to carry out the projects submitted by Member States, a good many of which are turned down due to lack of funds.
Let us not forget that, to date, LIFE amounts to only EUR 100 million per annum, i.e. scarcely 0.1% of the budget of the European Union.
For the record, the budget for agriculture, which has a real impact on the environment, amounts, as we all know, to EUR 37 billion.
Against this background, my group thinks it essential to increase the allocation to LIFE and unreservedly supports Mrs Lienemann' s proposal to increase the budget to EUR 850 million, since we know, and I think it bears saying, how high the expectations of our fellow citizens on environmental matters are and how excessively cautious and unacceptable the Council' s compromise regarding the budget for LIFE is, especially as the LIFE programmes show exceptional implementation rates and have demonstrated the extent to which they made it possible to bring about new environmental practice.
The first sustainable development projects are unquestionably those.
Mr President, the European Union environmental programme, to which a considerable amount (EUR 613 million) has been allocated, gives rise to many questions regarding the proper use of public funds.
A financial instrument of this order ought to be transparent and effective, and this is not the case for the following reasons: poorly defined selection criteria, dubious uncoordinated operations, assessments not made public and the lack of any assessment policy.
We are therefore proposing to amend the regulations as follows.
Firstly, to reserve the acquisitions made thanks to LIFE funds exclusively to public bodies, subsequently, following invitation to tender, to entrust the management of these sites to authorised nature conservation associations.
It is a question of the continuity of the ownership of the acquisitions, since private law associations may disappear or resell acquisitions.
It is shocking in philosophical terms and dubious in legal terms for 100% public money to be used to build up a heritage of private land ownership, even under cover of environmental protection.
Secondly, to define the criteria for the eligibility and allocation of LIFE funds, in order to rule our any suspicions of clientelism or ostracism.
Thirdly, to make prior coordination with the users and communities concerned a prerequisite.
For example, the LIFE-Nature project in France, at Grand-Lieu Lake, planned without any coordination, led to a real ecological disaster, the de-silting operation which was carried out without regard for French law on the subject caused significant silting of the Acheneau, a water course located downstream, destroying spawning beds, filling wetlands, and who knows what else.
The silt was in fact shifted 3 kilometres, at a cost of FF 6 million, the cure being worse than the disease, and a consequence that was foreseeable and actually predicted by the parties involved with the site.
Result: a court action and repair costs greater than the cost of the programme itself.
This is the sort of thing that we want to avoid.
Four, to include representatives of Parliament in the monitoring committee, at least one Member per political group.
What could be fairer than for Members of Parliament to monitor the use of the appropriations they voted for?
Fifthly, to publish an annual scientific, technical and financial assessment of LIFE operations carried out.
Six, to carry out proper evaluation of the programmes on a regular basis.
Seven, to make it possible for these funds to be used in the event of an environmental emergency: for example, in reforestation following storm damage, or restoration of the natural environment following an oil slick, etc.
Here, Mrs Lienemann, Mr President, we are putting forward here a practical proposal, a common sense proposal, easy to implement, likely to limit local conflicts and to vindicate the proper use of public monies, before increasing the LIFE budget line by as much as 40%!
Mr President, Commissioner, I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Lienemann on the report she has carried out, and also the Commission - why not? - because this report, this position, generally improves on the texts in force.
Furthermore, it contains more acceptable systematics and is clearer and more transparent.
I would also like to congratulate the services of the Commission, since the evaluation, control and monitoring of the LIFE programme provide a reasonable guarantee with regard to the selection and execution of projects.
However, I would like to insist on certain points.
Firstly, its continuity, which, in principle, I am not questioning.
Secondly, the financial contributions.
Sadly, only 7.2% of the projects requested receive funds.
Of the EUR 1 919 million requested, only EUR 784 million have been granted.
Now the financial statement shows only EUR 613 million to cover more countries and competences.
Parliament has proposed EUR 850 million, but the document repeats the initial proposal of EUR 613 million.
Commissioner, our environmental commitments are increasing in all areas, while the only financial instrument exclusively dedicated to the environment is decreasing.
Is this not a contradiction?
Let us not demand from others what we are not prepared to give ourselves?
Why do we all go on about the environment and are then not prepared to pay for it amongst all of us, but rather expect the usual people, the ones who live there all year, to pay for it and maintain it?
Commissioner, we must be consistent.
The cost of maintaining the environment, which we all enjoy, must be met by all of us, and the LIFE programme is the only financial instrument aimed exclusively at the environment and whose projects have generally been effective.
Mr President, LIFE has been the principal instrument available to the Community since 1992 for supporting and developing environmental policy, both within the Community and in the surrounding third countries.
On the basis of the experience gained over the past eight years, an attempt is being made to increase the effectiveness of action on behalf of the environment in the third development phase of that financial instrument.
The funding of activities for the implementation, adaptation and development of Community policy in the environment sector and the incorporation of the environment in other policies, particularly ones that contribute towards sustainable development, are central elements of the regulation we are to vote upon.
An important element of LIFE-Nature, which mainly concerns the realisation of the Natura 2000 network, is the introduction of a multinational approach to formulating plans for international projects and activities, so as to avoid the fragmentation of biotopes and to offer better protection of biodiversity.
In the second, LIFE-Environment strand, which is more concerned with projects involving small and medium-sized enterprises and local government agencies, the incorporation of the environment in other policies is expressed very clearly indeed.
As regards the financing package for the implementation of LIFE over the next five years, I wholeheartedly support the increase from EUR 613 million to EUR 850 million proposed by the rapporteur, Mrs Lienemann.
Unless the necessary means are secured to pursue environmental protection, there is no point on the one hand in continuing to raise the environmental awareness achieved in recent years, and on the other hand in incorporating the environmental dimension in other policies.
Besides, we cannot remain indifferent towards the increased challenges in areas around the Union or towards addressing very acute environmental protection problems in the applicant countries.
What has happened over the past few days with the pollution of the Danube and its tributary has been instructive.
Consequently, I consider that support for environmental action under the LIFE financial instrument will help to further Community policy in the environmental sector and can contribute substantially to fulfilling the Community' s mission of achieving a high level of environmental protection and improvement.
Mr President, I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Lienemann on her sensitive approach towards the environment, ably demonstrated in the two reports we have discussed this evening.
Two minutes is certainly not long enough to deal with such an important topic.
So I will simply appeal to the Commissioner to undertake full responsibility for such an important issue.
For five years, I have been the representative of the Committee on the Environment in a regional organisation, which assuredly does not have Parliament' s broad perspective.
The environment is in a parlous state.
Like a number of previous speakers, I, too, wish to consider the economic problem and the problem of finding funding for projects, which, in my view, should be incorporated into the pubic domain.
As regards funding, EUR 613 million is not enough.
Even EUR 850 million is not enough.
At the end of August 1999, I took part in a meeting of the Committee of the Environment in which it was said that EUR 2 million, or ITL 4 000 billion, should go towards eliminating or, at any rate, reducing smoking.
However, the environment constitutes a far bigger and more serious problem than smoking.
EUR 850 million - assuming that such a figure is actually agreed - believe me, is not enough, in practical terms, to allow any type of project to be carried out.
In many areas the parks which are a fundamental element in the LIFE programme have been established.
But creating parks with very limited financial resources, without any system of signs is inefficient and ineffectual.
I would therefore ask Parliament and the Commission to give the matter their full attention.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, ever since the beginning of 1999, discussions have taken place between the institutions on the subject of the proposed regulation for a third stage for the instrument for the environment known as LIFE.
I would again thank the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and Mrs Lienemann for the good and constructive co-operation we have had on this matter.
As a result of this, I can confirm that the Commission wholly or in principle approves nine of the fourteen amendments which have been adopted by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
The Commission welcomes, above all, Amendments Nos 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 13, which apply to the Committee procedures.
In these cases, Parliament has fully taken account of the objections which the Commission had to the common position.
The Commission can, in principle, also approve Amendment No 4 which ought, however, to be introduced into another place in the text.
With regard to Amendments Nos 5 and 6, I want to emphasise that projects for the sustainable exploitation of groundwater and surface water, together with projects for reducing forms of air pollution which contribute to the greenhouse effect, are to a large degree covered by LIFE.
The Commission nonetheless considers that, if this is stated separately, then that is to go against the original decision to have the proposal focus on just a few priority areas.
There is also a risk of overlap with other Community programmes such as the Fifth Framework Programme for Research, Technical Development and Demonstration.
The present programme' s key measures - water quality, tomorrow' s city and innovative products and processes - to a certain degree cover the same questions.
Where the question of the budget is concerned, I am pleased about the confidence shown by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
Amendment No 12 requires a larger budget than that stated in the common position.
I am also convinced that LIFE has great potential.
This instrument could finance good projects with a higher amount of money than that quoted in the proposed budget.
The amount quoted in Amendment No 12 does not, however, tally with the budget set on the basis of Agenda 2000.
Allow me also to add that, if the budget is increased, greater demands are obviously going to be made upon the Directorate-General for the Environment if an increased number of projects are going to be dealt with.
Account will also have to be taken of other programmes where decisions are to be made within the framework of the joint decision-making procedure.
At this stage, the Commission is keeping to the amount which has been set in the common position.
With regard to Amendment No 3, which we did not approve at first reading, I want to emphasise that each programme has its own objectives, conditions under which it may be applied for and costs which make it eligible for aid.
It is therefore meaningless, and often impossible, directly to transfer projects from LIFE to other instruments.
If other sources of finance were to be investigated for each project, more resources would, moreover, be required than are available in the present situation.
Now that the Commission has to consider carefully what resources are required for each activity, this is an example of the kind of activity we ought to avoid: one that is inessential but demanding in terms of resources.
Nor can the Commission approve Amendment No 14, which is contrary to the Commission' s right of initiative.
With regard to the discussion concerning the deadline, I want to say that the final date for beginning to implement LIFE - 31 March 2000, as set in the common position - must now be moved forward.
The date will be fixed as soon as the present regulation has been adopted.
Finally, I want to repeat that I am convinced that LIFE will be an effective instrument in support of development and the implementation of the Community' s environmental policy.
Parliament has contributed greatly to improving this instrument.
I am convinced that you share my wish that it should be possible to adopt the regulation as soon as possible, especially in view of the fact that there are great expectations in the Member States and in other countries, especially among the applicant States which are now being given the opportunity to participate in LIFE.
Thank you, Mrs Wallström.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Modernising social protection
The next item is the report (A5-0033/2000), by Mr Andersson on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the communication from the Commission on a concerted strategy for modernising social protection [COM(1999) 347 - C5-0253/1999 - 1999/2182(COS)].
Mr President, the issue of social security systems is an important one.
This is a natural consequence of cooperation within the EU.
The basis is monetary cooperation, which has since been followed up by macro-economic cooperation and cooperation on employment policy.
It is now a natural consequence to move on to social security systems.
These areas are mutually dependent upon one another.
Economic stability is a reason for growth and can provide high employment.
It also provides the opportunity to develop welfare provision.
But the reverse is also the case: a well-developed policy on social security can contribute to high employment and to increased growth.
In other words, social security is a factor of production.
Social security systems differ from one EU country to another.
This is largely due to historical factors.
We are now faced with a number of common challenges, however; demographic development, for example, which has to do not only with the increase in the number of elderly people but also with the lower birth rate.
The labour market is also changing.
Women are venturing into the labour market in ever greater numbers.
Another challenge is presented by technical development.
We must meet these challenges together.
The Commission' s communication recommends that experience should be more widely shared, a high-level group formed and benchmarking introduced.
What is more, the report on social security should be published annually and examined in conjunction with the report on employment.
This is good, but it is not enough.
We propose a procedure like the Luxembourg process.
Clear guidelines and indicators are required.
At the same time, the Member States are to formulate the relevant methods in national action plans.
We are creating a common model, but retaining the principle of subsidiarity.
This social convergence is a process which will continue for a long period.
Parliament must therefore be involved in the work - not by being part of the high-level group, but by enabling parliamentary representatives to track the work of the latter and come up with proposals as to how the process is to be carried on.
Like the work on employment, the Commission' s proposal is founded upon four pillars.
These are: to make the systems employment-friendly; to make the pensions systems sustainable in the long term; to promote social integration; and to guarantee sustainable, high-quality health and medical care.
All this is important.
In our report, we have highlighted the importance of combating poverty within the EU and of finding indicators as soon as possible so that we can make progress in this area.
Equality has no pillar of its own.
There, it is mainstreaming which applies.
All four pillars should reflect aspects of equality.
This is something we have borne in mind.
We are submitting a wide range of proposals to the effect, for example, that there should be a transition to individualised social security systems; that parental leave should involve entitlement to benefits under the social security systems; that there should be better opportunities to combine family and working life; and that the basic old-age pension should guarantee a decent standard of living.
These proposals favour women especially.
Parallel to this European strategy of social convergence, a concrete plan for legislative work in the social sphere is required, together with proposals for framework agreements in the context of the dialogue between employers and employees, accompanied by a concrete timetable.
We expect the Commission to present this as part of its proposal for a social action programme.
Social convergence is also needed before the enlargement of the Union, partly in order to strengthen the social model and partly to combat the risk of social dumping.
The Commission ought to consider devising a special action programme concerning social policy in connection with enlargement.
We have had a constructive discussion in the Committee.
We had a lot of amendments, but succeeded in agreeing upon a report.
Now, the amendments which are to be voted on at the plenary sitting have been reduced in number to only fifteen.
This indicates that we have a broad consensus.
A number of these amendments have come back from the Committee reading, and these I shall reject.
I shall also reject those amendments which have been tabled by the Technical Group of Independent Members, because I do not think that these add anything to the report.
On the other hand, my group will applaud Amendment No 14 from the group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party.
I think this proposal is a good one.
Certainly, it resembles Amendment No 1, but Amendment No 14 is better.
Finally, I want to say that the EU is not only concerned with cooperation on trade.
The EU is also a union for employment and social justice.
In creating a citizens' Europe, social policy has an important role to play.
By means of this report, Parliament wishes to make its contribution to reinforcing the social dimension of European society.
We hope that the Council and the Commission will take this contribution seriously and include it in future social policy.
The Lisbon Summit will provide an excellent opportunity to present a strategy of this kind.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, a long-term, workable social protection system in which men and women' s particular lifestyles are safeguarded on the basis of equality, is indispensable to social cohesion and stability for our society.
The mutual interdependence of issues pertaining to the national economy, employment policy, and social protection in the internal market calls for there to be joint deliberations at Community level in this respect.
We have not achieved equal rights for men and women either in the sphere of work or that of social protection.
The unemployment rate for women is considerably higher than that for men.
It is still much more difficult for women to gain access to certain professions and there are far more women than men in precarious and part-time jobs.
Wage levels for women are still way below those for men.
As a result, they have a low level of social protection or none whatsoever, for paid employment serves as the basis for this according to systems currently in force.
Many women are only accorded derived rights, which reinforces their economic dependence.
In view of the fact that economic and social conditions have changed, we should aim to achieve individualised social protection, with people being treated independently of their partners, and guaranteed lasting security.
However, it must still be worth an individual' s while to work, notwithstanding all the necessary contributions.
Reforming social protection must encompass support for and recognition of, in insurance law terms, the time it takes to bring up children, as well as care of needy family members.
It is shocking that an ever-increasing number of elderly women live in poverty.
They were unable to contribute to the social security systems because of the time they invested in bringing up their families, but they too must be afforded protection.
An individual' s entitlement to high-quality health care must be assured, irrespective of their contribution to the economy.
As before, in principle it is the Member States that are responsible for framing and financing their social protection systems.
Nevertheless, cooperation within the EU on the part of the expert working group, in which women must be suitably represented, could be instrumental in bringing about convergence of the social systems in the long term.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Andersson, very warmly on his report on modernising social protection which is now under discussion.
In the capacity of coordinator of the European People' s Party in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, I am very pleased with the compromise which was reached and which Mr Andersson put so much effort into.
I am also delighted that he based the report on a report which was written by myself as rapporteur under the previous Parliament and has partly followed the gist of this old report.
The goal of the Commission' s notification of June 1999, on which the Andersson report is based, is to reinforce cooperation between the Member States and the EU in terms of social protection.
Key sub-goals are: promoting employment and ensuring that work secures a fixed income; secondly, safeguarding old-age pensions and making these affordable; thirdly, promoting social integration and fourthly, guaranteeing affordable, first-rate health protection.
Gender-related aspects must feature prominently in all these goals.
I believe that congratulations are also in order for the Commission with regard to this notification, for these four points are, in fact, to a very large number of EU citizens extremely important - if not the most important points which merit further thought.
The Commission' s communication is an important strategic document for bringing about European social convergence.
Macro-economic policy, employment policy and social policy all affect each other and this is why they should be brought more closely together.
The Commission has recognised this interrelatedness.
It is our intention to bring about an integrated social strategy which is, of course, underpinned by a sound macro-economic strategy and a sound employment strategy.
These aspects are very much interconnected.
It is, therefore, surprising that this topic has, to date, not been incorporated in a strategy and this is why the Commission' s notification constitutes a break-through in a way.
It brings me great joy to witness that the Council now seems to accept this break-through and also wants to bring it to the fore in Lisbon.
We should, of course, not get overly excited about it.
It marks the beginning, rather than the end, of a process.
Some people have wondered whether our demands are too low or whether there should be more dialogue.
But it is extremely significant for the process to be set in motion.
The issues involved are extremely important but the systems in the European Union are quite different from one another.
The challenges are different.
The levels of employment are different and this is why it is very important to set the ball rolling gently but to make steady progress nonetheless.
In this way, we will be able to meet a number of huge challenges.
The majority within my group is of the opinion that something like this needs to happen.
The funny thing about the Andersson report is that it does not get bogged down with too many details of how everything should take shape; from this perspective it is not a pie-in-the-sky report.
It is a report which tries to give direction.
There are, however, one or two aspects about which I have doubts as to whether or not we are being too specific.
I think that a number of MEPs will make reference to this.
But that does not take away from the fact that the report' s importance mainly lies in the fact that we are developing a strategy and that there is a reasonable chance that it can make a significant contribution in Lisbon.
I believe that if it were to be adopted in Lisbon in this way, Lisbon will turn out to be a success.
If it is not adopted, Lisbon will not add much to what has already been said in the past.
As far as this is concerned, the report, albeit a component, may well be the key component of Lisbon, because it is really innovative, while many other things are merely a rumination of what has been said before.
All in all, I am indebted to the rapporteur and the Committee for this report.
I hope that Europe, in terms of social protection, will make a step forward, taking into account subsidiarity, for without subsidiarity, this would not be possible.
Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, like my fellow MEP, Bartho Pronk, please allow me to thank the Commission for this communication and, in particular, to congratulate our rapporteur for the work he has put into this report.
Commissioner, the fact that this report is no longer controversial within Parliament does not mean that it has lost any of its crucial importance.
There have been times within this Parliament when such discussions on social security were actually quite awkward.
It is also a timely discussion - as Mr Pronk said just a moment ago - at a time when preparations are in full swing for the Lisbon Summit, which intends to find out how we can put economic growth, employment and social cohesion on the agenda in Europe via the Information Society.
Within my group, it speaks for itself that social protection forms an important part of this social cohesion and should thus also be added to the agenda in Lisbon.
My group is pleased that the Social Affairs Council gave the go-ahead for a better cooperation strategy as early on as the end of last year and that, in fact, a group of high-ranking officials has already been commissioned to submit to the Council an initial report by June 2000.
However, we, the Parliament and, in particular, the group of the Social Democrats, want Lisbon to go one step further now.
It is of great importance that, in our fellow MEP' s report, this European Parliament advocates a true European strategy of social convergence, based on what provisions have been made for employment via the so-called Luxembourg strategy, that is to say it should encompass common goals, guidelines, national action plans and performance evaluations.
We believe that this course of action is ambitious, yet achievable.
Needless to say, it is clear that harmonisation of social security is not viable at European level.
The financial and organisational systems vary too greatly for this, and this is also an important reason why social protection has only just been put on the European agenda, and why, in fact, scenarios such as Danny Peters' thirteenth Member State or the European social snake have scarcely got off the ground.
But this new course of action is very exciting.
The employment strategy has proved that it can function well and social convergence is also necessary, for our social security systems are facing the same challenges, and in an EMU era, social security systems would otherwise threaten to fall prey to social competition.
But let me make one thing clear on behalf of my group: social convergence strategies should not be an alternative to social legislation.
They can merely serve as an extremely useful complement to what we are developing and expecting from the Commission in terms of social legislation.
I think that it also a good thing if, moreover, the European Parliament tried to convince the Council to substantiate the common strategy as early on as in Lisbon and to launch an annual procedure to reduce poverty levels no later than at the beginning of 2001.
I am pleased about the fact that the European Parliament supports my group' s idea and we hope, Commissioner, that we can also count on your support.
Finally, we urge the European Parliament, both sides of industry and social NGOs to be closely involved in this process.
The success of this strategy hinges on a broad and democratic base and we hope that we can count on your support.
Mr President, the four chief objectives which the EU countries' governments endorsed in November of last year and which were mentioned earlier here today were as follows: that care should be taken to ensure that it is worthwhile working and guaranteeing oneself a secure income; that pensions should be guaranteed and pension arrangements made sustainable; that social integration should be promoted; and that sustainable, high-quality health care should be guaranteed.
These are four goals which have been worded in such broad terms that everyone must be able to support them.
Having a group of high-ranking officials as the focal point for the pooling of experience and for the coordination and evaluation of the ways in which social and labour market policies are being developed is also something we can all benefit from.
The Commission' s communication, which we are discussing today and which was put by for a decision by the Council in November, is a well-balanced report on how we can obtain a more professional debate and more knowledge of the challenges faced by the Member States in the field of social policy over the next few years when we have ageing populations and are experiencing the effects of the enlargement of the Union.
We now already have major social problems and major social costs to find from the public budgets, which is a problem for many Member States.
If reforms are not got under way, we are in danger of eroding the economic basis of social policy, and a strong and competitive economy is now undoubtedly the most secure basis for effective social security.
It is therefore only reasonable to put these subjects on the agenda.
In the debate about coordination of social policy in the EU, we often use the expression social convergence.
As liberals, we can support this concept when it means that we in the EU are to establish broad common objectives with which the individual countries then seek to comply by means of their own national social policies.
It is not, therefore, about harmonisation but about common objectives.
It is, of course, a fact that the EU countries have different ways of organising social policy.
We have different traditions and there are differences in culture and, in spite of there being many points of similarity, there are also major differences between one country and another in the nature and extent of the social problems concerned.
It is therefore important to emphasise that social policy is a national concern.
National policy is, of course, subject to a number of common parameters.
That is the case with minimum social entitlements, which are established by treaty.
It is true in regard to guaranteeing the free movement of labour without loss of social entitlements.
It applies to the fact of our having to coordinate our economies; and it applies in the case of economic cooperation.
So coordination and cooperation are facts of life.
But convergence should be about goals, not means.
I should also like to thank the rapporteur, Jan Andersson, for his report and for his very constructive contribution to the attempt to reconcile different positions and to secure support for his report.
I can support the report, but there are a few points which are not completely to my taste.
I do not agree with the requirement that the Commission should intervene in regard to what is referred to as unfair competition between social and tax systems, if interference of this kind is to be used to stem the tide of new thinking and to restrict development and the process of making our social systems more efficient, or else to prevent a reduction in the unduly high tax burden in many EU countries.
I am sceptical about the detailed regulations that might result from the Commission' s having to deal with the scope and quality of child care and care of the elderly, and I am sceptical about the value of a common poverty threshold.
Dialogue and the coordination of social policy are to be commended, but we should not lump all nations together as if they were the same.
There should be room for a multiplicity of solutions.
Mr President, Commissioner, with regard to the strategy which has been set out here on modernising social security, I would like to point out some positive things as well as raise some questions that have come up for me.
I feel positive about the movement which is very gradually taking place in the dossier.
This seems to be a good thing and useful.
I also feel positive about the essence of the communication, namely the strategic approach.
We therefore hope that the four objectives which are mentioned in it can reasonably be achieved.
We would also underline the importance of the way in which the strategy is handled.
On the one hand, it would be useful to have guidelines and a process styled on Luxembourg, but we also think it is important, as is already mentioned by Mrs Van Lancker, that guidelines are drafted to accommodate less typical work scenarios, such as sole traders, etc.
We nonetheless foresee two problems for which solutions will need to be found.
The first problem is that concerning the downward adjustment of social security, which, we hope, will be replaced by high-level convergence.
I can illustrate this with examples from a study which was carried out recently by the Dutch trade union movement into social security reforms within the European Union.
It appears from this study that adjustments are rife but most of these adjustments, in fact, the majority of them, appear to be downward adjustments, the remainder being improvements.
The lion' s share of these adjustments pertains to pension plans: eleven restrictions and two improvements.
In the case of unemployment benefits, we came across six restrictions and five improvements.
The reasons for adjustments are, for example, to improve employment, reduce social security expenditure, but are also due to policy competition and EMU criteria.
Policy competition mainly occurs in the northern countries.
The highest level of stability and even improvement of social security can be found in the southern countries.
All in all, both sides of industry only have a limited role to play in the process as a whole.
This is nothing to write home about and means that the convergence strategy must focus on the best approaches.
To use a figure of speech, cappuccino is not always good for us.
Mr President, I come from the same country and the same region as the rapporteur, Mr Andersson.
In my constituency, there is deep scepticism about the Commission' s attempts at direction and control.
If those who voted for Mr Andersson knew that he is proposing that social policy throughout Europe should be coordinated, that taxes should be harmonised and that the welfare system should be subordinated to the process of European Monetary Union, then they would protest vociferously and in no uncertain terms.
I am certain that most of them would vote for another party next time.
Certainly, Mr Andersson' s report contains many good concrete proposals, which I can entirely support.
But I am critical of the global perspective on social security which characterises both the Commission' s communication and Mr Andersson' s report.
They seem to believe that it is the Commission which is the engine, centre and driving force of the process of change in Europe.
Just as Mr Prodi described himself this morning as someone who bears the responsibilities of the world on his shoulders, what we are encountering here is a top-down perspective upon social issues, from which the talk is of convergence and harmonisation.
There is even an attempt to make us believe that social integration can be considered a common pan-European process.
The reality is quite different.
A socially integrated Europe is a distant utopia which not even an all-powerful Commission can turn into a reality.
Great steps have been taken towards economic integration, and the process of political integration is now under way.
But social integration is an entirely different type of process which presupposes cultural community and direct communication between people.
The concept of a social Europe is a drawing-board product which is far removed from the real world.
Social policy is chiefly a national process.
In my own country, we have learned that large parts of the social security system have to be created locally within the framework of the municipalities.
Decentralisation and closeness to the people they serve are important factors for promoting quality and efficiency within health care, education and social services.
The municipalities have responsibility for delivering almost all welfare services.
Local democracy provides the framework for social security.
Now that we have economic coordination, I certainly believe we need to increase the degree of coordination of social policy, too, at European level.
But a European strategy for coordination must be based upon local initiatives and upon diversity.
It must have democratic support and respect the principle of closeness to the people.
I belong to a party which, once upon a time, believed in central control, five-year plans and far-reaching convergence requirements.
We were horribly wrong, and history forced us to ask questions of ourselves, to reconsider, and to revise our ideas about democracy.
I do not believe that the chief responsibility can lie with Mr Prodi and his Commission.
I am convinced that this must be borne by those people who are directly affected by the social problems concerned.
Mr President, I would, in turn, like to congratulate both the Commission, for making another step in the convergence process with regard to social security, and the rapporteur for the sound report he has compiled.
The European Union' s policy encompasses social policy in addition to economic and employment policy.
So far, social policy has remained limited in terms of set-up and resources.
But under the influence of the free movement of employees, of the internal market and of the euro, the labour markets are actually beginning to become integrated.
This has undeniable repercussions on social protection which is tied in with labour to a large extent.
Cross-border workers, employees on secondment and migrating employees, as well as job-seekers, students on placement and other students, experience hindrances in exercising the right of free movement.
This is due to a lack of coordination and a lack of convergence in terms of social protection.
In fact, the same phenomenon occurs in tax law.
In order to combat distortion of competition and prevent dumping, the Commission has, in my opinion, developed a well-balanced approach which steers a midcourse between harmonisation and non-intervention.
On the one hand, binding and enforceable rules apply to equal pay or additional old-age pensions and on the other hand, programmes are used to offer incentives with regard to non-discrimination or social exclusion.
Based on a number of recommendations, reports and communications, the Commission has made another step in the convergence process by setting out objectives and by setting up a working party of high-ranking officials.
Both proposals have already been accepted by the Council and it is thus a matter of endorsing this approach in order to be able to make an assessment in time, with knowledge of all facts and/or in order to establish to what extent and in what way social protection should be reorganised in the European Union.
Indeed, expansion, globalisation, a sharp increase in the ageing population, individualisation and changes in family situations render such reorganisation inevitable.
Denying that such shifts take place is tantamount to surrendering social protection.
With regard to eurosceptics and nationalists, I would say that social protection within the boundaries of a Member State is not social and offers no protection.
Indeed, if social protection were to be phased out as a result of competition, this would also harm social protection as a production factor.
And less social protection means less purchasing power, fewer healthy employees and fewer happy employees.
In respect of the super-Europeans, I would say that European social protection is neither attainable nor desirable.
The discrepancies between the Member States are too immense in terms of provisions, rightful claimants, revenue or benefits, etc.
It is thus impossible to bring all States into line.
The path which the Commission is walking is, in fact, obvious.
It has the advantage of clarity, and it can collect data and exchange experiences in order to agree on objectives and finely tune solid, comparative indicators and put forward recommendations.
I endorse this view.
I will give my support to the Commission and I hope that Lisbon will take us a step forward in this matter.
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent contribution, which adds great value to the Commission' s initiative.
In spite of the scepticism of some people, there is consensus on the need for a concerted strategy for modernising social protection.
The discussions that were held in the 1980s and 1990s demonstrate the importance of social transfers.
More than 50% of people in the Union receive benefits that are not part of pensions.
Denmark and the Netherlands are positive examples of the effort for cohesion that we must all make.
In those two countries, over 60% of people at risk live above the poverty line, whereas in the Southern countries, only 7% to15% of poor people manage to do so.
This fact creates the imbalances in society and in competition that have already been highlighted.
The convergence criteria have created the temptation to reduce public spending, a phenomenon which has led to anti-European feeling.
The truth is that high levels of protection coexist well with the best indicators of productivity.
Nevertheless, where social policies are concerned too, a strategy for convergence which the report is advocating will benefit both the public and the success of the internal market.
All systems face new problems and these are identified in the report.
The demographic issue is central, but the following are not minor issues: new forms of work, mobility within the Union and a shorter working life - young people start working later now and although the legal age for retirement is 65, in practice, people are retiring between the ages of 57 and 59, due to restructuring in industry.
In addition to this, poverty is an ever-present phenomenon, particularly for retired women because their salaries and contributions have been low.
These challenges must be responded to as a matter of urgency.
We are happy to welcome the Portuguese Presidency' s initiative, which is to establish a high-level group which we want to be the preparation for action for legislation and for programming, not just another postponement or a simple diagnosis of the problem.
We need common objectives with a realistic timetable.
Mr President, Mr Andersson' s report contains a lot that is of interest.
Unfortunately, what is most interesting is that the report, which purports to be concerned with a combined strategy for modernising social policy, instead proposes an extension of traditional social policy and more supranationalism in the social sphere.
Social policy needs to be renewed in order to reduce unemployment in the Member States.
Even though the socialists, now that there are so many social democratic governments, talk much less about unemployment than they used to, the unemployment in question is still high, and this in spite of the trade boom.
Something must be done so that unemployment does not turn the so-called European model into a parody.
Social policy must facilitate employment, creating incentives for employers and employees to, respectively, provide and accept jobs.
Mr Andersson' s report demands social convergence, that is to say that systems should be increasingly standardised within and throughout the EU.
The EU should apparently adopt what are called real convergence criteria, which would be binding and of real effect.
Mr Andersson also wants to see efficient and ambitious tax coordination, that is to say supranationalism in the fiscal sphere.
The EU should also, on the basis of a uniform definition of poverty thresholds, table recommendations concerning what is called the minimum acceptable subsistence level in the Member States.
The EU should devise guidelines governing the quality of the job opportunities which are to be created, whatever that may mean.
It is certainly not going to be possible to reduce unemployment with all these additional regulations and forms of interference.
Those structural problems which make unemployment higher in Europe than in the United States will become even greater.
There is no need at all for supranationalism in this area.
The Member States can devise their own systems in the social sphere, each within the framework of its economic resources and political preferences.
It is most especially important not to create unnecessary problems before the enlargement of the EU.
Mr Andersson thinks that the less wealthy Eastern countries should be reminded that social convergence is to apply to them too.
It is obvious, however, that these countries, impoverished within a Communist economic system, cannot cope with a social policy like, for example, Sweden' s.
Talk of minimum regulations and poverty thresholds is meaningless to the present Member States and unreasonable as far as less wealthy applicant States are concerned.
Mr President, as others have done, I should also like to congratulate Mr Andersson for the report he has produced.
He has done a great deal of work on behalf of Parliament in producing a wide-ranging consensus on what is, by any definition, a thorny issue, not just in this Parliament but in virtually every Member State.
I also welcome the Commission's communication.
It was slow in coming but well worth waiting for.
It could be a landmark in the development of a social Europe, providing we take it seriously and do not allow individual Member States to baulk at the steps that must be taken to implement it.
We can, and must, take the unique European social model we have and reform it to fit the twenty-first century, a century which is globalising fast.
I am afraid the proposals that are being put forward by Mr Herman Schmid will not deal with that globalising world.
To be successful we have to ensure that our economic policy, our employment policy and our social protection policy in its broadest sense, are integrated and that we deal with them as a whole.
We have to ensure that our ECOFIN ministers and our employment ministers acknowledge that social affairs ministers have a contribution to make to the establishment of a society in Europe which is creative, has initiative and which will provide a high quality of life for all of our citizens.
This is not an option for us any more.
It is an imperative.
European citizens will not settle for any less than a quality of life which befits them as human beings.
We do not want the US model - a model which has spectacularly failed to create the employment that is necessary to provide a decent quality of life.
What it has done is increase dramatically the number of working poor in the United States.
That is not what we want to do in Europe.
We have the traditions of solidarity in Europe and we have the experience of a better way of doing things.
But we have to grasp the tools to do that.
I therefore urge that we not only implement the high-level group as proposed by the Commission but also go further and have a Luxembourg-type process so that we have an integrated approach to this issue of social protection.
Mr President, Commissioner, this is one of the social areas to which the European Union ought to pay much more attention.
Macroeconomic policies, the stability pact and the criteria for nominal convergence have put a brake on modernising social protection which would improve the quality of people' s lives, specifically by means of a significant increase in pensions and pension schemes, particularly of the minimum pensions, and through fighting social exclusion.
This situation is particularly serious in countries such as Portugal where the minimum pensions and pension schemes are barely more than half of the minimum national wage which in turn, is the lowest in the whole of Europe.
Therefore, while the Commission does not accept the need to amend its macroeconomic policies to create more jobs of quality, with employee rights, which is a fundamental basis for maintaining and modernising a solid, public social protection system, we harbour serious doubts as to its position.
Although the Andersson report has gathered some positive proposals, including some that we put forward ourselves, we are still critical of some of the bases for the Commission' s proposal and we still have concerns about the strategy for modernising social protection.
Mr President, in my previous life I ran two manufacturing businesses, one in the United Kingdom and one in the Netherlands.
As the UK business grew, we invested in more people, as the Dutch business grew we invested in more machinery.
The simple reason for this was that social costs in the Netherlands were just too high in comparison.
I am in favour of social protection, I am in favour of the original Commission document, but I do not want to see people priced out of jobs because social protection costs become unrealistically high.
That is why in committee I proposed some form of business impact assessment, so that costs and risks to jobs could be taken into account, and the EPP-DE Group supported this amendment.
But I must record that other groups, led by the PSE Group, guided by my countryman, Stephen Hughes, voted this out.
I accept that Mr Andersson's report is very well-intentioned, and I respect him for the work he has done, but in my view the way the report defines and promotes social convergence would drive social costs higher throughout the EU.
This would put more jobs at risk and also put at risk the credibility of this House by showing how remote we are from the real world.
I therefore urge this House to reject the full report and let the original Commission proposal, which was very well-balanced, stand unamended.
Mr President, we are unable to vote for this report.
The European Union should actually place social issues at the heart of the building of Europe.
Social rights should determine economic choices, and not the other way around.
This is why, when it comes to social protection, we are opposed to schemes copied from the Luxembourg process which run counter to this rationale: broad economic guidelines, then convergence criteria and, finally, social issues, dealt with as the last resort.
The European Union should proclaim one general principle, to wit, that the social rights acquired in Member States may not be restricted.
Any Community intervention should aim to complement and to harmonise existing guarantees according to the highest common denominator.
In order to strengthen the funding of social security systems, we need a policy of general wage increase, the establishment of a minimum legal wage in each Member State.
In order to fight poverty, entitlement to an income and to employment are inalienable rights.
Finally, in order to avoid health being treated in any way as a commodity, the European Union should declare itself clearly opposed to pension funds and to a situation where private insurance companies have access to the health system.
I sincerely hope, in conclusion, that social Europe cannot be satisfied with mere words and pious hopes.
For millions of people the situation is too tragic for that.
Mr President, Commissioner, the aim of developing a coordinated strategy for modernising social protection in the European Union is certainly an admirable one.
Just as the launching of a European convergence strategy on employment and labour market policies at the Luxembourg Summit was commendable.
The labour market and social protection are, in fact, two sides of the same coin, that require harmonised policies and rules.
If the labour market functions by means of certain levels of employment, flexibility and salary discipline, then it is impossible for the welfare state and social protection not to function, and vice versa.
Until recently, the European countries fixed, it could be said in an autarkic way, the rules governing the functioning and financing of the two markets.
Budgetary and exchange rate policies were responsible for maintaining internal and external stability.
With the Maastricht Treaty and the single currency, budgetary discipline became tighter and recourse to devaluation ceased as a means of endeavouring to restore marginal competitiveness.
The structural and economic differences of the various countries cannot, therefore, be rebalanced through budget deficits and trade.
That being the case, in the absence of complete labour mobility inside the Union, and without a redistributive fiscal policy at federal level, it is left to the labour markets and welfare systems to provide what degree of flexibility there is to remedy both structural and economic disequilibria, the so-called exogenous asymmetric shocks.
And therein lies the paradox.
Political and monetary convergence in Europe unavoidably entails convergence of the respective rules of the game in the labour market and welfare systems.
But, at the same time, the single currency and the absence of labour mobility, as well as of a redistributive fiscal policy, force us into a situation of non-convergence in terms of salaries and welfare, in order to compensate for the differences in marginal productivity at national and regional levels.
Hypocrisy and fine-sounding words such as convergence, benchmarking, modernisation and concerted action are not going to extricate us from those contradictions.
Either the European Union becomes a genuine federal state with a genuine redistribution of resources, genuine free movement of workers and therefore - but only at that point - common labour and welfare regimes, or it would be better not to deceive and be deceived by hopeless paths to convergence which sound impressive but which, in reality, only cause harm, above all to the most vulnerable.
That is something we would do well to recognise.
Mr President, unlike several of those who have spoken in today' s debate, I am inclined to endorse the Andersson report, one of the reasons for this being that I can see clear differences between the report and the Commission' s communications.
In particular, I am referring to the fact that this report - and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this - defends the European social model' s approach, which is one based on solidarity.
I would like to highlight the clear positions adopted against social dumping, together with the right to a basic level of social security, the goal of social convergence, and, in particular, the quite specific points that have been made about equal opportunities for women being the primary objectives of this social policy.
I can certainly see that it has its shortcomings in failing to undertake a sufficiently rigorous analysis of macroeconomic policy within the European Union, and it is this policy which stands in the way of the aforementioned solidarity-based revival of the European social state, model.
All in all, though, I deem this report to be worthwhile.
Mr President, I have taken the floor in order to reaffirm the need for the modernisation of social protection, which is much more then simply one more step in the construction of Europe.
This message is contained in the excellent report by Mr Andersson.
Europe, the European Union, although it is very strong in economic and political terms, will remain shaky, weak and limited, perhaps inadequate, if we are not able to strengthen it from a social point of view.
I believe that the latter means the possibility of employment for those who require it, but also decisive action in support of the socially disadvantaged.
Bearing in mind that everybody has the right to social protection and a minimum guaranteed social income, I believe that we must not forget about those people who were not born in the European Union.
Let us not forget that, in 1999, 717,000 people came here to compensate for our low birth rate.
In social terms, it is therefore absolutely essential that we have an immigration policy with a social conscience, as President Gutierres recently stated in Spain.
We must be very aware of the situation of those people whose prospects of finding work are threatened or reduced by economic changes, mergers, take-overs, new technologies etc.
What is required here is a training policy to qualify and prepare people for new jobs, for those who already have a job and for those who need a second opportunity, because sometimes, as the title of the film states, the postman always rings twice.
In my humble opinion, it is the responsibility of all European, national and regional governments to ensure that he rings on more than one occasion.
It seems to me, Commissioner, that the Commission has the responsibility to promote and coordinate these opportunities.
Mr President, I should like to congratulate Mr Andersson on his really excellent work, which is the reason why there is broader agreement, and I also thank the Members of Parliament involved for their contribution.
I would like to make a number of comments about what has been said.
First, I must stress that the debate about social protection issues began several years ago among the European bodies and since 1995 there has been the first statement entitled: "The future of social protection" and there have been statements from the European Parliament, those of Mrs Weiler and Mr Pronk.
Today, we have the statement by Mr Andersson.
I believe we have made considerable progress since we are now talking about the modernisation of social protection.
The second point is that we must bear in mind the legal basis by virtue of which the European Commission can operate.
You know very well that the Treaty provides no legal basis for policies at European level, but there is the agreement expressed at the last Council, there is agreement that work should begin on coordination and the exchange of experience, as well as the exchange of successful programmes between the Member States.
The third observation is that as regards the four issues on which the specific statement focuses, which relate to paid work, the sustainability of pension systems, social convergence and lastly quality in health care, there is a horizontal approach to the issue of women because in each of these categories - as the speakers said - there are special problems relating to women and those problems should in many cases be addressed by separate policies.
The next point concerns the specific action we have undertaken.
As you know, a high-level group has already been set up by the Portuguese Presidency, which will present its first report to the Summit Conference in June.
The Portuguese Presidency has focused on two things: sustainable pension systems and social accession.
I believe that the proposal for a corresponding group at Parliamentary level is very positive and can contribute towards our progress to the next step after approval of the said high-level group.
Concerning some remarks about the role of social protection systems, the cost of social protection and the part played by those systems in the competitiveness of the Member States, I should like to say that in Europe policies strive to combine competitiveness and social cohesion.
Of course, we must take due note of the issue of competitiveness, but social protection too must be planned in a way that makes it a factor of economic growth and employment.
I think the statement' s content makes this clear.
Ladies and gentlemen, the aim is that in the next year, and after a unanimous decision by the Council, we should progress to a first level of coordination, exchange of views, listing of social problems and creation of a data base for the better coordination of policies.
As many of the speakers have said, I believe a first important step has been taken.
Already at the Intergovernmental Conference, social policy issues are being addressed more broadly and I believe we are in a new phase, in which social policy will, to a large extent, become a European policy.
Thank you, Mrs Diamantopoulou.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
WIPO treaty
The next item is the recommendation (A5-0008/2000) by Mrs Cederschiöld, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the proposal for a Council Decision on the approval, on behalf of the European Community, of the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty [COM(1998) 249 - C5-0222/1999 - 1998/0141 (AVC)].
Mr President, we are now taking a stance on an important issue, an international agreement, which may influence the prospects for prosperity of many Member States.
In my own country, Sweden, one of our biggest export industries is affected, namely the music and sound recording industry.
It is about artists' entitlement to copyright or to protection for their artistic products.
It is about the WCT (World Copyright Treaty) and the WPPT (World Performance and Phonograms Treaty).
Without protection under intellectual property law, creativity is inhibited and financial incentives obstructed.
Forgeries are big business.
It is estimated that, in Europe alone, income of EUR 4.5 billion is lost because of piracy.
The problem affects a lot of jobs in the entertainment industry.
This is an historic agreement because the EU is the contracting party.
This is the case, in spite of the fact that it is not the EU, but only the Member States, which belong to the organisation.
There exists a special clause which requires Parliament' s assent in two cases.
With regard to the present agreement, both these conditions are fulfilled.
A new institution is being created, an assembly which, in the future, will monitor the agreement and its consequences.
The agreement also concerns questions dealt with in accordance with the co-decision-making procedure.
Parliament must therefore give its assent, because the agreement concerns its sphere of competence.
The future will show whether it is right, by means of this new parliamentary assembly, to reduce the Commission' s powers regarding these issues.
Parliament cannot, in any case, at present do anything about the matter.
The agreement complements the Berne Convention in regard to literary works.
It creates international legal protection in connection with distribution, sale, rental, public reproduction and the making available of works.
It also creates protection for software and databases.
There are problems regarding the term "author" .
For example, it has not been defined.
Another issue, which is somewhat problematic, is that of intermediate storage.
This too has not been solved.
It is dealt with by means of a general clause which does not provide any definition.
If no definitions are provided in questions such as this, it can lead to their being dealt with differently around the world, with no uniformity of approach.
That would not be a good thing.
The question of arbitration procedures is still to be resolved, too.
Parliament cannot change these details.
We can only say yes or no to the agreement as it stands.
Yes or no to an agreement which contains deficiencies.
Both myself, as rapporteur, and the committee think we ought to say yes.
We have here an agreement which, in spite of its defects, constitutes a significant step forward for the issue of copyright.
We have of course discussed at length whether Parliament and whether the EU should have powers in regard to patents under intellectual property law.
I think they should have.
However, there is still no Community legislation in the areas of patent law and protection of designs, and there needs to be.
A European patent is in the offing, and that is a good thing.
Now, the Union and the Member States are combining to take the first steps in the area of intellectual property law.
It is good for us that we have the power to do this, in spite of the fact that we are not completely satisfied.
In that way, we can act as a model for the applicant States.
We have a direct financial interest in these issues being settled before enlargement.
I want to thank the Commission for its efforts in this area and for the cooperation with the Commission' s officials, which has been quite excellent.
Finally, I also want to thank this Chamber for being so good as to listen to these words at this late hour.
Mr President, I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Cederschiöld, on her very serious work.
She has clearly identified the problems created by the approval of the World Intellectual Property Organisation' s treaties.
Their approval is undoubtedly an historic occasion because for the first time the European Union is participating as a contracting party in an international treaty that governs the field of intellectual property.
It is a fact that the road has been a long one, mainly because of the legal problem that arose in connection with the extent to which the Community could be considered to have absolute competence in matters of intellectual property.
The problem has been overcome.
Today we are asked to give our assent in effect to two treaties: the treaty on intellectual property and the treaty on interpretations, performances and phonograms.
As regards the first of these, it seems to provide an effective solution for the long-standing demands by the creators of artistic and literary works, while at the same time creating a framework of protection in relation to issues such as distribution, rental and the presentation of their works to the public.
As regards the second treaty on performances and phonograms, it must be stressed that for the first time an international treaty signed by the Community as well recognises exclusive rights for performers, interpreters and artists for reproduction, distribution and rental to the public, and the right to fair remuneration for radio broadcasts.
In that context a noteworthy and important step forward is the treaty' s treatment of the right of reproduction.
Even though, as the Commission says, the texts of the treaties do not contain special provisions to regulate all the respective issues raised by technological development, it can nevertheless be said that within the legislative framework created, performing or interpreting artists enjoy broader protection than that accorded by the Treaty of Rome or even by the Community directives.
Interpreting Article 7 of the Treaty, we can conclude that the application of protection for reproduction does not only mean protection for the reproduction of the interpretations or performances themselves as such that are embodied in recordings, but also protection against copying, whether in whole or in part and whether permanent or temporary, and protection against any other form of production.
It would be appropriate, however, for us also to mention some points which should be at the focus of future WIPO work or the work of other diplomatic conferences.
First, there is the right of distribution as referred to in Article 8(1).
The option accorded to States by the next paragraph of the same article to regulate the exhaustion of the above right is dangerous and is one of the Treaty' s most negative points, since there is nothing to prevent States from enacting special conditions for the exhaustion of the right, a thing that would be to the disadvantage of artists.
As regards rental rights, on interpretation of Article 9, we can conclude that the exclusive right of rental belongs to artists, interpreters or performers, only if this is laid down by national legislation.
I think this conflicts with Article 13.
To conclude, I want to say that ratification of these treaties opens a horizon for property rights.
In the 21st century, the century of knowledge and the invisible economy, intellectual property will be the dominant form of property and will, in many cases, be more important than traditional property.
We are at the dawn of an age in which new legislation will be created, where the right to utilise intellectual property will clash head on with the public interest in terms of its dissemination and exploitation by the public at large.
Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur.
I believe she has touched on a few important points, which I intend to raise again myself very shortly.
First and foremost, we are discussing Parliament' s assent to the aforementioned WIPO treaties.
Nothing is in force yet and so this time Parliament' s decision will carry some weight.
In signing up, the EU is acting in accordance with its intention to arrogate all internal and international powers, but it is unclear as to where the powers withdrawn from national control, are to end up.
Therefore assent will only be the order of the day here if the EP is involved in the development of WIPO law every step of the way, from start to finish, and has the right of codecision.
This is not provided for in the Treaty of Amsterdam.
What does the Commission have to say to that?
Crucial aspects have remained unclear in the draft treaties, and the rapporteur says the same.
To quote one example: the concept "author" is not defined in any way in the Treaty, which would make the situation ripe for litigation amongst parties to the Treaty.
I would like to ask the Commission at this point if it intends to go into this with its eyes shut?
Does it intend to impose its own definitions of copyright on other parties to the Treaty?
In addition, the WIPO approach is based on the concept of individual rights.
This will lead to problems for indigenous people such as the Sami, for they have a different notion of rights: that of collective rights.
However, there are also public interests at stake.
For example, it is unclear as to whether public libraries will even be allowed to loan books, videos and cassettes at no charge in the future.
This would directly affect the individual' s right to equality of opportunity with regard to access to education.
Why does the Commission say nothing about this?
Does it in fact want to privatise education?
Economic interests are there in the large print of the treaties; public interests, on the other hand, are there in very small print indeed.
We have been conjuring up images of the penniless poet, but what we are talking about here is the total marketing of the soundtrack of Titanic.
Furthermore, the relationship between WIPO and TRIPS has not been clarified, particularly as parts of the two treaties overlap.
One could now say: "fine, TRIPS, the difference is trade-related intellectual property, but WIPO is mainly about relevance to trade.
Therefore, how do we distinguish between these two treaties and ought there to be cooperation?
If so, what form should this take?
Should we set a precedent with WIPO so as to give the EU complete control over TRIPS too?
All in all, there is still a huge amount of room for improvement and clarification as far as the draft is concerned.
I expect the Commission to provide some information on the questions that have been raised so that I can at least give an explanation of vote for my group.
Mr President, I should like to thank our rapporteur for this excellent report which, nonetheless, concludes that, as a Community, our accession to these two WIPO treaties must not boil down to a mere institutional development, however important that may be, i.e. the opportunity for the European Community and the WIPO Assembly to work together.
This ratification is also necessary in the light of the enlargement of Europe.
However, an objective is emerging behind this issue of Community accession, one I find as yet too theoretical but one that some Member States, nonetheless, find too offensive.
This is the affirmation of a European cultural policy.
In this connection, I expect our three institutions, Parliament, the Commission and the Council, to be in agreement.
Cultural policy means, in particular, defending the role of the arts, recognising the role of authors and setting high cultural standards.
In addition, at a time when Europe faces the task of defining a new policy on copyright and neighbouring rights, there is an urgent need - as has just been pointed out several times - to define and redefine what exactly an author is.
Our definitions are still too vague and new technologies now make it essential for us to clarify them.
Mr President, Commissioner, the adoption of the WIPO agreements was a very positive step in the direction of the global information society.
The agreements crystallise the decades-old legacy of copyright, and they represent a precisely considered and balanced solution for the regulation of copyright and neighbouring rights.
The entry into force of the treaties and their final form is, however, in addition to this recommendation, dependent on implementation by the parties themselves.
In the United States the WIPO Treaty has already entered into force, having been enacted into law by means of the Digital Millennium Corporate Act and there they have managed to retain the delicate balance of the Treaty by means of this legislation.
The EU too must proceed in its legislative work in accordance with what is agreed in the WIPO.
It is worrying that the position adopted by the previous Parliament does not support this balanced WIPO system.
The opinion on the copyright directive at first reading was very distorted, and, furthermore, the balance is moving in a harmful direction from the point of view of Europeans.
The recommendations that have been made will not improve the status of culture in Europe, on the contrary.
Parliament' s amendments would mainly improve opportunities for the media enterprises that are well established in the market to move their old, in excess of 80% market share to a new environment with rigid, excessive copyright regulations.
I am not now speaking of Charlotte Cederschiöld' s recommendation, which is an excellent paper, but of the matters of copyright that the previous Parliament discussed.
On one point of detail, I would like to thank Mrs Cederschiöld for having clarified, for example, the concept of so-called temporary copies in her opinion.
There is no consciously adopted position in the WIPO Treaty on temporary copies.
If these, which technically speaking are copies, were covered by the protection in force it would make the transfer of information - as the recommendation quite rightly states - expensive and complicated for no good reason.
It would be as if the deliveryman had to pay a copyright fee whenever he carried a book to be read by the purchaser.
The real benefit of culture is that art and knowledge can be transferred safely and easily from the artist directly to the user, the consumer.
The new operational environment is, above all, a huge opportunity to create and spread culture in a different way than ever before.
It is essential that the interests of all parties are taken into account.
Parliament has tried to take account of this in its own recommendation.
Mr President, with regard to the protection of intellectual property rights, the reality always seems to be ahead of the regulations.
The evolution of the economy, the appearance of new forms of contract and technological innovations are phenomena which mean frequent and rapid changes which must be taken into account when
drawing up regulations.
In this field, the process of producing regulations is slow, too slow, given the speed of the actual changes which that legislation is intended to regulate.
If this is the case, it is all the more obvious when the process involves multinational or supranational organisations, such as the WIPO, which has debated the treaties which we are proposing to rectify.
In considering whether we are in favour of the ratification of these treaties, we may wonder whether they meet the most current needs in that field.
It would be difficult to reply in the affirmative.
There is no doubt that these treaties update the regulations in this field, but neither is there any doubt that there are currently many problems which they do not resolve.
The recent inclusion of the Encyclopaedia Britannica on the Internet and the appearance of virtual libraries have demonstrated that there are still many problems to be resolved.
For example, the solution adopted by one of the most significant virtual libraries - which, by the way, belongs to my own university, the University of Alicante - which consists of not including works still protected by copyright, implies a considerable limitation to the development of this type of virtual library.
Moreover, ratifying these treaties now is going to be of little relevance.
On the one hand, the problems which it aims to resolve have already been resolved to a large extent by means of the directive on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society.
On the other hand, the majority of the Member States have already adapted their legislation to the treaties which are now being ratified.
I must finally point out that the legislative amendments introduced in a number of countries, such as Spain, have resolved some conflicts but have led to others which are commonly found when it comes to putting a price on rights and material.
In such a sensitive field, we must find solutions which balance the different interests involved.
Only in this way will the regulations be accepted.
.
(NL) Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on the work that she has carried out.
The Commission is under the impression that she has worked fast and effectively.
This is important.
It befits the Commission to express its gratitude towards the rapporteur.
I would like to present the Commission' s conclusion to you without any further ado: it agrees with the conclusions of the draft recommendation and, therefore, with ratification by this Parliament.
I would like to stress the importance of both Treaties.
Both the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty constitute progress in the international protection of copyright and neighbouring rights and are, as such, a considerable improvement on the Berne Convention and the Treaty of Rome.
Both Treaties contribute towards a high level of protection for works and other matters, but offer the public access to the contents of these via electronic networks.
The two Treaties explicitly permit the Community to become a party to the Treaties and to play an important role in managing them.
Consequently, approval of the Treaties by the Community is of major importance, because it illustrates that the Community sets great store by intellectual property rights.
In addition, assent leads to more widespread international recognition of the European Union' s role in terms of copyright.
At international level, there is a great deal of support for treaties entering into force more swiftly.
These have now been ratified by twelve or thirteen WIPO Member States, including the United States.
The entry into force of treaties largely depends on the European Union, because thirty ratification acts are required in order for treaties to enter into effect, and these acts that are signed by the European Union and the Member States, including associated countries, are of vital importance in order to reach this number.
The developing countries, too, expect the European Union to bring about ratification swiftly because this would give a strong signal worldwide.
In this context, Parliament has already played a key role in the discussions on the draft directive on copyright in the Information Society, which led to the approval of the Barzanti report in February 1999.
This directive is the necessary counterpart of the proposed decision and largely embraces the key principles of the WIPO Treaties.
The European Parliament must now follow once again the exceptional assent procedure of Article 300(3).
It is vitally important to give the correct signal to the outside world, in the form of this recommendation.
In a nutshell, I would like to reiterate the Commission' s conclusion here: it supports the draft recommendation and hopes that it will be of key importance to anyone with an interest in intellectual property.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 11.55 p.m.)