# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
3.4 Finally, the petitioners argue a violation of article 6 in that the State party failed to provide them with an effective remedy against acts of racial discrimination inflicted both by the authors of the petition and the council's second resolution, which was motivated by and based on such discrimination.
They contend that no measures have been taken (i) to cancel the second resolution, (ii) to punish the petition's authors or (iii) to ensure that such discrimination does not recur.
3.5 As to the admissibility of the complaint, the petitioners state that no further appeal lies against the Constitutional Court's judgement and that no other international procedure of investigation or settlement has been invoked.
The State party's submissions on the admissibility of the petition
4.1 By submission of 26 November 2003, the State party disputed the admissibility of the petition on the basis of the petitioners' failure to exhaust domestic remedies.
Firstly, it argues that the petitioners did not avail themselves of the possibility of challenging the District Prosecutor's decision, as provided for in section 34 of the Act on Prosecution.g
4.2 Secondly, with respect to the constitutional application, the State party argues that despite being urged to do so by the Constitutional Court, the petitioners did not “specify [with respect to the council's second decision] any fundamental right or freedom that was allegedly violated in conflict with the Constitution, other laws or other international instruments which are binding on the Slovak Republic”.
As a result, the Court held:
“The provisions of article 12, paragraphs 1 and 4, article 13, paragraphs 1 and 4, and article 35 of the Constitution exclude, in general terms, the discrimination against natural or legal persons; however, they cannot be invoked without explicitly specifying the impact of a discriminatory procedure applied by a State authority or a State administration body on a fundamental right or freedom of a natural or legal person.
An analogical approach may be applied to article 33 of the Constitution which has the aim of preventing any harm (discrimination or persecution) as a direct consequence of belonging to a national minority or ethnic group.
… None of the rights of the citizens who belong to a minority and enjoy constitutional protection entails a corresponding obligation on the part of the municipality to adopt certain decisions, i.e. the decisions on specific matters, such as construction of low-cost housing.”
4.3 In the State party's view, the Court, in dismissing the complaint “as manifestly unsubstantiated on procedural grounds”, did not decide on the merits, as a result of the petitioners' procedural mistake.
It is thus open for the petitioners to pursue a new “substantive” complaint with the Constitutional Court.
Finally, the State party argues that the petitioners did not argue a breach of the Convention before the Court, although international instruments are directly applicable and the Court can grant a remedy for breach thereof.
The petitioners' comments
5.1 By submission of 12 January 2004, the petitioners responded to the State party's observations.
On the alleged failure to file a petition for review of the District Prosecutor's decision, they argue that this authority was the only one able to bring a criminal prosecution.
The Prosecutor's decision contained no indication of a possibility of further appeal.
Moreover, there is no indication that a higher prosecutor would have taken any different view from that of the Prosecutor, namely that a town or municipal council is not a “public administration body” whose decisions are reviewable for legality.
This view was taken despite the rejection, by the Committee, of such an argument in the decision on the Koptova case.
In the absence of any change to the “firmly settled” domestic jurisprudence on this issue and in the absence of any new facts, the petitioners argue that the State party has not shown that a higher prosecutor would take any different view if the complaint were re-presented.
The same conclusion on the issue of exhaustion of the proposed remedy was also shared by the Committee in the Koptova case and Lacko v. Slovakia.h
5.2 As to the argument that a new application should be lodged with the Constitutional Court, the petitioners point out that the judgement describes itself as final and that in Koptova, the Committee rejected such an argument.
Accordingly, as there is no prospect that repeated petitions to either body offer any chance of success, the petitioners claim to have exhausted all effective domestic remedies.
They add that the State party's arguments should be viewed against the absence of a comprehensive anti-discrimination law; the only currently proscribed conduct is hate speech, racially motivated violence and discrimination in employment.
5.3 In response to arguments that municipal councils are not State organs, the petitioners invoke the Committee's general recommendation XV on article 4 for the contrary proposition.
The Slovak Municipality System Act 1990 establishes a “direct relationship” between municipalities and the State, in terms of its subordinate financial, functional and organizational positions.
Finally, in its Opinion on the Koptova case, the Committee found the council to be a public authority for the purposes of the Convention.
Thus, the petitioners submit, the council's resolution should have been reviewed for lawfulness by the District Prosecutor and the State party's international responsibility is engaged.
5.4 The petitioners dispute the State party's argument that they did not specify the fundamental rights and freedoms violated in their petition to the Constitutional Court, arguing that they did so both in the original application and in subsequent pleadings.
They claimed (i) violations of the right to equal treatment and dignity regardless of ethnic origin (art. 12); (ii) violations of the right, as a member of an ethnic group or national minority, not to suffer detriment (art. 33); (iii) violations, on the basis of ethnic origin, of their right to housing; and (iv) discrimination against an ethnic group, the Roma.
They point out that they continue to live in “appalling, substandard” conditions.
They argue that articles 12 and 33 of the Constitution are not simply accessory provisions which, standing alone, have no substance; they confer substantive rights.
They also point out that, while the domestic Constitution does not protect the right to housing, it does give precedence to international treaties such as, in addition to the Convention, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which protects the right to housing and prohibits discrimination.
Furthermore, the petitioners explicitly referred to the Council of Europe Framework Convention in their application.
In any event, they argue that they have complied with their obligation, under the relevant jurisprudence, to raise the substance of a complaint.
5.5 The petitioners further contend that the racial discrimination suffered by them amounts to degrading treatment proscribed in article 12 of the Constitution.
They refer to the case law of the European Commission on Human Rights, which held, in the East African Asians case, that immigration admission denied on the basis of colour and race amounted to such a violation of article 3 of the European Convention, and constituted an affront to human dignity.i They also argue that, under well-established principles, if a State party decides to confer a particular benefit (that it may not necessarily have had an obligation to confer ab initio), that benefit cannot be conferred in a discriminatory fashion.j Thus, even if the petitioners had no initial right to housing (which they contest), it cannot be cancelled, on discriminatory grounds, subsequent to its provision.
5.6 Finally, the petitioners object to any inference that they are not “victims” on the basis that the Constitutional Court held that no violation of the Slovak Constitution had been made.
They argue that they were part of a specific group of people granted certain rights, and then had them abolished.
Thus, once they are “directly targeted by the resolutions”, to use the Committee's language in its Opinion on the Koptova case, they can be considered “victims”.
In addition, as the complaint lodged with the District Prosecutor did not lead to substantive review of the lawfulness of the council decision or to a criminal investigation of charges of incitement, they were victims of an absence of a remedy.
The petitioners refer in this respect to the Committee's concluding observations on the State party's periodic report concerning discrimination in access to housing.k
The Committee's decision on the admissibility of the petition
6.1 At its sixty-fourth session, on 27 February 2004, the Committee examined the admissibility of the petition.
As to the State party's contention that the petitioners did not renew their complaint before another prosecutor after it had been dismissed by the District Prosecutor, the Committee noted that the District Prosecutor had dismissed the case for lack of jurisdiction over an act of the municipal council.
In the Committee's view, as far as the decision on lack of competence was concerned, the State party had not shown how re-presentation of the complaint would provide an available and effective remedy for the alleged violation of the Convention.
Consequently, these avenues need not be pursued for purposes of exhaustion of domestic remedies.
In this regard, the Committee recalled its own jurisprudence and that of the Human Rights Committee.l
6.2 With reference to the contention that the petitioners should renew their claim before the Constitutional Court, the Committee recalled its jurisprudence that where the Court dismissed a fully argued constitutional petition arguing alleged racial discrimination for failure to disclose the appearance of an infringement of rights, a petitioner could not be expected to re-present a petition to the Court.m In the present case, the Committee observed that the current petitioners also invoked several relevant constitutional rights alleged to have been violated, including rights of equality and non-discrimination.
In the circumstances, the State party had not shown how renewal of their petition before the Constitutional Court, after it had been dismissed, could give rise to a different result by way of remedy.
It followed that the petitioners have exhausted available and effective remedies before the Constitutional Court.
6.3 The Committee further recalled its jurisprudence that the acts of municipal councils, including the adoption of public resolutions of legal character such as in the present case, amounted to acts of public authorities within the meaning of the provisions of the Convention.n It followed that the petitioners, being directly and personally affected by the adoption of the resolution, as well as its subsequent cancellation after presentation of the petition, may claim to be “victims” for purposes of submitting their complaint before the Committee.o
6.4 The Committee also considered that the claims advanced by the petitioners were sufficiently substantiated, for purposes of admissibility.
In the absence of any other obstacles to admissibility, the complaint was therefore declared admissible.
The State party's request for reconsideration of admissibility and submissions on the merits
7.1 By submission of 4 June 2004, the State party submitted a request for reconsideration of admissibility and its submissions on the merits of the petition.
It argued that the petitioners had failed to exhaust domestic remedies, as they could have availed themselves of an effective remedy in the form of a petition pursuant to article 27 of the Constitution and the Right to Petition Act, challenging the second municipal council resolution and/or the petition lodged against the initial resolution.
Presentation of such a petition would have obliged the municipality to accept the petition for review and to examine the factual situation.
This remedy is not subject to time limits and is still available to the petitioners.
7.2 The State party argues that the failure of the petitioners to obtain the result that they sought from the prosecuting authorities and the courts cannot, of itself amount to a denial of an effective remedy.
It refers to the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in Lacko et al. v.
Slovak Republicp to the effect that a remedy, within the meaning of article 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights, “does not mean a remedy bound to succeed, but simply an accessible remedy before an authority competent to examine the merits of a complaint”.
It is the petitioners who should be held responsible for the failure of their claim before the Constitutional Court, on the basis that they failed to specify the fundamental right allegedly infringed by the council resolution in addition to simply invoking the general equality provision of article 12 of the Constitution.
7.3 The State party rejects the Committee's view that it was sufficient for the petitioners to plead certain relevant constitutional articles, without also pleading specific concrete injury, as both generally required by the Constitutional Court's jurisprudence and specifically requested of the petitioners by the Court in the instant case.
The State party regards such a requirement of particularized injury, i.e. a pleading of a violation of a general equality/non-discrimination guarantee in combination with a concrete right, to be wholly consistent with the spirit of the Convention.
7.4 On the remedies actually instituted by the petitioners, the State party argues that their application of 16 September 2002 to the Rožňava District Prosecutor contended only that the petition to the council amounted to an abuse of the right to petition under the Right to Petition Act, under which a petition must not incite violations of the Constitution or amount to a denial or restriction of personal, political or other rights of persons on the grounds of their nationality, sex, race, origin, political or other conviction, religious faith or social status, and must not incite to hatred and intolerance on the above grounds, or to violence or gross indecency.
The petitioners neither argued how the factual circumstances amounted to such an abuse of the right to petition, nor mentioned the issue of racial discrimination, Roma ethnicity or other circumstances implicating the Convention.
7.5 In their application to the Constitutional Court, the petitioners requested a ruling that the council resolution infringed “the fundamental right of the petitioners to equal fundamental rights and freedoms irrespective of sex, race, colour, language, national origin, nationality or ethnic origin guaranteed under article 12 of the Constitution” and “the fundamental right of the petitioner to not suffer any detriment on account of belonging to a national minority or ethnic group guaranteed under article 33 of the Constitution”.
The State party observes that the Constitutional Court requested the petitioners, inter alia, to complete their complaint with information on “which of their fundamental rights or freedoms were infringed, which actions and/or decisions gave rise to the infringement, [and] which decisions of the municipal council they consider to be ethnically or racially motivated”.
The petitioners, however, completed their submission without specifying the rights allegedly violated, with the result that the Court dismissed the complaint as unfounded.
In light of the above, the State party requests reconsideration of the admissibility of the petition.
7.6 On the merits, the State party argues that the petitioners failed to show an act of racial discrimination within the meaning of the Convention.
Firstly, it argues that the petitioners mischaracterize the facts in important respects.
It is not correct that the original resolution adopted by the municipal council approved a plan to construct low-cost housing; rather, the resolution “approv[ed] the concept of the construction of low-cost housing - family houses and/or apartment houses”, making no mention of who would be the future dwellers, whether Roma or otherwise.
It is also incorrect that the council instructed the local mayor to prepare a project aimed at securing finance from a government fund set up expressly to alleviate Roma housing problems; rather, the resolution only recommended that the mayor, as the State party describes it, “consider preparing project documentation and obtaining the funds for the construction from government subsidies”.q
7.7 The State party points out that such resolutions, as purely internal organizational rules, are not binding ordinances and confer no objective or subjective rights that can be invoked before the courts or other authorities.
As a result, neither Roma nor other inhabitants of Dobšiná can claim a violation of their “right to adequate housing” or discrimination resulting from such resolutions.
Similarly, the Constitutional Court held that “none of the rights granted to the citizens who belong to a minority and enjoy constitutional protection entails an obligation by a municipality to make a certain decision or perform a certain activity, such as the construction of low-cost housing”.
The municipal resolutions, which are general policy documents on the issue of housing in the municipality, make no mention of Roma and the petitioners infer an incorrect causal link.
The tentative nature of the resolution is also shown by the absence of any construction timetable, as any construction necessarily depended on government funding.
7.8 The State party observes that the second resolution, after revoking the first resolution, instructed the council, in the words of the State party, “to prepare a proposal on addressing the existence of inadaptable citizens in the town of Dobšiná and to subsequently open the proposal for a discussion by municipal bodies and at a public meeting of the citizens”.r This makes clear that the resolution is part of an ongoing effort to find a conceptual solution to the existence of “inadaptable citizens” in the town.
As a result, policy measures taken by the municipal council to secure housing for low-income citizens clearly does not fall within the scope of the Convention.
Rather, the council's activities can be viewed as a positive attempt to create more favourable conditions for this group of citizens, regardless of ethnicity.
The State party observes that these actions of the municipality in the field of housing were taken against the background of the Government of Slovakia's resolution No. 335/2001 approving the Programme for the Construction of Municipal Rental Flats for low-income housing, and should be interpreted in that context.
7.9 The State party invokes the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights in which the Court declined to entertain claims of discrimination advanced by travelling communities arising from the denial of residence permits on the basis of the public interest, such as environmental protection, municipal development and the like.s The State party argues that in this case local residents, committed to upgrading their municipality and properties, had legitimate concerns about certain risks including adverse social impacts arising from a mass influx of persons to low-income housing.
It is noted that a number of Roma also signed the petition in question.
7.10 The State party argues that reference to other cases decided by the Committee such as Lackot and Koptovau is inappropriate, as the facts and law of the present case differ.
In particular, in Koptova, there was no context of an ongoing policy programme of housing development.
The State party also observes that on 20 May 2004, Parliament passed a new anti-discrimination law laying down requirements for the implementation of the equal treatment principle and providing legal remedies for cases of infringement.
The State party also rejects the reliance placed upon the European Court's judgements in the East African Asiansv and Belgian Linguisticw cases.
They emphasize that the second resolution did not cancel an existing project (and thus deprive existing benefits or entitlements), but rather reformulated the concept of how housing in the municipality would best be addressed.
7.11 On article 6, the State party reiterates its arguments developed in the context of the admissibility of the petition, namely that its courts and other instances provide complete and lawful consideration, in accordance with the requirements of due process, to any claim of racial discrimination.
Concerning criminal prosecutions in the context of the petition on the basis of spreading racial hatred, the State party argues that the petitioners have failed to demonstrate that any actions of its public authorities were unlawful, or that the petition or its contents were unlawful.
A violation of the right to an effective remedy protected by article 6 has accordingly not been established.
The petitioners' comments on the State party's submissions
8.1 With respect to the State party's argument related to the remedy of a petition, the petitioners argue that the only legal obligation is for it to be received by the relevant authority.
The Constitutional Court has held that there is no obligation for the petition to be treated and given effect to; in the Court's words, “[n]either the Constitution nor the Petition Act give concrete guarantees of acceptance or consequences of dismissal of petitions”.
As a result, such an extraordinary remedy cannot be regarded as an effective remedy that must be exhausted for the purposes of petitioning the Committee.
8.2 On the merits, the petitioners reject the State party's characterization of the council resolutions as being without legal effect, and refer to the Committee's admissibility decision in which it was decided that “public resolutions of legal character such as in the present case” amounted to acts of public authorities.
The petitioners also contest whether any Roma signed the petition against the first council resolution, stating that this is founded upon an assertion made in a letter dated 28 April 2004 by the mayor of Dobšiná to the Slovak Ministry for Foreign Affairs, without any further substantiation.
In any event, the petitioners argue that the ethnicity of the persons signing the petition is irrelevant, as its content, purpose and effect are discriminatory.
The petitioners also argue that the repeated use of the term “inadaptable citizens” by the State party reveals institutional prejudices against Roma.
8.3 The petitioners argue that, contrary to the State party's assertions, there is a compelling causal link between the council resolutions, the petition and discrimination in access to housing suffered by the petitioners.
They argue that implementation of the social housing project would have resulted in their lives assuming a sense of dignity and alleviated dangers to their health.
However, to date, the State party authorities have taken no steps to alleviate the inadequate housing situation of the petitioners.
They argue that their situation is part of a wider context of discrimination in access to housing at issue in the State party and submit a number of reports of international monitoring mechanisms in support.x
8.4 The petitioners reject the argument that the State party authorities were under no obligation in the first place to provide housing, referring to the obligations under article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (right to “an adequate standard of living … including … housing”).
In any event, they argue that the principle developed in the Belgian Linguistic case stands not only for the principle that when a State party decides to confer a benefit it must do so without discrimination, but also for the principle that having decided to implement a certain measure - in this case to pursue the housing scheme - a State party cannot later decide not to implement it and base itself on discriminatory considerations.
Issues and proceedings before the Committee
Review of consideration of admissibility
9.1 The State party has requested the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, under rule 94, paragraph 6, of the Committee's rules of procedure, to reconsider its decision on admissibility.
The Committee must therefore decide whether the petition remains admissible in the light of the further submissions of the parties.
9.2 The Committee notes that the State party's request for reconsideration raises the possible remedy of a petition to the municipal authority, advancing the matters currently before the Committee.
The Committee observes, however, that under the State party's law, the municipal authority is solely under an obligation to receive the petition, but not to consider it or to make a determination on the outcome.
In addition, the Committee observes that it is fundamental to the effectiveness of a remedy that its independence from the authority being complained against is assured.
In the present case, however, the petition would re-present the grievance to the same body, the municipal council, that had originally decided on it.
In such circumstances, the Committee cannot regard the right of petition as a domestic remedy that must be exhausted for the purposes of article 14, paragraph 7 (a), of the Convention.
9.3 As to the State party's remaining arguments, the Committee considered that these generally recast the arguments originally advanced to it in the course of the Committee's initial consideration of the admissibility of the petition.
The Committee has already resolved these issues at that point of its consideration of the petition; accordingly, it would be inappropriate for the Committee to review its conclusions at the current stage of its deliberations.
9.4 In conclusion, therefore, the Committee rejects the State party's request for a reconsideration of the admissibility of the petition and proceeds to its consideration of the merits thereof.
Consideration of the merits
10.1 Acting under article 14, paragraph 7 (a), of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Committee has considered the information submitted by the petitioner and the State party.
10.2 The Committee observes, at the outset, that it must determine whether an act of racial discrimination, as defined in article 1 of the Convention, has occurred before it can decide which, if any, substantive obligations in the Convention to prevent, protect against and remedy such acts have been breached by the State party.
10.3 The Committee recalls that, subject to certain limitations not applicable in the present case, article 1 of the Convention defines racial discrimination as follows: “any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin, which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field”.
10.4 The State party argues firstly that the challenged resolutions of the municipal council make no reference to Roma, and must thus be distinguished from the resolutions at issue in, for example, the Koptovay case that were racially discriminatory on their face.
The Committee recalls that the definition of racial discrimination in article 1 expressly extends beyond measures which are explicitly discriminatory to encompass measures that are not discriminatory at face value but are discriminatory in fact and effect, that is, if they amount to indirect discrimination.
In assessing such indirect discrimination, the Committee must take full account of the particular context and circumstances of the petition, as by definition indirect discrimination can only be demonstrated circumstantially.
10.5 In the present case, the circumstances surrounding the adoption of the two resolutions by the municipal council of Dobšiná and the intervening petition presented to the council following its first resolution make abundantly clear that the petition was advanced by its proponents on the basis of ethnicity and was understood as such by the council as the primary, if not the exclusive basis for revoking its first resolution.
As a result, the Committee considers that the petitioners have established a distinction, exclusion or restriction based on ethnicity, and dismisses this element of the State party's objection.
10.6 The State party argues, in the second instance, that the municipal council's resolution did not confer a direct and/or enforceable right to housing, but rather amounted to but one step in a complex process of policy development in the field of housing.
The implication is that the second resolution of the council, even if motivated by ethnic grounds, thus did not amount to a measure “nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field”, within the meaning of article 1, paragraph 1 in fine.
The Committee observes that in complex contemporary societies the practical realization of, in particular, many economic, social and cultural rights, including those related to housing, will initially depend on and indeed require a series of administrative and policymaking steps by the State party's competent relevant authorities.
In the present case, the council resolution clearly adopted a positive development policy for housing and tasked the mayor with pursuing subsequent measures by way of implementation.
10.7 In the Committee's view, it would be inconsistent with the purpose of the Convention, and elevate formalism over substance, to consider that the final step in the actual implementation of a particular human right or fundamental freedom must occur in a non-discriminatory manner, while the necessary preliminary decision-making elements directly connected to that implementation were to be severed and be free from scrutiny.
As a result, the Committee considers that the council resolutions in question, taking initially an important policy and practical step towards realization of the right to housing, followed by its revocation and replacement with a weaker measure, taken together, do indeed amount to the impairment of the recognition or exercise on an equal basis of the human right to housing, protected by article 5, paragraph (e) (iii), of the Convention and further in article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The Committee thus dismisses the State party's objection on this point.
10.8 In light of this finding that an act of racial discrimination has occurred, the Committee recalls its jurisprudence set out in paragraph 6.3 supra of its consideration of the admissibility of the petition, to the effect that acts of municipal councils, including the adoption of public resolutions of legal character such as in the present case, amount to acts of public authorities within the meaning of Convention provisions.
It follows that the racial discrimination in question is attributable to the State party.
10.9 Accordingly, the Committee finds that the State party is in breach of its obligation under article 2, paragraph 1 (a), of the Convention to engage in no act of racial discrimination and to ensure that all public authorities act in conformity with this obligation.
The Committee also finds that the State party is in breach of its obligation to guarantee the right of everyone to equality before the law in the enjoyment of the right to housing, contrary to article 5, paragraph (e) (iii), of the Convention.
10.10 With respect to the claim under article 6, the Committee observes that, at a minimum, this obligation requires the State party's legal system to afford a remedy in cases where an act of racial discrimination within the meaning of the Convention has been made out, whether before the national courts or, in this case, the Committee.
The Committee having established the existence of an act of racial discrimination, it must follow that the failure of the State party's courts to provide an effective remedy discloses a consequential violation of article 6 of the Convention.
10.11 The Committee considers that the petitioners' remaining claims do not add substantively to the conclusions set out above and accordingly does not consider them further.
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, acting under article 14, paragraph 7, of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, is of the view that the facts before it disclose violations of article 2, paragraph 1 (a), article 5, paragraph (e) (iii), and article 6 of the Convention.
In accordance with article 6 of the Convention, the State party is under an obligation to provide the petitioners with an effective remedy.
In particular, the State party should take measures to ensure that the petitioners are placed in the same position that they were in upon adoption of the first resolution by the municipal council.
The State party is also under an obligation to ensure that similar violations do not occur in the future.
The Committee wishes to receive, within 90 days, information from the Government of the Slovak Republic about the measures taken to give effect to the Committee's Opinion.
The State party is requested also to give wide publicity to the Committee's Opinion.
[Adopted in English, French, Russian and Spanish, the English text being the original version.
Subsequently to be translated in Arabic and Chinese as part of the Committee's annual report to the General Assembly.
]
Notes
Opinion concerning
Communication No.
Submitted by: Mr. Emir Sefic (represented by the Documentation and Advisory Centre on Racial Discrimination)
Alleged victim(s): The complainant
State party: Denmark
Date of communication: 4 August 2003
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, established under article 8 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Meeting on 7 March 2005,
Adopts the following:
The petitioner is Mr. Emir Sefic, a Bosnian citizen currently residing in Denmark, where he holds a temporary residency and work permit.
He claims to be a victim of violations by Denmark of articles 2, paragraph 1 (d), 5 and 6, of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
He is represented by the Documentation and Advisory Centre on Racial Discrimination (DRC), a non-governmental organization based in Denmark.
The facts as presented by the petitioner
2.1 On 22 July 2002, the petitioner contacted Fair Insurance A/S to purchase insurance covering loss of and damage to his car, as well as third-party liability insurance.
He was told that they could not offer him insurance, as he did not speak Danish.
The conversation took place in English and the sales agent fully understood his request.
2.2 In late July 2002, the petitioner contacted DRC, which requested confirmation of the petitioner's allegations from Fair Insurance A/S.
In the meantime, the petitioner contacted the company again and was rejected on the same grounds.
By letter dated 23 September 2002, Fair Insurance A/S confirmed that the language requirement was necessary to obtain any insurance offered by the company for the following reasons:
“… [to] ensure that we cover the need of the customer to the extent that we can ensure that both the coverage of the insurance and the prices are as correct as possible.
“… ensure that the customer understands the conditions and rights connected to every insurance … ensure that the customer in connection with a damage claim, particularly when it is critical (accident, fire, etc.), can explain what has happened in order that he/she can be given the right treatment and compensation.
“To fulfil these demands it is … of the utmost importance that the dialogue with the customers is carried out in a language that both the customer and we are familiar with and that for the time being we can only fulfil this requirement and offer service to our customers in Danish.
The reason being that we as a young (3½ years) and relatively small company have limited resources to employ persons in our customer services department with knowledge of insurance issues in languages other than Danish or develop or maintain material on insurances in languages other than Danish.”
2.3 On 8 October 2002, DRC filed a complaint with the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority, which monitors financial companies.
By letter of 25 November 2002, the Supervisory Authority replied that the complaint should be made to the Board of Appeal of Insurances (“the Board”).
However, the Supervisory Authority would consider whether a general policy of rejection on the basis of language was in accordance with Danish law.
It pointed out that, under section 1 (1) of the Instruction on Third-Party Liability Insurances for Motor Vehicles (No. 585, 9 July 2002), the company was legally obliged to offer any customer public liability insurance.
2.4 On 12 December 2002, DRC filed a complaint with the Board and specifically asked whether the language requirement was compatible with the Act against Discrimination.
On 31 January 2003, the Board informed DRC that it was highly unlikely that it would consider the legality of the requirement in regard to any legislation other than the Act on Insurance Agreements.
However, the case was being given due consideration.
The letter also contained a response, dated 29 January 2003, from Fair Insurance A/S to the Board, which stated as follows:
“Regarding the Act on Insurance Agreements … we are clearly aware of the fact that anybody accepting our conditions of insurance can demand to be offered third-party liability insurance.
We regret that Emir Sefic was not offered [the] third-party liability insurance that he could have claimed.
On this basis, we have explained in more detail to our employees the legal rules in regard to the liability insurance.”
2.5 On 10 January 2003, the Supervisory Authority informed DRC that in its determination on whether Fair Insurance A/S had complied with “upright business activity and good practice”, its assessment would be based on section 3 of the Act on Financial Business.
On 11 March 2003, it informed DRC that it was of the view that the requirement did not violate section 3.
The Supervisory Authority did not consider whether the language requirement violated any other legislation, in particular the Act against Discrimination.
2.6 On 12 December 2002, DRC filed a complaint with the Commissioner of Police of Copenhagen (“the Commissioner”).
On 24 April 2003, the Commissioner informed DRC that “it appears from the material received that the possible discrimination only consists of a requirement that the customers can speak Danish in order for the company to arrange the work routines in the firm.
Any discrimination based on this explanation and being objectively motivated is not covered by the prohibition in section 1 (1) of the Act against Discrimination”.
2.7 On 21 May 2003, DRC filed an appeal with the Regional Public Prosecutor of Copenhagen (“the Prosecutor”).
On 13 June 2003, the Prosecutor rejected the complaint under section 749 (1) of the Administration of Justice Act.
He explained that the language requirement “was not based on the customer's race, ethnic origin or the like, but in the wish to be able to communicate with the customers in Danish, as the company has no employees who in regard to insurances in other languages than Danish have skills.
Discrimination based on such a clear linguistic basis combined with the information given by the company is not in my opinion covered by the Act on the prohibition of differential treatment based on race, etc.
Moreover, it is my view that Fair Insurance A/S's acknowledgement of the fact that the company was obliged to offer a third-party liability insurance to Emir Sefic, in accordance with the Act on Insurance Agreements, is of no relevance in regard to … the Act on the prohibition of differential treatment based on race, etc. … I have based this on the information provided by Fair Insurance A/S that it was due to a mistake that no third-party liability insurance was offered to Emir Sefic”.
2.8 The petitioner argues that he has exhausted domestic remedies.
Any decision by the regional prosecutors relating to the investigation by the police departments cannot be appealed to other authorities.
As questions relating to the pursuance by the police of charges against individuals are entirely up to the discretion of the police, there is no possibility of bringing the case before the Danish courts.
He submits that a civil claim under the Act on Civil Liability would not be effective, as both the Commissioner and the Prosecutor have rejected his complaint.
Furthermore, the Eastern High Court, in a decision of 5 February 1999, has held that an incident of racial discrimination does not in itself imply a violation of the honour and reputation of a person under section 26 of the Act on Civil Liability.
Thus, racial discrimination in itself does not amount to a claim for compensation by the person offended.
The complaint
3.1 As to the definition of discrimination under article 1, subparagraph 1, of the Convention, the petitioner argues that, although a language requirement is not specifically included in this definition, discrimination may conflict with the obligation laid down in the Convention, especially under circumstances where the requirement in fact constitutes discrimination based, inter alia, on national or ethnic origin, race or colour, as the requirement has such an effect.
Further, any language requirement used with the purpose of excluding, inter alia, customers of a specific national or ethnic origin would be contrary to article 1 of the Convention.
Such a requirement should also have a legitimate aim and respect the requirement of proportionality in order to constitute a legal ground for discrimination.
3.2 The petitioner claims that the State party has violated articles 2, subparagraph 1 (d), and 6, by not providing effective remedies against a violation of the rights relating to article 5.
He refers to the Committee's decisions in L.K.
v.
The Netherlandsa and Habassi v. Denmark,b in which it was established that States parties have a positive obligation to take effective action against reported incidents of racial discrimination.
The petitioner submits that the language requirement cannot be considered as an objective requirement, and argues that the Danish authorities could not come to such a conclusion without initiating a formal investigation.
They merely based their claim on the letter from Fair Insurance A/S of 23 September 2003, the complaint of DRC to the Commissioner of 12 December 2003 and the appeal to the Prosecutor of 21 May 2003.
Neither the Commissioner nor the Prosecutor examined whether the language requirement constituted direct or indirect discrimination on the basis of national origin and/or race.
3.3 The petitioner highlights the following questions and issues, which in his view the Danish authorities failed to consider in examining whether the language requirement constituted racial discrimination.
Firstly, to what extent were the petitioner and Fair Insurance A/S able to communicate in the present case?
As the latter did understand the petitioner sufficiently to reject his claim, the authorities should have examined whether Fair Insurance A/S had understood the needs of the petitioner, to ensure that he understood the conditions and rights connected to each insurance and that he would be able to inform the company about the relevant facts in connection with a potential damage claim.
Secondly, the authorities should have examined the extent to which the situation concerning language skills in regard to statutory insurance (the third-party liability insurance) differed from the situation in regard to voluntary insurance (the insurance covering loss of and damage to a car).
As the third-party insurance is statutory, the company is obliged, even if the customer only speaks English, as in the present case, to provide an offer and accept any customer who accepts its conditions.
An investigation “could” have uncovered whether Fair Insurance A/S was able to “communicate on a sufficient basis” the demands, requirements and rights connected to the statutory insurance to the petitioner.
3.4 Thirdly, the authorities should have examined whether Fair Insurance A/S had any customers who were unable to speak Danish.
If this were the case (especially relating to the statutory insurance), it would be of interest to reveal how the company communicated with such customers, and why the company could not communicate with other potential customers requesting other insurances.
In addition, the petitioner claims that the failure by the Commissioner and the Prosecutor to interview him and Fair Insurance A/S further demonstrates that no proper investigation was carried out to try and establish whether the reasons given by Fair Insurance A/S were correct.
The petitioner argues that there “may” have been other reasons for the language requirement and refers to a test case conducted by a television show, which revealed that Fair Insurance A/S offered insurance at a higher price to an individual of non-Danish national origin than to a person of Danish national origin.
State party's submission on the admissibility and merits
4.1 On 18 December 2004, the State party provided comments on the admissibility and merits.
On admissibility, it submits that, although the petitioner has exhausted available remedies under criminal law, there remain two civil actions which he has not pursued.
Thus, the case is inadmissible for failure to exhaust domestic remedies.
Firstly, the petitioner could bring an action against Fair Insurance A/S, claiming that it acted in contravention of the law by exposing him to racial discrimination, and thus request damages for both pecuniary and non-pecuniary loss.
4.2 The State party argues that this case differs from the Habassi decision, in which the Committee found that the bringing of a civil action in a case of alleged discrimination contrary to the Act against Discrimination was not an effective remedy, as, unlike the petitioner in that case, the petitioner in the current case claims that he has suffered a financial loss, as he subsequently had to take out insurance with another insurance company at a higher premium.
The same argument is made to distinguish the current case from the Committee's decision in the case of B.J. v. Denmark.c
4.3 The second civil remedy is an action against Fair Insurance A/S under the rules of the Danish Marketing Practices: under section 1 (1) thereof, a private business may not perform acts contrary to “good marketing practices”.
The petitioner could have submitted that Fair Insurance A/S had acted in contravention of the Act against Discrimination in its treatment of his insurance application and had thus also acted in contravention of “good marketing practices”.
The petitioner could have claimed damages under general rules of Danish law, both for the financial loss allegedly suffered by him and for non-pecuniary loss.
Acts contrary to this Act can be prohibited by judgement and give rise to liability in damages.
4.4 As to the merits, the State party submits that there has been no violation of the Convention.
It acknowledges that States parties have a duty to initiate a proper investigation when faced with complaints about acts of racial discrimination, which should be carried out with due diligence and expeditiously and must be sufficient to determine whether or not an act of racial discrimination has occurred.d However, in the State party's view, it does not follow from the Convention or the Committee's case law that an investigation has to be initiated in all cases reported to the police.
If no basis is found to initiate an investigation, the State party finds it to be in accordance with the Convention to dismiss the report.
In the present case, the Commissioner and the Prosecutor received a detailed written report enclosing a number of annexes from DRC illustrating the case sufficiently to conclude, without initiating any investigation, whether it could reasonably be presumed that a criminal offence subject to public prosecution had been committed.
4.5 As to the petitioner's argument that the Commissioner should have investigated whether the language requirement constituted direct or indirect discrimination, the State party submits that the Act against Discrimination does not make this distinction, but refers to the person who “refuses to serve” another person on the same conditions as others on account of race, nationality, etc.
It was, therefore, not decisive in itself to clarify whether direct or indirect discrimination had occurred, but rather whether section 1 of the Act against Discrimination had been violated intentionally, whether the alleged discrimination contrary to the Act was direct or indirect.
As to the petitioner's reference to the television survey, the State party finds this of no relevance to this context.
4.6 As to whether the Commissioner should have investigated the extent to which the petitioner and Fair Insurance A/S could communicate, the State party argues that it was not decisive to clarify whether the petitioner and Fair Insurance A/S had been able to communicate adequately, but rather whether section 1 of the Act against Discrimination had been violated intentionally.
As the language requirement is due to the lack of resources to hire staff with insurance expertise in languages other than Danish and to the fact that it is a telephone-based company, the State party considers the requirement to be objectively justified, as the question involves the purchase of an insurance policy, which implies contractual rights and obligations, and the contents and consequences of which both the buyer and seller must be able to understand with certainty.
It is therefore considered irrelevant to initiate an investigation of the extent to which the petitioner and Fair Insurance A/S were able to communicate in a language other than Danish.
In this connection, the Government notes the decision of the Financial Supervisory Authority that this language policy does not violate section 3 of the Financial Business Act No. 660 of 7 August 2002, as the measure involved is a practical measure resulting from limited resources.
4.7 As to whether the Commissioner should have investigated the extent to which the situation concerning language skills in regard to statutory insurance differed from the situation in regard to voluntary insurance, the State party submits that it follows from Fair Insurance A/S's letter of 22 January 2003 that the company acknowledges that the petitioner should have been offered third-party liability insurance when he contacted the company.
The State party notes that the task of the Commissioner was not to consider whether Fair Insurance A/S had a general practice contrary to the Act against Discrimination, but rather whether it had specifically violated the Act in connection with the petitioner's application, and thus committed a criminal act of racial discrimination.
4.8 As to whether the Commissioner should have investigated the extent to which Fair Insurance A/S had customers who are unable to speak Danish, the State party submits that in its letter of 19 September 2002, Fair Insurance A/S informed DRC that the company has many customers with an ethnic background other than Danish, but that these customers speak Danish.
In this light, it was not considered necessary to investigate any further.
Petitioner's comments on State party's submission
5.1 On 27 February 2004, the petitioner responded to the State party's submission.
On its admissibility arguments, he submits that the Habassi decision clearly indicates that “the civil remedies proposed by the State party could not be considered an adequate avenue of redress [because] … [t]he same objective could not be achieved by instituting a civil action, which would lead only to compensation for damages” and thus not to a criminal conviction.
Furthermore, “the Committee was not convinced that a civil action would have any prospect of success …”.e He submits that he has a right to an effective remedy against racial discrimination, as defined in articles 1 and 5 of the Convention.
5.2 As to the Danish Marketing Practices Act, the petitioner submits that this Act has nothing to do with racial discrimination and a decision in relation to this Act is not a “remedy” against such a violation of the petitioner's rights.
In addition, the petitioner claims that if this civil legislation covered the situation in the current case there would have been no necessity for the State party to adopt a new Act on Equal Treatment, which was implemented and took effect on 1 July 2003 after the incident addressed in the present case.
The petitioner maintains his arguments on the merits.
Issues and proceedings before the Committee
Consideration of admissibility
6.1 Before considering any claims contained in a petition, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination must, in accordance with rule 91 of its rules of procedure, decide whether or not it is admissible under the Convention.
6.2 The Committee notes that the State party objects to the admissibility of the complaint on the grounds of failure to exhaust civil domestic remedies.
The Committee recalls its jurisprudencef that the types of civil remedies proposed by the State party may not be considered as offering an adequate avenue of redress.
The complaint, which was filed with the police department and subsequently with the Public Prosecutor, alleged the commission of a criminal offence and sought a conviction of the company Fair Insurance A/S under the Danish Act against Discrimination.
The same objective could not be achieved by instituting a civil action, which would result only in compensation for damages awarded to the petitioner.
Thus, the Committee considers that the petitioner has exhausted domestic remedies.
6.3 In the absence of any further objections to the admissibility of the communication, the Committee declares the petition admissible and proceeds to its examination of the merits.
Consideration of the merits
7.1 The Committee has considered the petitioner's case in the light of all the submissions and documentary evidence produced by the parties, as required under article 14, paragraph 7 (a), of the Convention and rule 95 of its rules of procedure.
It bases its findings on the following considerations.
7.2 The issue before the Committee is whether the State party fulfilled its positive obligation to take effective action against reported incidents of racial discrimination, with regard to the extent to which it investigated the petitioner's claim in this case.g The petitioner claims that the requirement to speak Danish as a prerequisite for the receipt of car insurance is not an objective requirement and that further investigation would have been necessary to find out the real reasons behind this policy.
The Committee notes that it is not contested that he does not speak Danish.
It observes that his claim together with all the evidence provided by him and the information about the reasons behind Fair Insurance A/S's policy were considered by both the police department and by the Public Prosecutor.
The latter considered that the language requirement “was not based on the customer's race, ethnic origin or the like”, but for the purposes of communicating with its customers.
The Committee finds that the reasons provided by Fair Insurance A/S for the language requirement, including the ability to communicate with the customer, the lack of resources for a small company to employ persons speaking different languages, and the fact that it is a company operating primarily through telephone contact were reasonable and objective grounds for the requirement and would not have warranted further investigation.
In the circumstances, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, acting under article 14, paragraph 7 (a), of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, is of the opinion that the facts as submitted do not disclose a violation of the Convention by the State party.
[Done in English, French, Spanish and Russian, the English text being the original version.
Subsequently to be issued also in Arabic and Chinese as part of the Committee's annual report to the General Assembly.
]
Notes
Opinion concerning
Communication No.
Submitted by: Mr. Kamal Quereshi (represented by the Documentation and Advisory Centre on Racial Discrimination)
Alleged victim(s): The petitioner
State party: Denmark
Date of communication: 11 December 2003
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, established under article 8 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Meeting on 9 March 2005,
Adopts the following:
The petitioner is Kamal Quereshi, a Danish national born 29 July 1970 and a current member of the State party's Parliament (Folketinget) for the Socialist Peoples Party (Socialistisk Folkeparti).
He alleges that he is the victim of a violation by Denmark of articles 2, subparagraph 1 (d), 4 and 6 of the Convention.
He is represented by counsel.
The facts as presented
2.1 On 26 April 2001, Ms. Pia Andersen, a member of the executive board of the Progressive Party (Fremskridtspartiet), faxed to the media two letters on party letterhead stating, inter alia: “No to more Mohammedan rapes!
… Cultural enrichments [are] taking place in the shape of negative expressions and rapes against us Danish women, to which we are exposed every day.
… Now it's too much, we will not accept more violations from our foreign citizens.
Can the Mohammedans not show some respect for us Danish women, and behave like the guests they are in our country, [otherwise] the politicians in the Parliament have to change course and expel all of them.”
2.2 On 15 May 2001, with respect to certain disturbances in an Odense neighbourhood, Ms. Andersen faxed a press release stating: “Engage the military against the Mohammedan terror!
… Dear fellow citizen, it is that warlike culture these foreigners enrich our country with … Disrespect for this country's laws, mass rapes, violence abuse of Danish women by shouting things like `whore', `Danish pigs', etc. … And now this civil war-like situation.”
2.3 On 5 September 2001, the Progressive Party placed an advertisement in a local newspaper for a lecture by the former leader of the Party, Mr. Mogens Glistrup, which stated, inter alia: “The Bible of the Mohammedans requires [that] the infidel shall be killed and slaughtered, until all infidelity has been removed.”
2.4 The petitioner asserts that the Progressive Party established courses, parts of which were broadcast on a newsflash on State television, teaching members how to avoid attracting liability under section 266 (b) of the Criminal Code.a
2.5 Speeches made at the Progressive Party's annual meeting, held on 20 and 21 October 2001, were broadcast on the State party's public television system, which has a duty to broadcast from annual meetings of political parties seeking election.
The petitioner contends that the following statements were made at the meeting from the podium:b
Vagn Andreasen (party member): “The State has given the foreigners work.
They work in our slaughterhouses where they can easily poison our food and endanger the agricultural exports.
Another form of terrorism is to break into our waterworks and poison the water.”
Mogens Glistrup (former leader of the party): “The Mohammedans will exterminate the populations of the countries to which they have advanced.” On 22 October, an article in the Dagbladet Politiken daily quoted this statement as: “Their holiest duty is, in the name of Allah, to exterminate the populations in the countries to which they have advanced.”
Erik Hammer Sørensen (party member, commenting on immigration to the State party): “There are fifth columnists about.
Those that we have got in commit violence, murder and rape.”
Margit Petersen (party member, referring to her earlier conviction under section 266 (b) in the State party's courts): “I'm glad to be a racist.
We want a Mohammedan-free Denmark”; “the Blacks breed like rats”.
Peter Rindal (party member): “Concerning Mohammedan burial grounds in Denmark, of course we should have such ones.
And they should preferably be so large that there is room for all of them, and hopefully in one go.”
Bo Warming (party member): “The only difference between Mohammedans and rats is that rats don't draw social benefits.” He allegedly distributed a drawing of a rat with the Koran under its arm to journalists present at the conference.
2.6 Upon viewing the meeting, the petitioner requested the Documentation and Advisory Centre on Racial Discrimination (DRC) to file complaints against the above individuals, as well as the members of the executive board of the Progressive Party for its approval of the statements made.
2.7 On 23 October 2001, DRC filed complaints with the Varde police, alleging that the statements of Ms. Guul and Mr. Warming separately violated section 266 (b) (1) and (2) of the Criminal Code on the basis that they threatened, insulted or degraded a group of persons on account of their race and ethnic origin.
2.8 On 25 October 2001, DRC filed a complaint with the Varde police, alleging that the statement made by Mr. Andreasen violated section 266 (b) (1) and (2) on the basis that it insulted and degraded a group of people on account of their religious origin.
DRC added that the statement postulated that immigrants and refugees were potential terrorists, thereby generally and unobjectively equating a group of people of an ethnic origin other than Danish with crime.
The same day, DRC filed a complaint with the Varde police, alleging that the statement made by Mr. Rindal violated section 266 (b) (1) and (2) on the basis that it threatened a group of people on account of their race and ethnic origin.
2.9 On 26 October 2001, DRC filed a complaint with the Varde police alleging that the statement made by Mr. Glistrup violated section 266 (b) (1) and (2) on the basis that it insulted and degraded a group of people on account of their ethnic origin, including their Muslim faith.
The same day, DRC filed a complaint with the Varde police alleging that the statement made by Mr. Sørensen violated section 266 (b) (1) and (2) on the basis that it threatened, insulted and degraded a group of people on account of their race and ethnic origin.
DRC added that the statement equated a group of an ethnic origin other than Danish with crime.
2.10 In addition, DRC filed a complaint against the Progressive Party itself with the Thisted police (being the police with jurisdiction over the party leader's place of residence).
Subsequent proceedings against the individual speakers
2.11 On 28 March 2003, the Varde Police Chief Constable forwarded the six cases to the Sønderborg Regional Public Prosecutor with the following recommendations: Mr. Glistrup, Mr. Rindal and Mr. Warming should be prosecuted under section 266 (b) (1) of the Criminal Code.
The part of the charge against Mr. Warming concerning the allegedly distributed drawing should, however, be withdrawn under section 721 (1) (ii) of the Administration of Justice Act, as the drawing could not be procured.c The charges against Ms. Petersen should be withdrawn under sections 721 (1) (ii)d and 722 (1) (iv)e of the Administration of Justice Act.
The charges against Mr. Andreasen and Mr. Sørensen should be withdrawn under sections 721 (1) (ii) of the Administration of Justice Act.
2.12 On 23 April 2003, the Regional Public Prosecutor requested the Chief Constable to carry out further investigations of all six cases and to procure from the police television channel a transcript of the statements made at the party conference.
On 9 May 2003 the Chief Constable modified his recommendations, advising the withdrawal of charges against Mr. Glistrup under section 721 (1) (ii) of the Administration of Justice Act.
He also reported that the television channel had advised that it did not possess any non-broadcast material from the party conference.
2.13 After receipt of further information, the Regional Public Prosecutor, on 18 June 2003, made the following recommendations to the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP), in relation to prosecution of the above; DPP accepted them on 6 August 2003: Mr. Rindal and Mr. Warming should be prosecuted under section 266 (b) (1) for their statements at the party conference.
The part of the charges against Mr. Warming relating to the drawing was discontinued as it could not reasonably be presumed that a criminal offence had been committed, as it had not been possible to procure a copy of the drawing.
The charges against Mr. Andreasen should be withdrawn on the basis that that further prosecution could not be expected to lead to conviction and sentence.
DPP observed that the actus reus of section 266 (b) (1) required a statement to be directed at a group of persons on account of, inter alia, race, colour, national or ethnic origin and religion.
In the view of DPP, this requirement had not been met as the concept of “foreigners” employed by Mr. Andreasen was “so diffuse that it does not signify a group within the meaning of the law”.
The charges against Mr. Glistrup should be withdrawn on the basis that that further prosecution could not be expected to lead to conviction and sentence.
DPP observed that the journalist who attributed the reported statement to Mr. Glistrup had declared that the statement had been made from the rostrum and not in connection with an interview.
However, the particular statement did not appear on the video recording of the television broadcast, and the television channel did not have any other non-broadcast material in its possession.
For his part, Mr. Glistrup had stated that his remarks were unscripted.
Accordingly, DPP concluded that it was “dubious” that the alleged statement could be proven to be in violation of section 266 (b).
The charges against Mr. Sørensen should be withdrawn on the basis that that further prosecution could not be expected to lead to conviction and sentence.
Referring to the actus reus requirements discussed above, DPP was of the view that the terms “fifth columnists” and “those that we have got in” employed by Mr. Sørensen were not directed at a group of persons as set out in section 266 (b).
The charges against Ms. Petersen should be withdrawn on the basis that completion of the trial would entail difficulties, costs or trial periods not commensurate with the sanction to be expected in the event of conviction.
DPP emphasized that on 20 November 2001, the Haderslev court had convicted Ms. Petersen to 20-day fines of DKr 300 for violation of section 266 (b) (1) and that her sentence would not have been much more severe if the current offence had been included in that case.
DPP observed that her remarks at the conference had been in the nature of a summary of her trial and conviction by the Haderslev court.
2.14 On 26 and 28 August 2003, respectively, DRC appealed the DPP decisions regarding Mr. Andreasen (on the petitioner's behalf) and Mr. Sørensen (on its own behalf) to the Ministry of Justice.
On 13 October 2003, the Ministry found both appeals inadmissible for lack of standing under rules of administrative law concerning appeals of DPP decisions.
With respect to the appeal concerning Mr. Andreasen, the Ministry considered that the petitioner, Mr. Quereshi, did not have “an essential, direct and individual interest in the case, that he can be considered a party who is entitled to appeal”.
As to the appeal regarding Mr. Sørensen, the Ministry observed that, on the same principles, “lobby organizations, societies, etc. or persons handling the interests of others, of groups or of the general public on an idealistic, professional organizational, work-related or similar basis cannot normally be considered parties to a criminal case unless they have a power of attorney from a party to the case”.
It went on to find that “this case does not present such circumstances that the DRC must be considered entitled to appeal”.
2.15 In October 2003, Mr. Rindal and Mr. Warming were tried before the Grindsted District Court and convicted of offences against section 266 (b) (1).
Mr. Rindal was sentenced on 26 November 2003 to a 20-day fine of DKr 50 for the statement he had made at the party conference.
Mr. Warming, for his part, was sentenced to an additional punishment of 20-day fines of DKr 200 under section 89 for, firstly, stating at the party conference, “It may happen any day that all Muslims decide to throw Molotov cocktails into all the nearest homes and drive in all their expensive cars to as many more other homes as possible and throw in Molotov cocktailsThey can halve Denmark's population or more than that in a much shorter time if they want to do like their fellow Muslims did with the World Trade Centre”, and secondly, for stating, with the intent of wider dissemination in an interview at the party conference with a journalist, “The only difference between Mohammedans and rats is that rats don't draw social benefits.” In assessing quantum, the court relied on two previous convictions of Mr. Warming for offences against section 266 (b) (1), both by the High Court of Eastern Denmark (on appeal) on 22 March 1999 and by the Copenhagen City Court on 30 January 2003.
2.16 On 17 March 2004, the Board of Appeal rejected Mr. Warming's application for leave to appeal the Grindsted District Court's decision to the High Court of Western Denmark.
Mr. Rindal did not appeal the District Court's decision in his case.
Proceedings against the Progressive Party
2.17 The Thisted police rejected the complaint against the Progressive Party on the basis that the State party's law, as it then stood, did not permit a complaint of violation of section 266 (b) to be filed against entities with legal personality, including a political party.
The Regional Public Prosecutor subsequently upheld this decision.
2.18 On 11 December 2002, DRC, at the petitioner's request, filed a new complaint against Ms. Andersen with the Odense police (having jurisdiction over her place of residence), arguing that in light of what is described in paragraphs 2.1 to 2.5 above, she had participated in a violation of section 266 (b) as a member of the Party's executive board.
On 7 January 2002, the Chief Police Constable of the Odense police rejected the complaint as there was no reasonable evidence to support the conclusion that an unlawful act had been committed by Ms. Andersen as a member of the Party's executive board.
He considered that membership of a political party's executive does not of itself create a basis for criminal participation in relation to possible criminal statements made during the party's annual meeting by other persons.
On 25 January 2002, the Odense District Court convicted Ms. Andersen of offences against section 266 (b) of the Criminal Code for the publication of the press releases.
2.19 On 11 March 2002, the Fyn Regional Public Prosecutor rejected DRC appeal, on the basis that neither it nor the petitioner had the required essential, direct, individual or legal interest in the case to become parties to it.
As a result, DRC filed the petitioner's first petition before the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which found that there had been no violation with respect to the State party's action concerning Ms. Andersen.f It emphasized that proceedings had been lodged with respect to those directly responsible for the statements in question at the party conference.
The complaint
3.1 The petitioner alleges two counts of violation of articles 2, subparagraph 1 (d), 4 and 6 of the Convention.
He first alleged that the State party failed to discharge its positive obligation to take effective action to examine and investigate reported incidents of racial discrimination; as the charge against Mr. Andreasen was discontinued, none of the speakers at the party conference was prosecuted, and an investigation of Ms. Andersen's role was not initiated.
In his view, the failure to prosecute those directly responsible for the statements (despite their having initially been charged) violated article 6, while the Regional Public Prosecutor's decision (not subject to appeal by the petitioner) that Mr. Andreasen's statements fell outside the scope of section 266 (b) of the Criminal Code violated article 2, subparagraph 1 (d), of the Convention.
The petitioner relies on a decision of the High Court of Eastern Denmark of 1980 for the proposition that such statements do in fact fall within the scope of section 266 (b).
3.2 Secondly, the petitioner argues that the decision of the Public Prosecutor to discontinue Mr. Andreasen's case, confirmed on grounds of lack of standing by the Ministry of Justice, violates the obligation imposed by the same articles, but especially article 6, to ensure effective protection and remedies against any act of racial discrimination.
In his view, as a result of these decisions, he could not take action against the acts of racial discrimination to which he had been exposed, as part of a group of persons against whom the statements were directed.
3.3 As to the exhaustion of domestic remedies, the petitioner argues that to take (unspecified) legal actions directly against Mr. Andreasen would not be effective given the rejection of the complaint by the Regional Public Prosecutor and the Ministry of Justice.
The petitioner also contends that a complaint under section 26 of the Act on Civil Liability (providing civil damages for infringements of a person's honour and reputation) would be ineffective, citing a 1999 decision of the Eastern High Court to the effect that racial discrimination does not in itself give rise to a claim for compensation to the offended person under the section in question.
The petitioner also rejects any possible constitutional remedy under section 63 of the Constitution (providing for review of scope of executive authority), claiming that it is necessary to have the status of a party to the case in order to bring such an action.
This petitioner was, however, denied such status both by the Regional Public Prosecutor (in the earlier decision concerning the case of Ms. Pia Andersen, see paragraph 2.19, supra) and by the Ministry of Justice in the current case.
State party's submissions on the admissibility and merits of the petition
4.1 By submission of 17 June 2004, the State party contests both the admissibility and the merits of the petition.
It argues that the petitioner has failed to exhaust domestic remedies available in criminal proceedings in three respects.
Firstly, the petitioner only appealed the DPP decision of 14 August 2003 related to Mr. Andreasen, and did not appeal any of the DPP decisions on the other individuals concerned.
In respect of those individuals, therefore, domestic remedies have not been exhausted.
4.2 Secondly, the State party repeats its argument, also advanced in the petitioner's first petition to the Committee, that section 63 of the Constitution enables decisions of administrative authorities, including DPP and the Ministry of Justice, to be reviewed as to their lawfulness before the courts.
It rejects the petitioner's argument that such an application would be ineffective as a result of the DPP refusal to prefer charges and the Ministry's finding the petitioner's appeal to be inadmissible.
On the contrary, the petitioner could have applied to the courts for a review of whether the DPP view of the scope of section 266 (b) (1) or of the Ministry's view of his standing was correct.
The DPP decisions on the other cases could also have been reviewed.
Thirdly, the State party argues that even where a prosecution under section 266 (b) (1) of the Criminal Code has not been pursued, a private prosecution under section 267 of the Criminal Codeg protecting personal honour is available.
In Sadic v. Denmark,h the Committee accepted, in circumstances where a complaint under section 266 (b) had not been pursued by the police, that the requirements of section 267 are different and a petitioner should be expected to exhaust that alternative and effective remedy before approaching the Committee.
4.3 On the merits, the State party argues that the petition discloses no violation of the Convention.
As to alleged violations of articles 2, 4 and 6 arising from the processing and assessment of the criminal complaints lodged, the thorough treatment at the levels of police, Regional Public Prosecutor and DPP fully met the State party's obligation to take effective action.
The State party points out that the Convention does not guarantee the specific outcome on allegations of conduct in breach of the Convention, but rather sets out certain parameters for the processing of such allegations.
The State party's authorities complied with their duty to initiate a proper investigation, and carried it out with due diligence and expedition in order to determine whether or not an act of racial discrimination took place.
Upon such investigation, some complaints - those against Mr. Rindal and Mr. Warming concerning their conference statements - were found to make out a case to answer, while in others no basis for prosecution was found.
4.4 For those cases for which it was determined not to proceed further, the State party argues that each result was the product of careful and proper individual investigation and justified on the merits of each complaint.
In the case of the drawing allegedly distributed by Mr. Warming, the police questioned both Mr. Warming and the journalist who had allegedly been offered the drawing before concluding that there was no basis for prosecution.
The State party emphasizes that the Convention does not require every investigation of every case reported to the police to result in prosecution, including, for example, if the requisite proof is not available.
4.5 Concerning the DPP decision concerning Ms. Petersen that the resources involved in a prosecution would not be commensurate with the punishment expected, the State party observes that the Regional Public Prosecutor procured a transcript of the videotape of the television broadcast and questioned Ms. Petersen, disclosing sufficient examination of the case.
DPP determined that Ms. Petersen's earlier sentence of 20 November 2001 (20-day fines of DKr 300 for violating section 266 (b) (1)) would not have been much more severe if the current complaint had been included in that case, thus justifying the DPP's decision under section 89 of the Criminal Code not to proceed.
The State party also recalls that her conference statements were in the nature of a summary of her earlier trial and conviction.
The case was thus examined in accordance with the requirements of the Convention.
4.6 As to the decision that it was impossible to determine the context of Mr. Glistrup's statement, the State party notes that the police questioned him and the journalist involved and procured a transcript of the tape of the television broadcast, on which the alleged statement at the rostrum did not appear.
The State party observes that it is important for due process reasons that evidence be of a certain probity before being put to the courts in criminal proceedings.
The withdrawal of charges in this case, having been found inadequate in evidentiary terms, followed effective investigation consistent with the Convention.
4.7 Concerning the decisions concerning Mr. Andreasen and Mr. Sørensen that the actus reus of the offence requiring statements concerning groups of persons on account of race, colour, or national or ethnic origin had not been made out with use of terms such as “foreigners” and “fifth columnists”, the State party points out that section 266 (b) clearly identifies the specific groups to be covered.
It points out that the 1980 decision of the High Court of Eastern Denmark referred to by the petitioner found that the designation “guest worker” did fall within “a group of persons”, within the meaning of section 266 (b).
The Court emphasized, however, that according to general understanding, that expression designated a person living in Denmark of South European, Asian or African origin, particularly Yugoslavs, Turks or Pakistanis.
Unlike the much broader terms at issue in the present case, therefore, this conclusion was possible as the designation was used to refer to persons originating from specific countries.
The finding that it was impossible to establish that the terms used by Mr. Andreasen and Mr. Sørensen concerned a specific group of people characterized by race, colour, or national or ethnic origin thus followed an examination in accordance with the Convention's requirements.
4.8 The State party argues that section 266 (b), as applied in practice and detailed in its fourteenth and fifteenth periodic reports to the Committee, satisfies the State party's obligation under article 2 (1) (d) of the Convention to prohibit and end, by appropriate means including legislation, all racial discrimination.
As to the portion of the complaint concerning the petitioner's inability to appeal the decision concerning Mr. Andreasen, the State party refers to its submissions on admissibility concerning the available possibilities of a constitutional complaint and a private prosecution under section 267 of the Criminal Code.
The petitioner's comments on the State party's submissions
5.1 By letter of 2 August 2004, the petitioner disputes the State party's submissions on admissibility and reiterates his earlier submissions on the merits.
On the possibility of a constitutional complaint challenging the decisions of DPP and Ministry of Justice, he argues that since the Ministry itself declared that he had no essential, direct and individual interest in the case which would confer standing, it would not be correct to place an obligation on him to pursue such a case and delay the possibility of a petition to the Committee.
In any event, even if a court found that he did have standing, this would be futile, as the deadline for bringing a prosecution (related to the Ministry's decision) has passed.
Thus, in violation of articles 4 and 6 of the Convention, no sanction can ever be imposed on Mr. Andreasen.
5.2 Concerning a private prosecution under section 267 of the Criminal Code, the petitioner argues that, whether or not Mr. Andreasen's statement fell within the scope of that provision, a court would reject such a claim on the basis that he had no essential, direct and individual interest in the case.
He thus again argues that it would not be appropriate to require him to pursue such an avenue and delay a petition to the Committee.
Issues and proceedings before the Committee
Consideration of admissibility
6.1 Before considering any claims contained in a petition, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination must, in accordance with rule 91 of its rules of procedure, decide whether or not it is admissible under the Convention.
6.2 On the issue of exhaustion of domestic remedies, the Committee notes that the petitioner confines his complaint to the handling of the complaint made against Mr. Andreasen, a case in which he did appeal to the Ministry of Justice.
The Committee thus need not address the argument that the petitioner did not also appeal the adverse decisions in certain other cases, though the Committee would note that there is nothing to suggest that the Ministry's decision of lack of standing would have been any different in those cases.
6.3 Turning to the State party's argument that the petitioner should have initiated a private prosecution under the general provisions of section 267 of the Criminal Code, the Committee recalls that, in its Opinion in Sadic,i it indeed required the petitioner in that case to pursue such a course.
In that case, however, the facts fell outside the scope of section 266 (b) of the Criminal Code on the basis that the disputed comments were essentially private or were made within a very limited circle; in that light, section 267, which could capture the conduct in question, complemented the scope of protection of section 266 (b) and was a reasonable course more appropriate to the facts of that case.
In the present case, by contrast, the statements were made squarely in the public arena, which is the central focus of both the Convention and section 266 (b).
It would thus be unreasonable to expect the petitioner to initiate separate proceedings under the general provisions of section 267 after having unsuccessfully invoked section 266 (b) of the Danish Criminal Code in respect of circumstances directly implicating the language and object of that provision.
6.4 As to the State party's argument that judicial review of the DPP and Ministry's decisions in the form of a constitutional application remained available, the Committee recalls that the petitioner pursued his complaint through four levels of administrative decision-making in a process lasting just weeks short of two years, with respect to facts which were in the public domain from the outset and which did not require complex investigation.
In those circumstances, the Committee considers that the application of further remedies in the courts at the present time would be unreasonably prolonged within the meaning of article 14, paragraph 7 (a), of the Convention.
They thus need not be exhausted for the purposes of the present complaint.
The Committee notes, moreover, that the petitioner has questioned the effectiveness of such an application, arguing that as the deadline for prosecution had passed any judicial decision on the legality of action taken would be devoid of practical effect for the proceedings in question.
6.5 In light of the foregoing and in the absence of any other objection to the admissibility of the petition, the Committee declares it admissible and proceeds to the examination of the merits.
Consideration of the merits
7.1 Acting under article 14, paragraph 7 (a), of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Committee has considered the information submitted by the petitioner and the State party.
7.2 The Committee recalls that in its decision on the first petition presented by the complainant it emphasized that the focus of its examination was on steps taken on the basis of the State party's legislation, primarily criminal, against the individual actors alleged to have personally engaged in an act of racial discrimination.
Thus, in that case, it noted that Ms. Andersen had been convicted for the conduct she had personally engaged in.j In the present case, two speakers at the party conference were convicted and sentenced for violations against section 266 (b) of the Criminal Code.k Indeed, one of those speakers was given a more severe sentence after two earlier convictions with less severe sentences for offences against section 266 (b).
Meanwhile, a further speaker was not further prosecuted on the basis that her sentence would not have been materially greater in comparison to what she had already incurred under an earlier conviction under section 266 (b).l With respect to another speaker's statement, the investigation carried out showed that the statement alleged to have been made from the rostrum had not in fact occurred.m It is against the background of the operation of the State party's criminalization of acts of statements of racial discrimination, both in respect of instances outside the present party conference as well as of statements made at the conference, that the merits of the petition concerning resolution of the complaint against Mr. Andreasen must be considered.
7.3 The Committee recalls that Mr. Andreasen made offensive statements about “foreigners” at the party conference.
The Committee notes that, regardless of what may have been the position in the State party in the past, a general reference to foreigners does not at present single out a group of persons, contrary to article 1 of the Convention, on the basis of a specific race, ethnicity, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin.
The Committee is thus unable to conclude that the State party's authorities reached an inappropriate conclusion in determining that Mr. Andreasen's statement, in contrast to the more specific statements of the other speakers at the conference, did not amount to an act of racial discrimination contrary to section 266 (b) of the Danish Criminal Code.
It also follows that the petitioner was not deprived of the right to an effective remedy for an act of racial discrimination in respect of Mr. Andreasen's statement.
Nevertheless, the Committee considers itself obliged to call the State party's attention (i) to the hateful nature of the comments concerning foreigners made by Mr. Andreasen and of the particular seriousness of such speech when made by political figures and, in this context, (ii) to its general recommendation XXX, adopted at its sixty-fourth session, on discrimination against non-citizens.
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, acting under article 14, paragraph 7, of the Convention, is of the opinion that the facts before it do not disclose a violation of the Convention.
[Done in English, French and Spanish, the English text being the original version.
Subsequently to be issued in Arabic, Chinese and Russian as part of the Committee's annual report to the General Assembly.
]
Notes
B. Sixty-seventh session
Opinion concerning
Communication No.
Submitted by: The Jewish community of Oslo; the Jewish community of Trondheim; Rolf Kirchner; Julius Paltiel; the Norwegian Antiracist Centre; and Nadeem Butt (represented by counsel, Mr. Frode Elgesen)
Alleged victim(s): The petitioners
State party: Norway
Date of communication: 17 June 2003
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, established under article 8 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Meeting on 15 August 2005,
Adopts the following:
Opinion
The authors of the communication, dated 17 June 2003, are Mr. Rolf Kirchner, born on 12 July 1946, leader of the Jewish community in Oslo, Mr. Julius Paltiel, born on 4 July 1924, leader of the Jewish community in Trondheim, and Nadeem Butt, born on 16 June 1969, leader of the Norwegian Antiracist Centre (NAC).
They claim to be victims of violations by Norway of articles 4 and 6 of the Convention.
They are represented by counsel.
The facts as presented
2.1 On 19 August 2000, a group known as the “Bootboys” organized and participated in a march in commemoration of the Nazi leader Rudolf Hess in Askim, near Oslo.
Some 38 people took part in the march, which was routed over 500 m through the centre of Askim, and lasted five minutes.
The participants wore “semi-military” uniforms, and a significant number allegedly had criminal convictions.
Many of the participants had their faces covered.
The march was headed by Mr. Terje Sjolie.
Upon reaching the town square, Mr. Sjolie made a speech, in which he stated:
“We are gathered here to honor our great hero, Rudolf Hess, for his brave attempt to save Germany and Europe from Bolshevism and Jewry during the Second World War.
While we stand here, over 15,000 Communists and Jew-lovers are gathered at Youngsroget in a demonstration against freedom of speech and the white race.
Every day immigrants rob, rape and kill Norwegians, every day our people and country are being
plundered and destroyed by the Jews, who suck our country empty of wealth and replace it with immoral and un-Norwegian thoughts.
We were prohibited from marching in Oslo three times, whilst the Communists did not even need to ask.
Is this freedom of speech?
Is this democracy?
…
“Our dear Führer Adolf Hitler and Rudolf Hess sat in prison for what they believed in, we shall not depart from their principles and heroic efforts, on the contrary we shall follow in their footsteps and fight for what we believe in, namely a Norway built on National Socialism …”a
2.2 After the speech, Mr. Sjolie asked for a minute's silence in honour of Rudolf Hess.
The crowd, led by Mr. Sjolie, then repeatedly made the Nazi salute and shouted “Sieg Heil”.
They then left.
2.3 The authors claim that the immediate effect of the march appeared to be the founding of a Bootboys branch in nearby Kristiansand, and that for the next 12 months the city was “plagued” by what the authors describe as incidents of violence directed against Blacks and political opponents.
They further state that, in the Oslo area, the march appears to have given the Bootboys confidence, and that there was an increase in “Nazi” activity.
Several violent incidents took place, including the murder by stabbing on 26 January 2001 of a 15-year-old boy, Benjamin Hermansen, who was the son of a Ghanaian man and a Norwegian woman.
Three members of the Bootboys were later charged and convicted in connection with his death; one was convicted of murder with aggravating circumstances, because of the racist motive of the attack.
The authors state that he and one of the other persons convicted in this case had participated in the march on 19 August 2000.
2.4 The authors state that the Bootboys have a reputation in Norway for their propensity to use violence, and cite 21 particular instances of both threats and the use of violence by the Bootboys between February 1998 and February 2002.
Mr. Sjolie himself is currently serving a term of imprisonment for attempted murder in relation to an incident in which he shot another gang member.
2.5 Some of those who witnessed the commemorative march filed a complaint with the police.
On 23 February 2001, the District Attorney of Oslo charged Mr. Sjolie with a violation of section 135a of the Norwegian Penal Code, which prohibits a person from threatening, insulting, or subjecting to hatred, persecution or contempt any person or group of persons because of their creed, race, colour, or national or ethnic origin.
The offence carries a penalty of a fine or a term of imprisonment of up to two years.
2.6 On 16 March 2001, Mr. Sjolie was acquitted by the Halden City Court.
The prosecutor appealed to the Borgarting Court of Appeal, where Mr. Sjolie was convicted of a violation of section 135a because of the references in his speech to Jews.
The Court of Appeal found that, at the least, the speech had to be understood as accepting the mass extermination of the Jews, and that this constituted a violation of section 135a.
2.7 Mr. Sjolie appealed to the Supreme Court.
On 17 December 2002, the Supreme Court, by a majority of 11 to 6, overturned the conviction.
It found that penalizing approval of Nazism would involve prohibiting Nazi organizations, which it considered would be incompatible with the right to freedom of speech.b The majority also considered that the statements in the speech were simply Nazi rhetoric, and did nothing more than express support for National Socialist ideology.
It did not amount to approval of the persecution and mass extermination of the Jews during the Second World War.
It held that there was nothing that particularly linked Rudolph Hess to the extermination of the Jews; noted that many Nazis denied that the Holocaust had taken place; and that it was not known what Mr. Sjolie's views on this particular subject were.
The majority held that the speech contained derogatory and offensive remarks, but that no actual threats were made, nor any instructions to carry out any particular actions.
The authors note that the majority of the Court considered article 4 of the Convention not to entail an obligation to prohibit the dissemination of ideas of racial superiority, contrary to the Committee's position as set out in general recommendation XV.
2.8 The authors claim that the decision will serve as a precedent in cases involving section 135a of the Penal Code, and that it will henceforth not be possible to prosecute Nazi propaganda and behaviour such as occurred during the march of 19 August 2000.
Following the Supreme Court decision, the Director of Public Prosecutions expressed the view that, in light of the Supreme Court's decision, Norway would be a safe haven for Nazi marches, due to the prohibition on such marches in neighbouring countries.
The complaint
3.1 The authors contend that they are victims of violations by the State party of articles 4 and 6 of the Convention.
They allege that, as a result of the Supreme Court's judgement of 17 December 2002, they were not afforded protection against the dissemination of ideas of racial discrimination and hatred, as well as incitement to such acts, during the march of 19 August 2000; and that they were not afforded a remedy against this conduct, as required by the Convention.
Status as victims
3.2 The authors argue that they are victims of the above violations because of the general inability of Norwegian law to protect them adequately against the dissemination of anti-Semitic and racist propaganda, and incitement to racial discrimination, hatred and violence.
They concede that the Committee has not previously had the opportunity to consider the concept of “victim” in this context, but submit that the Committee should adopt the approach of both the Human Rights Committee and the European Court of Human Rights.
They state that the “victim” requirement in the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights is framed in equivalent terms, and submit that the Human Rights Committee and the European Court have recognized that by the mere existence of particular domestic laws, a person's rights may be directly affected in a way that results in their becoming a victim of violations.
Reference is made to the decisions of the Human Rights Committee in Toonen v. Australiac and Ballantyne et al.
v. Canada,d and the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in Dudgeon v. United Kingdom.e In the Toonen case, the Human Rights Committee held that the author could claim to be a victim of a violation of his right to privacy, even though he had not been prosecuted, because of the existence of a provincial law that criminalized sexual relations between consenting male adults.
An analogous result was reached by the European Court in the Dudgeon case.
Similarly, in Ballantyne, a case involving the prohibition in Quebec of the use of the English language in public outdoor advertising, the Human Rights Committee found that the author could claim to be a victim, although he had not been prosecuted under the relevant legislation.
The authors claim that these cases demonstrate that the “victim” requirement may be satisfied by all members of a particular group, as the mere existence of a particular legal regime may directly affect the rights of the individual victims within the group.
In this instance, the authors contend that they, together with any other Jews, immigrants, or others facing an imminent risk of suffering racial discrimination, hatred or violence can claim to be victims of violations of articles 4 and 6 of the Convention.
3.3 The authors submit that they are victims notwithstanding the absence of any direct confrontation with the participants in the march.
In this regard, it must be recalled that the Convention is concerned not only with the dissemination of racist ideas as such, but also the effects of this (art.
1, para.
Further, it will rarely be the case that racist views are imparted directly to persons of the race concerned - it will usually be the case that the views are disseminated to like-minded people.
If article 4 were not to be read in this context, it would be rendered ineffective.
3.4 The authors also refer to decisions of the European Court of Human Rights that recognize the right of a potential victim to bring a claim against alleged human rights violation.
In Campbell and Cosans v. United Kingdom,f the Court held that a schoolboy could claim to be a victim of a violation of article 3 of the Convention owing to the use of corporal punishment as a disciplinary measure at the school he attended, even though he himself had never been subjected to it.
The general threat of being subjected to such treatment was sufficient to substantiate his claim of being a “victim”.
The authors contend that the existence of violent Nazi groups in Norway, together with the state of Norwegian law after the Supreme Court judgement in the Sjolie case, entail a real and imminent risk of being exposed to the effects of dissemination of ideas of racial superiority and incitement to racial hatred and violence, without their being protected or provided with a remedy, as required by articles 4 and 6 of the Convention.
3.5 The authors further state that, in any event, they have already been personally affected by the alleged violations.
The march and speech referred to had a serious adverse effect on Mr. Paltiel, who survived a concentration camp during the war, and who has previously had threats made on his life because of his educational work.
The same considerations apply to Mr. Kirchner, whose family was also deeply affected by the persecution of Jews during the war.
In addition, the petitioners that are organizations are directly affected, as it is said that they will no longer be able to rely on the protection of the law in conducting their work.
They argue that the Supreme Court's decision hands over the task of protecting against the effects of racist advocacy to private organizations, and creates new responsibilities for those who are the targets of the racial discrimination.
Exhaustion of domestic remedies
3.6 The authors submit that there are no available domestic remedies to be exhausted.
The decision of the Supreme Court is final and there is no possibility of appeal.
On the merits
3.7 In relation to the merits of the claim, the authors refer to the Committee's general recommendation XV, paragraph 3, which requires States parties to penalize four categories of misconduct: dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred; incitement to racial hatred; acts of violence against any race; and incitement to such acts.
They consider that the decision of the Supreme Court is incompatible with the Committee's general recommendation in relation to article 4 in this regard.
3.8 The authors note that, in the Committee's concluding observations on Norway's fifteenth periodic report, it noted that the prohibition on dissemination of racial hatred is compatible with the right to freedom of speech; article 20 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights stipulates the same.
The authors invoke paragraph 6 of general recommendation XV, which states that organizations which promote and incite racial discrimination shall be prohibited, and submit that the State party's alleged failure to meet these requirements has been noted with concern by the Committee on previous occasions.g The authors submit that it is fully acceptable for a State party to protect democratic society against anti-democratic propaganda.
In particular, they state that there is no basis for the Supreme Court's conclusion that article 4 of the Convention does not require States parties to penalize the dissemination of ideas of racial superiority, given the Committee's clear position on this issue.
3.9 The authors contend that the Supreme Court underestimated the danger of what it termed “Nazi rhetoric”, and that the object of article 4 is to combat racism at its roots.
As the Supreme Court minority pointed out, Mr. Sjolie's speech accepted and encouraged violent attacks on Jews, and paid homage to their mass extermination during the Second World War.
In particular, the declaration that the group would follow in the Nazis' footsteps and fight for what they believed in had to be understood as an acceptance of and incitement to violent acts against Jews.
The use of the Nazi salute made clear that the gathering was not peaceful, and, given the Bootboys' record of violence, the commemorative march was frightening and the incitement to violence evident.
3.10 The authors state that, in light of the Supreme Court's decision, section 135a of the Penal Code is unacceptable as a standard for protection against racism.
They therefore argue that the State party violated article 4 of the Convention, and consequently violated article 6, as the legal regime laid down by the Supreme Court necessarily implies that no remedies, such as compensation, can be sought.
Observations by the State party
4.1 By note dated 3 October 2003, the State party challenges the admissibility of the communication and requests that the Committee address the question of admissibility separately from the merits.
4.2 It submits that the authors' communication amounts to an actio popularis, the aim of which is to have the Committee assess and evaluate the relationship between section 135a of the Penal Code, as applied by the Supreme Court, and article 4 of the Convention.
The State party considers that issues of such a general nature are best dealt with by the Committee under the reporting procedure.
It notes that the Committee recently addressed this very issue when considering the sixteenth report of the State party; the Committee had noted with concern that the strict interpretation of section 135a may not cover all aspects of article 4 (a) of the Convention and invited the State party to review this provision and provide information to the Committee in its next periodic report.h The State party submits that it is currently preparing a White Paper on proposed amendments to section 100 of the Constitution, which guarantees freedom of speech, and the scope of section 135a of the Penal Code.
The State party assures the Committee that its concluding observations will be a weighty consideration in considering relevant amendments to these provisions.
4.3 The State party submits that neither the Jewish Communities of Oslo and Trondheim, nor the Antiracist Centre, can be considered “groups of individuals” for the purposes of article 14, paragraph 1.
The Jewish Communities are religious congregations comprising numerous members.
The Antiracist Centre is a non-governmental organization which seeks to promote human rights and equal opportunity, and conducts research on racism and racial discrimination.
The State party submits that, whilst the jurisprudence of the Committee is silent on this issue, a “group of individuals” should be understood as meaning a group of which every individual member could claim to be a victim of the alleged violation.
What is significant is not the group per se, but those individuals who comprise it.
It is the individuals, rather than the groups, who have standing.
4.4 In relation to the individual authors, Mr. Kirchner, Mr. Paltiel and Mr. Butt, the State party contends that they have not exhausted domestic remedies.
It refers to the decision of the Committee in the case of POEM and FASM v.
Denmark, where it noted that the petitioners had not been plaintiffs in any domestic proceedings, and considered that it was a “basic requirement of admissibility” that domestic remedies be exhausted “by the petitioners themselves”.i The State party notes that none of the individual petitioners in the present case was a party to the domestic proceedings leading to the Supreme Court's judgement, and that the only complaint about the incident to the police was made by a local politician in the town of Askim.
It states that the petitioners have not filed any complaints with the domestic authorities or made any requests for protection.
4.5 The State party contends that the authors are not “victims” for the purpose of article 14, paragraph 1.
There have only been two instances in which the Committee has appeared to find that article 4 gives rise to an individual right, capable of being invoked in the context of a communication under article 14 of the Convention.
In both of those cases, the racist expressions had been directed specifically at the petitioners in question, and had involved adverse effects on their substantive rights under article 5.
By contrast, none of the petitioners in this case was present when the remarks were made during the commemorative march.
They were not personally targeted by the remarks, nor have they specified how, if at all, their substantive rights under article 5 were affected by the comments of Mr. Sjolie.
Accordingly, the State party contends that the authors are not victims for the purpose of article 14, paragraph 1.
Comments by the petitioners
5.1 In comments on the State party's submissions of 2 December 2003, the authors contend that the communication is truly individual in nature.
They state that, in any event, the issue of inadequate protection against racist speech under article 4 had been an issue in the Committee's dialogue with the State party for some time, and that the concerns expressed by the Committee in its concluding observations have had little impact on the State party.
5.2 The authors reiterate that the Jewish Communities and the Antiracist Centre should be considered “groups of individuals” for the purpose of article 14 of the Convention, and that they have standing to submit communications to the Committee.
They note that there is nothing in the wording of article 14 which supports the interpretation that all members of the group must be able to claim victim status on their own.
If such a strict reading were applied, the words “groups of individuals” would be deprived of any independent meaning.
They contrast the wording of article 14, paragraph 1, with the corresponding provision in the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (art.
1), which provides that only individuals may submit complaints for consideration by the Human Rights Committee.
They contend that the expression “groups of individuals”, whatever its outer limits may be, clearly covers entities that organize individuals for a specific, common purpose, such as congregations and membership organizations.
5.3 As to the requirement of exhaustion of domestic remedies, the authors claim that, in light of the judgement of the Supreme Court, any legal proceedings taken by them in Norway would have no prospect of success.
They invoke a decision of the European Court of Human Rights to the effect that the obligation to exhaust domestic remedies did not apply in circumstances where, owing to an authoritative interpretation of the law by domestic judicial authorities, any legal action by the petitioners would be pointless.j They argue that the same approach should be adopted by the Committee in relation to article 14 of the Convention.
Thus, even if the authors had not exhausted domestic remedies, the Supreme Court dispensed with this requirement by handing down a final and authoritative interpretation of the relevant law.
5.4 On the State party's submission that they are not “victims” for the purpose of article 14, the petitioners reiterate that article 4 guarantees to individuals and groups of individuals a right to be protected against hate speech.
Failure to afford adequate protection against hate speech is of itself a violation of the individual rights of those who are directly affected by the State's failure to fulfil its obligations.
They reiterate that, just as a person's status as a potential victim may arise when people are formally required to breach the law in order to enjoy their rights, so too may it arise where the domestic law or a court's decision impedes the individual's future enjoyment of Convention rights.
They further state that, in the present case, the individual authors are public figures and leaders of their respective Jewish communities, and therefore potential victims of violations of the Convention.
Mr. Paltiel has received death threats by neo-Nazi groups in the past.
However, the intent of article 4 is to fight racism at its roots; there is a causal link between hate speech of the type made by Mr. Sjolie and serious violent racist acts.
Persons like Mr. Paltiel are seriously affected by the lack of protection against hate speech.
It is submitted that all the authors belong to groups of obvious potential victims of hate speech, against which Norwegian law affords no protection.
They claim that there is a high degree of possibility that they will be adversely affected by the violation of article 4 of the Convention.
5.5 In a further submission dated 20 February 2004, the petitioners draw the Committee's attention to the third report of the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) on Norway, dated 27 June 2003.
In this report, ECRI stated that Norwegian legislation did not provide individuals with adequate protection against racist expression, particularly in light of the Supreme Court's judgment in the Sjolie case.
ECRI recommended that Norway strengthen protection against racist expression through relevant amendments to its Constitution and criminal law.
Committee's request for clarification from the State party
6.1 At its sixty-fourth session, the Committee instructed the Secretariat to seek clarification from the State party as to whether, under Norwegian law, any of the petitioners could have requested to become a party to the criminal proceedings instituted after the remarks made by Mr. Sjolie on the occasion of the march of the “Bootboys” and, in the affirmative, to clarify whether intervention by the petitioners as third parties would have had any prospect of success.
The request for clarification was sent to the State party on 3 March 2004; it was also transmitted for information to the petitioners.
6.2 By letter of 19 June 2004, the petitioners submitted that they had no possibility of participating in the criminal proceedings that had been instigated in relation to the “Bootboys” march; they also added that they had not suffered any pecuniary loss which could form the basis of a civil claim.
6.3 In its submission dated 19 August 2004, the State party advised that the petitioners were not at liberty to institute private criminal proceedings or to join the public prosecution against Mr. Sjolie for alleged breaches of section 135a.
However, it submits that the lack of such a possibility has no bearing on the question of whether the petitioners had exhausted domestic remedies, and states that the present case is indistinguishable from the Committee's decision in POEM and FASM v.
Denmark, referred to in paragraph 4.3 above, where the Committee had found the communication in question to be inadmissible, as none of the petitioners had been plaintiffs in the domestic proceedings.
The State party submits that there is no significant difference between Norwegian and Danish criminal procedure law as regards the possibility of instituting private criminal proceedings or joining a public prosecution of racist expression.
In the Danish case, as in the instant case, the communication was admissible because the petitioners did not take any procedural steps to secure the conviction of the alleged perpetrator.
In the Danish case, as in the present case, the petitioners had not filed complaints with the police.
None of the petitioners took any steps to address the statements of Mr. Sjolie before presenting their communication to the Committee, some three years after the comments were made.
The State party submits that there is no basis to distinguish the present case from the Committee's earlier decision in the Danish case.
6.4 The State party further submits that the individual petitioners, and most likely the Jewish Communities, could have filed proceedings against Mr. Sjolie for criminal defamation, which is open to persons who feel targeted by denigrating or defamatory speech under articles 246 and 247 of the Criminal Code.
Had they done this, the petitioners could have joined their action for criminal defamation to the criminal proceedings already under way against Mr. Sjolie.
The petitioners could thereby have had an impact on the proceedings.
While sections 246 and 247 are not directed specifically against discrimination, they are applicable also to racist statements.
In its decision in Sadic v. Denmark,k the Committee noted that the notion of an “effective remedy” for the purposes of article 6 of the Convention is “not limited to criminal prosecutions based on provisions which specifically, expressly and exclusively penalize acts of racial discrimination”.
It extends to “a general provision criminalizing defamatory statements, which is applicable to racist statements”.
The Committee stated in the same decision that “mere doubts about the effectiveness of available civil remedies do not absolve a petitioner from pursuing them”.l
6.5 Finally, the State party submits that, should the Committee declare the communication admissible and consider it on the merits, it should bear in mind that the Government is proposing significant enhancements of the protection offered by section 135a, and that a White Paper has been presented to Parliament on possible amendments to section 100 of the Norwegian Constitution.
It is too early to inform about the outcome of the legislative process, and the State party will elaborate further upon this in the course of its next periodic report to the Committee.
6.6 In their reply dated 22 August 2004, the petitioners state that the Danish case referred to by the State party is distinguishable from their own case, as the criminal proceedings in that case had been discontinued by the police, without any action being taken by the authors to press civil or criminal proceedings against the alleged perpetrator.
In the present case, Mr. Sjolie's comments were held by the Supreme Court to be protected by the constitutional right to freedom of speech, and consequently any action by the authors would be futile.
They further submit that the applicability of defamation law to racist speech is an unresolved issue in Norwegian law, and for this reason defamation laws are not invoked in cases dealing with racist speech.
They state that it would have been untenable for the authors to seek to consolidate defamation proceedings with the criminal proceedings instituted by the authorities; they are not aware of this ever having happened before.
Decision on admissibility
7.1 At its sixty-fifth and sixty-sixth sessions, the Committee considered the admissibility of the communication.
7.2 The Committee noted the State party's submission that the authors had not exhausted domestic remedies because none of them complained to the authorities about Mr. Sjolie's conduct; reference was made to the Committee's decision in the POEM and FASM case.
However, as the authors pointed out, the POEM and FASM case involved criminal proceedings which were discontinued by the police, without any action being taken on the part of the authors to have the proceedings reinstigated.
The present case involved an authoritative decision by the highest Norwegian court to acquit a person accused of racist statements.
In the former case, the authors could have taken the initiative to protest the decision by the police to discontinue the criminal proceedings, but did not.
In the present case, the authors had no possibility of altering the course of the criminal proceedings.
Further, Mr. Sjolie had now been acquitted and cannot be retried.
The Committee further noted that, in answer to the question asked of it by the Committee during its sixty-fourth session, the State party confirmed that the authors could not have requested to become a party to the criminal proceedings against Mr. Sjolie.
The State party submitted that the authors could have taken defamation action against Mr. Sjolie.
However, the authors contended that the application of defamation laws to racist speech was an unresolved issue in Norwegian law, and the Committee was not in a position to conclude that such proceedings constituted a useful and effective domestic remedy.
In the circumstances, the Committee considered that there were no effective domestic remedies to be exhausted, and that accordingly no barrier to admissibility arose in this regard.
7.3 The authors claimed that they were “victims” of alleged violations of articles 4 and 6 of the Convention because of the general inability of Norwegian law to protect them against the dissemination of anti-Semitic and racist propaganda.
They also claimed that they were “victims” because of their membership of a particular group of potential victims; the authors, together with any other Jews or immigrants, faced an imminent risk of suffering racial discrimination, hatred or violence.
They referred in particular to the jurisprudence of other international human rights bodies to support their argument.
They invoked the decision of the Human Rights Committee in the case of Toonen v.
Australia, where the very existence of a particular legal regime was considered to have directly affected the author's rights in such a way as to give rise to a violation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
They also referred to the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in Open Door and Dublin Well Women v.
Ireland, in which the Court found certain authors to be “victims” because they belonged to a class of persons which might in the future be adversely affected by the acts complained of.
Similarly, in the present case the authors stated that, following the decision of the Supreme Court, they are at risk of being exposed to the effects of the dissemination of ideas of racial superiority and incitement to racial hatred, without being afforded adequate protection.
They also submitted that the decision contributed to an atmosphere in which acts of racism, including acts of violence, are more likely to occur, and in this regard they referred to specific incidents of violence and other “Nazi” activities.
The Committee agreed with the authors' submissions; it saw no reason why it should not adopt a similar approach to the concept of “victim” status as was adopted in the decisions referred to above.
It considered that, in the circumstances, the authors had established that they belong to a category of potential victims.
7.4 The Committee did not consider the fact that three of the authors are organizations posed any problem to admissibility.
As has been noted, article 14 of the Convention refers specifically to the Committee's competence to receive complaints from “groups of individuals”.
The Committee considered that to interpret this provision in the way suggested by the State party, namely to require that each individual within the group be an individual victim of an alleged violation, would be to render meaningless the reference to “groups of individuals”.
The Committee had not hitherto adopted such a strict approach to these words.
The Committee considered that, bearing in mind the nature of the organizations' activities and the classes of person they represent, they too satisfied the “victim” requirement in article 14.
7.5 On 9 March 2005, the Committee therefore declared the communication admissible.
State party's submissions on the merits
8.1 By a communication of 9 June 2005, the State party submits that there has been no violation of articles 4 or 6 of the Convention.
It states that, consistent with the provisions of the Convention, section 135a of the Norwegian Penal Code must be interpreted with due regard to the right to freedom of expression.
The State party's obligation to criminalize certain expressions and statements must be balanced against the right to freedom of expression, as protected by other international human rights instruments.m In the present case, the Norwegian Supreme Court carefully assessed the case following a full hearing, including arguments on the requirements of the relevant international instruments.
It concluded that the proper balance of these rights resulted in there being no violation of section 135a in the present case, a conclusion which the Court considered to be consistent with the State party's obligations under the Convention, taking account of the “due regard” clause in article 4 of the Convention.
8.2 For the State party, States must enjoy a margin of appreciation in balancing rights at the national level, and that this margin has not been overstepped in the present case.
The majority of the Supreme Court found that section 135a applied to remarks of a distinctly offensive character, including remarks that incite or support violations of integrity and those which entail a gross disparagement of a group's human dignity.
The majority considered that the remarks had to be interpreted in the light of the context in which they were made and the likely perception of the remarks by an ordinary member of the audience.n The State party submits that the Committee should give due respect to the Supreme Court's interpretation of these remarks, since it had thoroughly examined the entire case.
8.3 The State party submits that the Committee's general recommendation XV should be interpreted as recognizing that the application of article 4 requires a balancing of the right to freedom of expression against the right to protection from racial discrimination.
8.4 The State party notes the Committee's decision that the authors belong to a “category of potential victims”; to the extent that the authors are “potential victims”, the State party draws attention to recent changes in Norwegian law which strengthen legal protection against the dissemination of racist ideas.
It argues that, following the adoption of recent changes to section 100 of the Constitution and section 135a of the Penal Code, the authors can no longer be considered “potential victims” of racial discrimination contrary to the Convention; any possible violation could only relate to the period preceding the adoption of these amendments.
8.5 A completely revised version of section 100 of the Constitution entered into force on 30 September 2004, affording the Parliament greater scope to pass laws against racist speech, in conformity with its obligations under international conventions.
Parliament has since used this new power to amend section 135a of the Penal Code to provide that racist remarks may be subject to prosecution even if they are not disseminated among the public.
Racist statements made negligently are now also proscribed - intent need not be proved.
The maximum punishment has been raised from two to three years' imprisonment.
The balance between section 135a and freedom of speech, however, must be weighed by the courts in each case.
According to the State party, these recent amendments contradict the authors' assertion that the verdict in the Sjolie case would serve as a precedent, and that it will be more difficult to prosecute dissemination of ideas of racist discrimination and hatred.
The State party further refers to the adoption of a new Discrimination Act, which incorporates the Convention and provides criminal sanctions for serious cases of incitement to or participation in discrimination, thus supplementing the new provisions of section 135a.
The Government is also developing a new Mandate of Anti-Discrimination Ombudsman to monitor and enforce these new provisions.
8.6 The State party submits that, in light of the above changes in the State party's laws and their effect on the authors as “potential victims”, the Committee should reconsider its decision on admissibility, pursuant to rule 94, paragraph 6, of its rules of procedure, at least as far as the communication raises questions regarding the general legal effects of the Supreme Court's judgement.o
8.7 Finally, the State party notes that the authors have not identified how the remarks of Mr. Sjolie have had adverse effects on their enjoyment of any substantive rights protected by article 5 of the Convention.
Authors' comments on State party's submissions on the merits
9.1 In their comments on the State party's submissions dated 4 July 2005, the authors invoke their earlier submissions, in which issues relating to the merits were addressed.
They emphasize that it remains undisputed that, under Norwegian law as it presently stands, only three of the four relevant categories of racial discrimination referred to in article 4 of the Convention are penalized; contrary to article 4 and general recommendation XV, dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred may go unpunished.
9.2 In relation to the State party's request for the Committee to reopen the question of admissibility of the complaint, the authors state that the Committee must review and assess the communication on the basis of the facts at the material time, and not on the basis of legislation adopted subsequently.
In any event, the new legislation has not addressed the authors' main concern, namely the failure of the law to proscribe all relevant categories of misconduct under the Convention; thus the authors remain potential victims.
9.3 In respect of the “due regard” clause in article 4, the authors maintain that penalizing all four categories of misconduct is clearly compatible with any international principle of freedom of speech.
For them, the Committee must undertake its own interpretation of the impugned statements, rather than defer to the interpretation adopted by the Norwegian Supreme Court.p In characterizing the speech, the authors note that Hess was well known as Hitler's deputy and confidant, instrumental in the development of the Nuremberg laws.
They maintain that, as the minority of the Supreme Court found, anyone with a basic knowledge of Hitler and National Socialism would have understood Mr. Sjolie's speech as an acceptance and approval of mass violence against Jews in the Nazi era.
9.4 The authors refer to jurisprudence of the European Court and the Human Rights Committee, both of which have accorded racist and hate speech little protection under the freedom of speech provisions of their respective conventions.q According to the authors, the role of the “due regard” clause is to protect the role of the media in imparting information about issues of public importance, provided the objective is not advocacy of racial hatred.
It is submitted that the State party offers a much broader level of protection to hate speech than standards established in international case law.
The authors further state that the Supreme Court decision in the Sjolie case is already having a significant effect as a precedent, despite the entry into force of the new legislation.
They provide a decision by the Oslo police dated 31 May 2005 not to prosecute the leader of a neo-Nazi organization, in relation to statements made to the effect that Jews had killed millions of “his people”, that Jews should be “cleansed”, and were “not human beings” but “parasites”.
The police dropped the case with explicit reference to the Sjolie case.
9.5 The authors further submit that invoking freedom of speech for racist and discriminating purposes amounts to an abuse of the right of submission.
They reiterate that the balance between freedom of speech and protection from hate speech following the Sjolie decision is such that persons are afforded protection only against the most distinctive and offensive remarks, entailing severe violations of a group's dignity.
9.6 Finally, the authors note that Norway does not prohibit racist organizations and that the Supreme Court in the Sjolie case built on the view that such a ban would be unacceptable, contrary to the Committee's general recommendation XV, paragraph 6.
Consideration of the merits
10.1 Acting under article 14, paragraph 7 (a), of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Committee has considered the information submitted by the petitioners and the State party.
10.2 In relation to the State party's request that the Committee should reconsider its decision on admissibility pursuant to rule 94, paragraph 6, of its rules of procedure in the light of recent legislative changes, the Committee considers that it must review and assess the communication on the basis of the facts as they transpired at the material time, irrespective of subsequent changes in the law.
Further, the authors have referred to at least one incident following the recent amendments to the relevant legislation where the judgement in the Sjolie case was apparently interpreted as a bar to the prosecution of hate speech.
10.3 The Committee has noted the State party's submission that it should give due respect to the consideration of the Sjolie case by the Supreme Court, which conducted a thorough and exhaustive analysis, and that States should be afforded a margin of appreciation in balancing their obligations under the Convention with the duty to protect the right to freedom of speech.
The Committee notes that it has indeed fully taken account of the Supreme Court's decision and is mindful of the analysis contained therein.
However, the Committee considers that it has the responsibility to ensure the coherence of the interpretation of the provisions of article 4 of the Convention as reflected in its general recommendation XV.
10.4 At issue in the present case is whether the statements made by Mr. Sjolie, properly characterized, fall within any of the categories of impugned speech set out in article 4, and if so, whether those statements are protected by the “due regard” provision as it relates to freedom of speech.
In relation to the characterization of the speech, the Committee does not share the analysis of the majority of the members of the Supreme Court.
While the content of the speech is objectively absurd, the lack of logic of particular remarks is not relevant to the assessment of whether or not they violate article 4.
In the course of the speech, Mr. Sjolie stated that his “people and country are being plundered and destroyed by Jews, who suck our country empty of wealth and replace it with immoral and un-Norwegian thoughts”.
He then refers not only to Rudolf Hess, in commemoration of whom the speech was made, but also to Adolf Hitler and their principles, stating that his group will “follow in their footsteps and fight for what (we) believe in”.
The Committee considers these statements to contain ideas based on racial superiority or hatred; the deference to Hitler and his principles and “footsteps” must, in the Committee's view, be taken as incitement at least to racial discrimination, if not to violence.
10.5 As to whether these statements are protected by the “due regard” clause contained in article 4, the Committee notes that the principle of freedom of speech has been afforded a lower level of protection in cases of racist and hate speech dealt with by other international bodies, and that the Committee's own general recommendation XV clearly states (para.
4) that the prohibition of all ideas based upon racial superiority or hatred is compatible with the right to freedom of opinion and expression.
The Committee notes that the “due regard” clause relates generally to all principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, not only freedom of speech.
Thus, to give the right to freedom of speech a more limited role in the context of article 4 does not deprive the “due regard” clause of significant meaning, all the more so since all international instruments that guarantee freedom of expression provide for the possibility, under certain circumstances, of limiting the exercise of this right.
The Committee concludes that the statements of Mr. Sjolie, given that they were of an exceptionally/manifestly offensive character, are not protected by the “due regard” clause and that accordingly, his acquittal by the Supreme Court of Norway gave rise to a violation of article 4, and consequently article 6, of the Convention.
10.6 Finally, in relation to the State party's submission that the authors have failed to establish how the remarks of Mr. Sjolie adversely affected their enjoyment of any substantive rights protected under article 5 of the Convention, the Committee considers that its competence to receive and consider communications under article 14 is not limited to complaints alleging a violation of one or more of the rights contained in article 5.
Rather, article 14 states that the Committee may receive complaints relating to “any of the rights set forth in this Convention”.
The broad wording suggests that the relevant rights are to be found in more than just one provision of the Convention.
Further, the fact that article 4 is couched in terms of States parties' obligations, rather than inherent rights of individuals, does not imply that they are matters to be left to the internal jurisdiction of States parties, and as such immune from review under article 14.
If such were the case, the protection regime established by the Convention would be weakened significantly.
The Committee's conclusion is reinforced by the wording of article 6 of the Convention, by which States parties pledge to assure to all individuals within their jurisdiction effective protection and a right of recourse against any acts of racial discrimination which violate their “human rights” under the Convention.
In the Committee's opinion, this wording confirms that the Convention's “rights” are not confined to article 5.
Finally, the Committee recalls that it has previously examined communications under article 14 in which no violation of article 5 has been alleged.r
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, acting under article 14, paragraph 7, of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, is of the view that the facts before it disclose violations of articles 4 and 6 of the Convention.
The Committee recommends that the State party take measures to ensure that statements such as those made by Mr. Sjolie in the course of his speech are not protected by the right to freedom of speech under Norwegian law.
The Committee wishes to receive, within six months, information from the State party about the measures taken in the light of the Committee's Opinion.
The State party is requested also to give wide publicity to the Committee's Opinion.
[Done in English, French, Spanish and Russian, the English text being the original version.
Subsequently to be issued also in Arabic and Chinese as part of the Committee's annual report to the General Assembly.
]
Notes
Annex IV
Overview of the methods of work of the Committee
Terms of reference for the work of the coordinator on follow-up to the observations and recommendations of the Committee under Article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention
Pursuant to article 9 (1) (b) of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and rule 65, paragraph 1, of the rules of procedure of the Committee (see HRI/GEN/3/Rev.2), the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination may make a request for an additional report or for further information from a State party.
It may indicate both the manner and time within which such information should be received.
At its sixty-fourth session, the Committee decided to amend its rules of procedure relevant to follow-up activities in adopting a second paragraph to rule 65.a The paragraph provides for the appointment of a coordinator in order to further the implementation of rule 65, paragraph 1.
At its sixty-fifth session, the Committee appointed a coordinator and an alternate.b
The mandate of the coordinator took effect as from the sixty-fourth session of the Committee.
Terms of reference
The coordinator is mandated to monitor the follow-up by States parties to the observations and recommendations of the Committee, cooperating with the respective country rapporteur.
The Committee may ask the State party to submit information at a specified time before the next reporting session of the State concerned.
The coordinator will be responsible for monitoring respect by the State party for deadlines set by the Committee.
The coordinator will be responsible for sending reminders (within a month of expiry of the deadline) to a State party when it has not supplied the additional information on time.
The coordinator will analyse and assess the information received from the State party pursuant to a request by the Committee for further information.
This task should be shared with the country rapporteur.
If the coordinator finds that further information is needed, the coordinator will take the matter up with the State party.
The coordinator may make recommendations for appropriate action to the Committee when information as mentioned in paragraph 2 is received and in the case of non-receipt of such information.
The coordinator may, inter alia, recommend that the Committee take note of the information, request further information in the next periodic report, or remind the State party of recommendations included in the last concluding observations of the Committee and its obligations as party to the Convention.
The meeting is held in private.
The coordinator shall submit a succinct progress report to the Committee at each session.
The Committee should set aside sufficient time for discussion of the coordinator's findings and the adoption of formal recommendations, if any, including, where appropriate, reconsideration of the date on which the next periodic report of the State party is due.
The meeting is held in private.
The coordinator's findings will be included in the chapter of the annual report on follow-up activities.
If no information is received in spite of reminders, this will be recorded in the Committee's subsequent report to the General Assembly.
Follow-up on opinions adopted by the Committee under article 14, paragraph 7, of the Convention
At its 1721st meeting (sixty-seventh session), on 15 August 2005, the Committee added the following two paragraphs to rule 95 of its rules of procedure:
The Committee may designate one or several Special Rapporteurs for follow-up on Opinions adopted by the Committee under article 14, paragraph 7, of the Convention, for the purpose of ascertaining the measures taken by States parties in the light of the Committee's suggestions and recommendations.
The Special Rapporteur(s) may establish such contacts and take such action as is appropriate for the proper discharge of the follow-up mandate.
The Special Rapporteur(s) will make such recommendations for further action by the Committee as may be necessary; he/she (they) will report to the Committee on follow-up activities as required, and the Committee shall include information on follow-up activities in its annual report.
Notes
Annex V
The following is a list of the working papers referred to in chapter V submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples:
Annex VI
Country rapporteurs for reports of States parties considered by the Committee and for states parties considered under the review procedure at the SIXTY-SIXTH and sixty-SEVENTH sessions
Annex VII
Sixth and seventh periodic reports of Bahrain
The following comments were sent on 2 September 2005 by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the United Nations concerning the concluding observations adopted by the Committee following the consideration of the sixth and seventh periodic reports submitted by the State party:*
“The Kingdom of Bahrain confirms its commitment to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
In this context, while the Government of the Kingdom welcomes the concluding observations which were adopted by the Committee following its consideration of the Kingdom's sixth and seventh periodic reports, it would nevertheless like to make the following points:
“1.
As the Kingdom's reports clearly show, the Convention is part of Bahrain's domestic law, Bahrain's legislation and policies affirm the principles of equality and non-discrimination and there are means of redress available to deal with any allegation of racial discrimination.
“2.
The Committee expressed concern about the abolition of one human rights association, even though the delegation of Bahrain had explained that the decision to abolish the association in question had been taken in accordance with law and that the association's appeal against the decision had been reviewed by the courts.
The delegation had furthermore described the legal safeguards which are provided for civil society organizations.
“3.
The Committee expressed concern about the situation of migrant workers and their enjoyment of social, economic and cultural rights, even though the Kingdom's reports and its delegation had clearly explained that migrant workers enjoy all of these rights, together with legal protection and access to services offering advice on their rights and the means for protecting them.
“4.
The Committee, in the light of some questions raised during the debate, expressed concern about repeated allegations of discrimination facing some groups that may be distinguishable by virtue of their tribal or national origin, descent, culture or language.
The Committee recommended that the State party should ensure that everyone, without distinction as to race, colour, or national or ethnic origin, enjoyed the rights to work and to health and social security, adequate housing and education.
In this connection, the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain should like to make the following comments:
“(a) Although the questions raised about these allegations were essentially based on the religious angle, and although the religious angle has nothing to do with the Convention, the delegation of the Kingdom, in a spirit of cooperation, replied to the questions by explaining that the allegations were unfounded;
“(b) Since the questions related to whether or not there was any truth to the allegations, we had hoped that the Committee's observation would have taken account of the additional information which had been requested on that subject;
“(c) The Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain confirms that, in accordance with the Convention, it spares no effort to guarantee everyone the right to work, health, social security, housing and education without discrimination, and that this is reflected in the State's laws and policies and the Government's programmes.
“The Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain should like to express its gratitude to the Committee for its appreciative comments about the positive political, legal and economic developments unfolding in the Kingdom of Bahrain with regard to respect for human rights.
In this connection, the Government also expresses its satisfaction that the Advisory Council and the House of Deputies of Bahrain are currently debating two draft laws on the Government's accession to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.”
Annex VIII
* The following States have signed but not ratified the Convention: Andorra, Bhutan, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Nauru and Sao Tome and Principe.
* For the amendments to enter into force, two thirds of the States parties to the Convention must accept it.
* See paragraphs 71-94 of the present report.
* This list only concerns documents issued for general distribution.
vi
vii
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/8718), chap.
IX, sect.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/48/18), para.
18 and annex III.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/59/18), paras. 180-210.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/59/18), paras. 190 and 192.
Ibid., para.
Ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/56/18), paras.
Ibid., Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/53/18), para.
Ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/56/18), para.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/59/18), paras. 434-458.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/48/18), para.
18 and annex III.
Recommended by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1989/65 of 24 May 1989.
Recommended by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/89 of 4 December 2000.
Adopted by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, 27 August-7 September 1990.
Adopted by the First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Geneva, 22 August-3 September 1955, and approved by the Economic and Social Council in its resolutions 663 C (XXIV) of 31 July 1957 and 2076 (LXII) of 13 May 1977.
Adopted and proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 45/111 of 14 December 1990.
Adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 43/173 of 9 December 1988.
Official Reports of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/51/18), paras. 587-627.
Ibid., Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/58/18), annex IV.
Ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/59/18), annex III.
a The State party provides, with its submissions on the merits of the petition, the following full text of the resolution:
“On its 25th extraordinary session held on 20 March 2002 the Town Council of the town of Dobšiná adopted the following resolution from discussed reports and points:
RESOLUTION 251-20/III-2002-MsZ
After discussing the proposal by Lord Mayor Ing.
Ján Vozár concerning the building of low-cost housing the Town Council of Dobšiná
Approves
the low-cost housing - family houses or apartment houses - development policy and
Recommends
the Lord Mayor to deal with the preparation of project documentation and acquisition of funds for this development from State subsidies.”
b Petitioners' translation, which reflects exactly the text of the petition set out in the translated judgement of the Constitutional Court provided by the State party annexed to its submissions on the merits.
The State party suggests in its submissions on the merits that a more appropriate translation would be: “I do not agree with the construction of flats for the citizens of Gypsy nationality (ethnicity) within the territory of the town of Dobšiná, as there is a danger of influx of citizens of Gypsy nationality from surrounding area [sic] and even from other districts and regions.”
c The State party provides, with its submissions on the merits of the petition, the following full text of the resolution:
“RESOLUTION 288/5/VIII-2002-MsZ
After discussing the petition of 30 July 2002 and after determining the facts, the Town Council of Dobšiná, through the Resolution of the Town Council is in compliance with the law, on the basis of the citizens' petition
Cancels
Resolution 251-20/III-2002-MsZ approving the low-cost housing - family houses or apartment houses - development policy.
Tasks
The Town Council commissions with elaborating a proposal for solving the existence of inadaptable citizens in the town of Dobšiná and then to discuss it in the bodies of the town and at a public meeting of the citizens.
Deadline: November 2002
Responsible: Chairpersons of commissions.”
d The petitioners refer to:
(i) Article 1 of the Act on the Right of Petition, which provides:
“A petition cannot call for a violation of the Constitution of the Slovak Republic and its laws, nor deny or restrict individual rights”;
(ii) Article 12 of the Constitution, which provides:
(1) All human beings are free and equal in dignity and in rights.
Their fundamental rights and freedoms are sanctioned; inalienable, imprescriptible and irreversible.
(2) Fundamental rights shall be guaranteed in the Slovak Republic to everyone regardless of sex, race, colour, language, belief and religion, political affiliation or other conviction, national or social origin, nationality or ethnic origin, property, descent or any other status.
No one shall be aggrieved, discriminated against or favoured on any of these grounds.
(3) Everyone has the right to decide freely which national group he or she is a member of.
Any influence and all manners of pressure that may affect or lead to a denial of a person's original nationality shall be prohibited.
(4) No injury may be inflicted on anyone, because of exercising his or her fundamental rights and freedoms;
(iii) Article 33 of the Constitution, which provides:
“Membership in any national minority or ethnic group may not be used to the detriment of any individual”; and
(iv) The Act on the Public Prosecution Office, which provides that the Prosecutor has a duty to oversee compliance by public administration bodies with laws and regulations, and to review the legality of binding regulations issued by public administration bodies.
e Koptova v.
Slovak Republic, case No. 13/1998, Opinion of 8 August 2000.
f Case No. 4/1991, Opinion of 16 March 1993.
g This section provides that: “The applicant may request a review of the lawfulness of dealing with his motion by filing a repeated motion; this new motion shall be dealt with by a superior prosecutor.”
h Case No. 11/1998, Opinion of 9 August 2001.
i 3 EHRR 76 (1973).
j The petitioners refer to the Belgian Linguistic case, 1 EHRR 252, 283.
k CERD/C/304/Add.110 of 1 May 2001.
l See Lacko, supra, and, with respect to the Human Rights Committee, R.T. v.
France, case No. 262/87, decision adopted on 30 March 1989, and Kaaber v.
Iceland, case No. 674/95, decision adopted on 11 May 1996.
m See Koptova, supra, at paras.
2.9 and 6.4.
n Ibid., at para.
o Ibid., at para.
p Application No. 47237 of 2 July 2002.
q See the full text of the resolution set out in note a.
r See the full text of the resolution set out in note c.
s Chapman v. United Kingdom, judgement of 18 January 2001, and Coster v. United Kingdom, judgement of 18 January 2001.
t Op. cit.
at note h.
u Op. cit.
at note e.
v Op. cit.
at note i.
w Op. cit.
at note j.
x The petitioners cite the Committee's own concluding observations, dated 1 June 2001, on the State party (CERD/C/304/Add.110) [Note of the Committee: The Committee's most recent concluding observations on the State party are dated 10 December 2004 (CERD/C/65/CO/7)].
The petitioners also cite the third report on the State party of the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance, dated 27 June 2003, a report on the situation of Roma and Sinti in the OSCE area, dated April 2000, by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the 2004 Report on Human Rights in the OSCE Region by the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights, the Human Rights Watch World Report 2001 and 2002, the concluding observations, dated 22 August 2003, of the Human Rights Committee on the State party (CCPR/CO/78/SVK), the concluding observations, dated 19 December 2002, of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (E/C.12/1/Add.81), the Opinion on Slovakia, dated 22 September 2000, adopted by the Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the 2003 Country Reports (Slovakia) on Human Rights Practices of the United States of America Department of State.
y Op. cit.
a Case No.
4/1991, decision adopted on 16 March 1993.
b Case No.
10/1997, decision adopted on 17 March 1999.
c Case No.
17/1999, decision adopted on 17 March 2000.
d The State party refers to the Committee's jurisprudence on this issue: case No.
1/84, A. Yilmaz v.
The Netherlands, decision adopted on 10 August 1988; case No.
4/1991, L.K. v. The Netherlands, op.
cit.
; case No.
10/1997, Habassi v.
Denmark, op cit.
; and case No. 16/1999, Ahmad v.
Denmark, decision adopted on 13 March 2000.
e Habassi v.
Denmark, op.
cit., paras.
6.1 and 6.2.
f Ibid.
v.
The Netherlands and Habassi v.
Denmark, op. cit.
a Section 266 (b) of the Criminal Code stipulates:
“(1) Any person who, publicly or with the intention of wider dissemination, makes a statement or imparts other information by which a group of people are threatened, insulted or degraded on account of their race, colour, national or ethnic origin, religion, or sexual inclination shall be liable to a fine or to imprisonment for any term not exceeding two years.
“(2) When the sentence is meted out, the fact that the offence is in the nature of propaganda activities shall be considered an aggravating circumstance.”
b The form of the statements is as reported in the criminal complaints to the police lodged by the Documentation and Advisory Centre on Racial Discrimination.
c Section 721 (1) of the Administration of Justice Act provides:
“Charges in a case may be withdrawn in full or in part in cases:
“(i) Where the charge has proved groundless;
“(ii) Where further prosecution cannot anyway be expected to lead to conviction of the suspect; or
“(iii) Where completion of the case will entail difficulties, costs or trial periods which are not commensurate with the significance of the case and with the punishment, the imposition of which can be expected in case of conviction.”
d Ibid.
e Section 722 (1) (iv) of the Administration of Justice Act provides that: “Prosecution in a case may be waived in full or in part in cases … where section 89 of the Criminal Code is applicable when it is deemed that no punishment or only an insignificant punishment would be imposed and that conviction would not otherwise be of essential importance.” Section 89 provides: “Where a person already sentenced [for another offence] is found guilty of another criminal offence committed prior to the judgment, an additional sentence must be imposed provided that simultaneous adjudication would have resulted in a more severe sentence.”
f Quereshi v.
Denmark (No. 1), case No.
27/2002, Opinion adopted on 19 August 2003.
g Section 267 of the Criminal Code provides: “(1) Any person who violates the personal honour of another by offensive words or conduct or by making or spreading allegations of an act likely to disparage him in the esteem of his fellow citizens, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding four months.”
h Case No.
25/2002, Opinion adopted on 25 May 2002.
i Ibid.
j See para.
2.18, supra.
k See para.
2.15, supra.
l See para.
2.13, supra.
m Ibid.
a The speech was recorded on video by the magazine Monitor.
It was later used in the criminal proceedings against Mr. Sjolie.
b Section 100 of the Norwegian Constitution guarantees the right to freedom of speech.
c Communication No.
488/1992, Views adopted on 31 March 1994.
d Communications No.
359/1989 and No.
385/1989, Views adopted on 31 March 1993.
e Judgement (Merits) of 22 October 1981, Series A, No. 45.
f Judgement (Just Satisfaction) of 22 March 1983, Series A, No. 60.
g The authors refer to paragraph 14 of the concluding observations adopted in 2000 (CERD/C/304/Add.88) on the fifteenth periodic report and paragraph 13 of the concluding observations (CERD/C/304/Add.40) adopted in 1997 on the twelfth to fourteenth periodic reports.
h CERD/C/63/CO/8, para.
i Communication No.
22/2002, decision of 19 March 2003, para.
j Case of Open Door and Dublin Well Women v.
Ireland, judgement of 29 October 1992, Series A, No.
k Communication No.
25/2002, decision on admissibility adopted on 16 March 2003, para.
l Ibid., para.
m Reference is made to article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights and article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
n The State party draws the Committee's attention to the reasoning of the majority set out on pages 11 and 12 of the English version of the judgement; however the Court's conclusions in this regard are not summarized in the submission.
In the judgement, the majority concludes that various remarks in question are “absurd”, “defy rational interpretation”, and “cliché”, and that they expressed no more than general support for Nazi ideology which, according to the majority, did not imply support for the extermination of or other systematic and serious acts of violence against Jews.
Hess, in whose memory the march was held, was not particularly associated with the Holocaust.
The majority also notes that the group of Mr. Sjolie's supporters was small, and those opposing the speech were in the majority and able to voice their disapproval.
o The submission then reads: “The Government, however, trusts the Committee to undertake any required assessments at this point.”
p Reference is made to decisions of the European Court of Human Rights in Lehideux and Isorni v.
France, judgement of 23 September 1998, Reports 1998-VII, paras.
50-53 and Jersild v. Denmark, judgement of 23 September 1994, Series A, No. 298, para.
q Particular mention is made of Jersild v.
Denmark, ibid., concerning racist comments by the “Greenjackets” against Africans and foreigners, held not to be protected by freedom of speech, and J.R.T.
and W.G. v. Canada, communication No.
104/1981, Views adopted on 6 April 1983.
r See for example: Ziad Ben Ahmed Habassi v.
Denmark, communication No.
10/1997, Opinion adopted on 17 March 1999, paras.
9.3 and 10, where the Committee found a violation of arts.
2 and 6; Kashif Ahmed v.
Denmark, communication No.
16/1999, Opinion adopted on 13 March 2000, paras.
6.2-9, where the Committee found a violation of art.
6; and Kamal Qureshi v.
Denmark, communication No.
27/2002, Opinion adopted on 19 August 2003, paras. 7.1-9.
a For the text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/59/18), annex III.
b Ibid., para.