# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
United Nations
Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
Forty-fifth session (6 June-1 July 2005)
General Assembly
Official Records Sixtieth Session Supplement No. 16 (A/60/16)
General Assembly Official Records Sixtieth Session Supplement No. 16 (A/60/16)
United Nations • New York, 2005
Report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
Forty-fifth session (6 June-1 July 2005)
Note
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Contents
Chapter I
Organization of the session
The Committee for Programme and Coordination held its organizational session (1st meeting) at United Nations Headquarters on 11 May 2005 and its substantive session from 6 June to 1 July 2005.
It held a total of 15 meetings and a number of informal consultations.
Agenda
The agenda for the forty-fifth session, adopted by the Committee at its organizational session (1st meeting), is contained in annex I to the present report.
The attention of the Committee was drawn to the note by the Secretariat on the reports of the Joint Inspection Unit contained in document E/AC.51/2005/L.2.
The Committee postponed the selection of a report of the Joint Inspection Unit for its consideration to its substantive session, pending a review by the members of the Bureau.
Programme of work
At its 1st meeting, on 11 May, the Committee had before it an informal paper submitted by the secretariat of the Committee setting out the proposed programme of work for the forty-fifth session.
Views were exchanged on the duration and length of the session, as well as on the question relating to the proposed programme budget for the period 2006-2007.
Due to the divergent views expressed on those issues, the Committee postponed taking a decision on its programme of work pending a review by the members of the Bureau.
The Committee, in compliance with General Assembly resolution 59/275 of 23 December 2004, by which the Assembly welcomed the decision of the Committee to revert to the agenda item entitled “Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate”, as a matter of priority, at the beginning of its forty-fifth session, approved the programme of work of the Committee for the first two days, namely 6 and 7 June 2005, for its consideration of agenda item 7.
At its 2nd-4th and 6th meetings, on 6, 7 and 9 June, the Committee considered its proposed programme of work for the forty-fifth session.
At its 6th meeting, on 9 June, the Committee approved its programme of work for the forty-fifth session of the Committee.
Selection of reports of the Joint Inspection Unit
At its 2nd meeting, on 6 June, the Committee's attention was drawn to the fact that the report entitled “Overview of the series of reports on managing for results in the United Nations system” (A/59/617) contained an overview of three other reports.
Taking into account that the benchmarks contained in the other three reports were included in that report, the Committee decided to select it, along with an addendum containing the comments thereon by the Secretary-General and the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (A/59/617/Add.1), for its consideration at its forty-fifth session.
Election of officers
At its 1st meeting, on 11 May, the Committee elected, by acclamation, Valery Mkrtoumian (Armenia) Chairman of the Committee for the forty-fifth session.
On 3 June 2005, in a note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Armenia to the United Nations, the secretariat of the Committee for Programme and Coordination was informed that, owing to unforeseen health complications, the elected Chairman of the forty-fifth session would be unable to attend the session.
Consequently, the members of the Group of Eastern European States were invited to nominate a candidate.
At its 2nd meeting, on 6 June, the Committee elected, by acclamation, Markiyan Kulyk (Ukraine) Chairman of the Committee for the forty-fifth session.
At its 1st meeting, on 11 May, the Committee elected, by acclamation, the following members of the Bureau for the forty-fifth session: Vice-Chairmen: Yoo-Dae Jong (Republic of Korea) and Johannes de Millo Terrazzani (Monaco); and Rapporteur: Abdelatif Debabeche (Algeria).
At its 5th meeting, on 7 June, the Committee elected, by acclamation, Devon Rowe (Jamaica) Vice-Chairman of the Committee for the forty-fifth session.
The members of the Bureau for the forty-fifth session of the Committee are:
Chairman: Markiyan Kulyk (Ukraine)
Vice-Chairmen: Yoo-Dae Jong (Republic of Korea)
Johannes de Millo Terrazzani (Monaco)
Devon Rowe (Jamaica)
Rapporteur: Abdelatif Debabeche (Algeria)
C. Attendance
The following Member States were represented on the Committee:
The following States Members of the United Nations were represented by observers:
The Holy See was represented in its capacity as Observer State.
The International Labour Organization was represented.
Also present at the session were the Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security, the Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, the Controller, the Director of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, an Inspector of the Joint Inspection Unit and senior officials of the United Nations Secretariat.
Documentation
The list of documents before the Committee at its forty-fifth session is set out in annex II to the present report.
E. Adoption of the report of the Committee
At its 15th meeting, on 1 July 2005, the Rapporteur introduced the draft report of the Committee (E/AC.51/2005/L.4 and Add.1-13).
At the same meeting, the representative of India requested the deletion in E/AC.51/2005/L.4, of the text starting from the second sentence in paragraph 5 to the end of paragraph 6.
The representative of France made a statement regarding the absence of the complete draft report in all the official languages.
Following a statement by the representative of the United States of America, a discussion ensued regarding the segment of the draft report relating to item 7, entitled “Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate” (E/AC.51/2005/L.4/Add.13).
During the discussion, at which the representatives of France, Ghana, the United States of America, India, Mexico, Benin, South Africa, Argentina, Jamaica, Cuba, South Africa, Germany, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and Brazil took part, proposals were made, clarifications sought, and points of order raised.
The Secretary of the Committee provided clarifications on questions raised regarding the rules of procedures and relevant resolutions of the General Assembly governing the proceedings of the Committee.
After a suspension of the meeting, the Committee adopted the draft report of the Committee on the work of its forty-fifth session (E/AC.51/2005/L.4 and Add.13) as a whole, as orally amended, without a vote.
After the adoption of the draft report, as a whole, as orally amended, statements were made by the representatives of the United States of America, Germany, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Canada, India, South Africa, Japan, Ghana, Switzerland, France, Cuba, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and Jamaica.
Chapter II
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations
Progress and impact assessment of management improvement measures
At its 13th and 14th meetings, on 16 and 17 June 2005, the Committee for Programme and Coordination considered the report of the Secretary-General on progress and impact assessment of management improvement measures (A/60/70).
The representative from the Department of Management introduced the report and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the report.
Discussion
Almost all delegations expressed strong support for the report's enhanced methodology, and took favourable note of the efforts made by the Secretariat to respond to the Committee's requests and further strengthen that type of reporting.
They encouraged the Secretariat to continue to improve the presentation and to extend the coverage of reporting on the progress and the impact achieved by management improvement measures and on the obstacles encountered in their implementation.
They also welcomed a series of efforts by the Department of Management for improving management communication and furthering the sharing of good management practices.
They encouraged the Department to continue its efforts, initiatives and leadership, as the Department of Management plays a crucial role in the work of the Organization as a whole.
Some delegates expressed the view that the report itself contributes to the process of United Nations management reform, by providing a strategic view of progress and thereby encouraging managers to sustain the effort, while highlighting the relative rate of progress made and obstacles encountered, so that appropriate action can be taken to ensure successful outcomes of improvement measures.
Many delegates shared the concern expressed in the report that the lack of a standardized cost accounting system in United Nations offices impeded the type of analysis upon which the report was based, and asked for an update on both the status of the forthcoming feasibility study on cost accounting and its relationship to high-level efforts to address questions of accounting standards within the United Nations system.
Information on those matters was provided in the latter part of the discussion, namely that procurement for the feasibility study was under way, and that a task force under the auspices of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination was undertaking work to review the existing standards, which deal with accounting principles, financial statement formats and accounting policies for specific issues — matters that do not directly bear on progress and impact reporting.
Several delegates expressed a concern that, with the increased emphasis on making impact reporting more quantitative, qualitative or intangible aspects of improvement might not be fully reported, and they encouraged the Secretariat to ensure that balanced reporting was attained and that it prevailed in the future.
The view was expressed that the project-level descriptive material in the annex to the report should allow delegates to better appreciate the reasons for improving management with regard to the different programmes and to have a fuller view of the substance of the improvement measures, as well as an overview of the deployment of initiatives among offices and departments.
Accommodating that concern does raise questions as to how to keep to the new General Assembly brevity standards for such reports as A/60/70.
The Secretariat expressed a willingness to share such information in more detail through informal briefings and supplementary documents.
Delegations expressed concern regarding the obstacles to implementation identified in the report, particularly resistance to change and lack of cooperation among offices.
Delegations strongly emphasized the need for management cooperation and for skilful leadership in change management; they also stressed that reporting offices should cooperate more fully with the reporting process itself.
An inquiry was raised about the public management practices and other sources that influenced the creation of the analytical methodology.
The representative of the Secretary-General noted the concern, but stated that multiple, global sources were reviewed and that ultimately an original approach, reflecting the unique character of our Organization, was constructed from diverse sources.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee took note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on progress and impact assessment of management improvement measures (A/60/70).
The Committee encouraged the Secretary-General to develop further an approach conducive to a genuine improvement of United Nations management, taking due account of the Organization's realities and needs.
The Committee noted the improvements to the presentation of the information and the refinements to the methodology, which took into account some of the previous comments of the Committee, as endorsed by the General Assembly, and recommended that the Secretary-General be requested to implement the remaining recommendations and to further refine the methodology and extend coverage of the data.
The Committee welcomed the initiatives by the Department of Management for improving management and requested the Department of Management, together with all relevant departments and offices, to continue efforts in that regard.
The Committee invited the General Assembly to review the appropriateness of the continuation of the consideration of the agenda item entitled “Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations” by the Committee for Programme and Coordination, taking into account relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolutions 54/236 and 59/275.
Chapter III
Programme questions
Programme planning
Priority-setting
At its informal consultations on 24 June 2005, the Committee resumed its consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on priority-setting (A/59/87) .
Discussion
The Committee recalled that at its forty-fourth session it had decided to continue its consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on priority-setting at its forty-fifth session and had recommended that the General Assembly defer its consideration of the report to its sixtieth session.1 The Committee also recalled General Assembly resolution 59/275 of 23 December 2004 in which it endorsed that recommendation.
The Committee further recalled Assembly resolution 59/278 of the same date, in which the Assembly decided on the priorities for the biennium 2006-2007.
The Committee noted that the report provided historical background on previous debates within the General Assembly and the Committee for Programme and Coordination regarding the question of priority-setting.
In that regard, it was noted that Member States previously had been unable to reach agreement on many aspects of the question.
The view was expressed that it was the responsibility of Member States to designate priorities at the macro level for the Organization and that priority-setting was key to the United Nations programme planning and budgeting process.
It was stressed that, while it was important to designate priorities, particularly in view of resource constraints, it was important to recognize that action to address new challenges should not be taken at the expense of priorities that have already been designated.
The view was also expressed that an additional difficulty with priority-setting was related to the fact that the Secretariat was required to implement all legislative mandates.
It was observed that, given the fact that the designation of priorities by the General Assembly reflected general trends of a broad sectoral nature, the specialized intergovernmental bodies should play a greater role in determining priorities at the subprogramme level.
On the other hand, the view was expressed that priorities should not be designated by intergovernmental bodies at the subprogramme level because of the way that the plan has been structured and because of the decision of the Assembly that priorities should reflect general trends of a broad sectoral nature.
It was also noted that the structure of the strategic framework was not organized to reflect sectoral issues but rather congruence with the organizational entities.
It was noted that the structure had been approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 51/219 of 18 December 1996 when it adopted the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001.2 In that connection, the General Assembly thereafter did not designate priorities by programme or subprogramme.
Priorities instead reflected general trends of a broad sectoral nature.
Furthermore, it was noted that the Assembly, in its resolution 53/207 of 18 December 1998, decided that the priorities contained in the budget outline should be in conformity with the priorities in the medium-term plan.
It was also recalled that the Assembly, in its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986, had earlier decided that the budget outline should indicate priorities reflecting general trends of a broad sectoral nature.
It was noted that for the medium-term plans for the periods 1998-2001 and 2002-2005,3 the priorities for the budget outline were the same as those for the plans.
The view was expressed that difficulties already encountered by Member States with the designation of priorities would be further compounded at the subprogramme level.
In this connection, it was stressed that the Secretary-General should have the authority to make judgements at the subprogramme level, taking due account of legislative mandates, particularly since Member States had the opportunity to reject or approve his proposals in the context of the proposed programme budget.
In that context, it was pointed out that the Secretariat should fully implement regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation (ST/SGB/2000/8) so that Member States would have a basis for judging the value of programmes and activities.
On the other hand, the view was expressed that priority-setting, at all levels, was the prerogative of Member States and not that of the Secretary-General.
The view was expressed that the Committee for Programme and Coordination would have benefited from receiving an analysis or elaboration of the implications that General Assembly resolution 58/269 of 23 December 2003 and the strategic framework could have on the question of priority-setting.
It was stated that future reports on priority-setting should provide the Committee with an assessment of whether or not the reduced time frame of the biennial programme plan has made it easier to reflect the latest legislative developments that could have a bearing on the allocation of resources.
Part one of the strategic framework provides an opportunity to expand on the broad priorities of the Organization in more detail than the Secretariat was able to do in the medium-term plan.
The view was expressed that future reports on priority-setting should expand on that element.
The view was also expressed that the report should have provided a more detailed analysis of the experiences that the Secretariat has gained in the application of the results-based logical framework and how they might improve priority-setting in the Organization.
The report provided a great deal of information on what had transpired before 1998 but very little on the impact of the changes reflected in the medium-term plan for 2002-2005, beyond what was alluded to in paragraph 16 of the report.
The medium-term plan for the period 2002-2005 was the first one to reflect the results-based-budgeting methodology, and the programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003 was the first budget to be submitted in a results-based format.
The performance report for the biennium 2002-2003 thus provided the Committee with an opportunity to evaluate the application of the results-based logical framework for the first time.
It was hoped that future reports on priority-setting would expand on the contribution, if any, that the results-based-budgeting logical framework has made towards the setting of priorities, in particular as it is intended to improve the measurement of achievements.
It was acknowledged that priority-setting remains the prerogative of Member States and that the use of results-based budgeting may not address the larger question of how to identify, agree upon and designate priorities.
With regard to paragraph 35 of the report, it was recalled that in paragraph 19 of its resolution 55/231 of 23 December 2000, the General Assembly emphasized that resources proposed by the Secretary-General should be commensurate with all mandated programmes and activities to ensure their full, effective and efficient implementation.
The view was expressed that the priorities, as reflected in the legislative mandates, should determine the resource requirements for the Organization; the resource levels should not determine the priorities.
It was also stressed that the level of resources for peacekeeping operations and for the international Tribunals should not have any impact on the level of resources for the regular budget.
However, it was pointed out that some Member States viewed their contributions, assessed or voluntary, to the work of the United Nations in their entirety, and decisions on the level of resources for the regular budget, the peacekeeping operations and the Tribunals were inevitably linked.
It was questioned how expanding the discussion of resources beyond the Fifth Committee would prevent the “disconnection between planning and resource allocation” referred to in paragraph 33 of the report.
The view was expressed that the rules of procedure of the General Assembly guiding administrative and budgetary questions were clear.
General Assembly resolution 45/248 of 21 December 1990 was recalled, and the view was expressed that it had further clarified the mandate given to the Fifth Committee.
It was also stated that the latter resolution had been aimed at ensuring that the Main Committees would be able to focus on substantive matters and that resource requirements would not be the overriding factor in setting priorities or determining objectives.
The General Assembly did not amend the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation when it adopted resolution 58/269.
It was therefore expected that the process of consultations with sectoral, functional and regional intergovernmental bodies would continue and that the relevant regulations and rules would be implemented to the fullest extent possible.
Those regulations and rules should apply to all activities undertaken by the United Nations, irrespective of their source of financing.
It was noted that the majority of the conclusions in the report have been reflected to some extent in previous reports of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
In view of the adoption of General Assembly resolution 58/269, it was felt that the recommendations of the Committee should focus largely on those issues that are relevant to the question of priority-setting within the context of more recent developments.
It was observed that a major feature of the programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005, as well as the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007, was the reallocation of resources among subprogrammes within each programme, without any justification of the criteria for such reallocation, as indicated by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.4 In this regard, the need for the General Assembly to give particular attention to this question when considering the present report at its sixtieth session was stressed.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee emphasized that priority-setting in the Organization was an intergovernmental process and that priorities represented the longer-term objectives of the Organization.
Proposed biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-2007
Programme 27 Safety and security
At its 11th and 13th meetings, on 14 and 16 June 2005, the Committee for Programme and Coordination considered proposed programme 27, Safety and security, of the biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-2007 (A/59/806, annex).
The representative of the Secretary-General introduced programme 27 and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of the programme.
Discussion
General support was expressed for the proposed programme.
The value and importance of the activities proposed in the programme were recognized, and particular emphasis was placed on the need for further strengthening of the United Nations security management system in the field.
A view was expressed that the General Assembly should be kept informed of progress in the formation of the United Nations safety and security structures, in particular in the field, in the context of the implementation of section XI of General Assembly resolution 59/276 of 23 December 2004 on a strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations.
A view was expressed that coordination among various United Nations entities and consultations with United Nations funds and programmes on safety and security-related matters should be a continuous process and that that aspect should be more clearly reflected in the programme narrative and the strategies.
It was pointed out that the monitoring of compliance with security policies, standards and operational procedures by all actors in the field should be further reflected in the programme of work of the Department of Safety and Security in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007.
Views were also expressed that the programme narrative should emphasize the primary responsibility of host countries for the safety and security of the United Nations operations, staff and premises, in line with the provisions of section XI of General Assembly resolution 59/276.
A view was also expressed that the general orientation of the programme and logical framework should more closely reflect the provisions of section XI of General Assembly resolution 59/276.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of programme 27, Safety and security, of the biennial programme plan for the period 2006-2007, subject to the following modifications:
Paragraph 27.5 (c)
Insert the words “safety and” before the word “security”
Subprogramme 2 Indicator of achievement (a) (ii)
Insert the words “safety and” before the word “security”
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007
At its 11th meeting, on 14 June 2005, the Committee for Programme and Coordination considered issues related to the implementation of General Assembly resolution 58/269 of 23 December 2003.
The Controller made a statement and responded to questions.
Discussion
Delegations recalled resolution 58/269, in which the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to establish new procedures, on a trial basis, for the review of the biennial programme plan, the budget outline and the proposed programme budget.
In that resolution, the Assembly requested the Committee, in performing its programmatic role in the planning and budgeting process, to review the programmatic aspects of the new and/or revised mandates approved by the Assembly subsequent to the adoption of the biennial programme plan, as well as any differences that arise between the biennial programme plan and the programmatic aspects of the programme budget.
The Committee noted that the Secretary-General had indicated in his note on the proposed biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-2007 (A/59/806) that the only new mandate affecting the programme narratives of the approved biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-20075 (namely, the objectives of the Organization, expected accomplishments of the Secretariat and indicators of achievement) were related to safety and security.
Consequently, in accordance with established procedure, the Secretary-General submitted a new programme to be included in the biennial programme plan, namely, programme 27, safety and security (ibid.).
Views were expressed that the Committee should focus on the new programme for safety and security and not discuss the proposed programme budget, bearing in mind the need to observe the new procedures during the trial period.
Furthermore, it was noted that the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 would not be submitted to the Committee for its consideration.
The view was also expressed that the General Assembly had not amended the programmatic role of the Committee when it adopted the experiment.
In this regard, it was noted that the Committee should continue to consider the programmatic aspects of the proposed programme budget, in accordance with its terms of reference, the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation,6 and relevant resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the programmatic role of the Committee in the planning and budgetary process.
In this context, the view was expressed that the proposed programme budget had been introduced to the Committee in order to enable it to perform its programmatic role and undertake the review called for in paragraph 14 of General Assembly resolution 58/269.
Views were expressed that many of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session would have an impact on the programme narrative of the biennial programme plan.
It was pointed out, however, that at the time of its review of the biennial programme plan, the Assembly had benefited from the ongoing discussions in other committees of the General Assembly on related issues.
Some resolutions requested the Secretary-General to undertake additional work, and/or to deliver additional outputs or to change procedures, and those mandates have been duly reflected in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007.
However, there were no new mandates requiring modification of the approved objectives of the Organization, expected accomplishments of the Secretariat or the indicators of achievement, as approved by the General Assembly, with the exception of safety and security.
It was noted that a corrigendum to the biennial programme plan had been issued with respect to programme 24, Management and support services, to include a programme narrative for services to the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly and to the Committee for Programme and Coordination.7
Views were expressed that the overview sections of individual budget fascicles did not contain the same information presented in the overall orientation of each programme in the biennial programme plan.
In this connection, the Secretariat pointed out that the overview in the programme budget served a different purpose and was intended to highlight major resource movement and the focus of activities for the biennium, to provide a summary of the number of expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement and of the number of publications, to identify approximate resources for monitoring and evaluation and the level of extrabudgetary resources, and to indicate the distribution of resources of the budget by component.
These issues do not appear in the overall orientation for every programme in the biennial programme plan.
Views were expressed that the definition of programme narratives set out in paragraph 41 of the foreword and introduction to the programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 (see A/60/6 (Introduction)), only applied to the subprogrammes and not the programmes.
In this regard, it was noted that regulation 4.5 and rule 104.4 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation clearly define the type of programme information that should be set out in the narratives of programmes and subprogrammes.
It was acknowledged that, in implementing paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution 58/269, it might be difficult to ensure that the programme narratives of the biennial programme plan and proposed programme budget are identical.
Views were thus expressed that the Committee should inform the General Assembly about that difficulty and that it would be easier to ensure that the narratives of the subprogrammes are identical.
It was also felt that the Secretariat should be encouraged to make a greater effort to ensure that the narrative of each budget fascicle is similar to that of the related programme set out in the programme plan.
With respect to the inclusion in the proposed programme budget, but not in the biennial programme plan, of a component for executive direction and management, together with related objectives, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement, it was noted that the focus of the Committee's work was on programme, not managerial issues.
Views were expressed that logical frameworks for executive direction and management should be included in the next biennial programme plan.
Views were expressed that outputs should be terminated in accordance with regulation 5.6 and rule 105.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation and that the relevant intergovernmental bodies should approve such termination.
It was noted that a number of specialized intergovernmental bodies had reviewed the programmatic aspects of the proposed programme budget prior to the issuance of the budget fascicles.
Attention was also drawn to the fact that annex III to the foreword and introduction to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 (ibid.), which will be submitted to the General Assembly for consideration, provides a review of the identification of activities and outputs that have been completed or become obsolete, of marginal usefulness or ineffective, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/270 of 23 December 2003.
It was noted that not only had discontinued outputs been indicated in the proposed programme budget (i.e., those that were non-recurrent or had been completed, rationalized, consolidated or terminated by legislative authority), but that the status of delivery of outputs had also been reported in the biennial programme performance report, which is submitted to the General Assembly through the Committee.
In the programme performance report, information and the mandate for the changes are provided on outputs that have been added, deleted or modified subsequent to the submission of the Secretary-General's proposed programme budget.
It was noted that the General Assembly, in its resolution 58/269, had decided to review, with a view to taking a final decision at its sixty-second session, the format, content and duration of the strategic framework, including the necessity of maintaining part one, and that it had requested the Secretary-General to submit a report, through the Committee at its forty-seventh session, reviewing the experiences gained with the changes made in the planning and budgeting process.
It was noted that, in the meantime, the General Assembly, in paragraph 14 of its resolution 58/269, had requested the Committee to provide comments at its current session on the various aspects of the review process referred to with respect to the review of programme narratives of the proposed programme budget.
In this connection, the view was expressed that the mandates given to the Committee, as set out in its terms of reference, the regulations and rules of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation and relevant resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the programmatic role of the Committee in the planning and budgetary process, must be fully observed.
At the same time, it was noted that any apparent conflict between those mandates and current arrangements reflects the interim status of the new procedures and was not a question of non-compliance.
It was confirmed that the only new mandate affecting the programme narratives of the approved biennial programme plan, namely, the objectives of the Organization, expected accomplishments of the Secretariat and indicators of achievement, related to safety and security, as indicated by the Secretary-General in his note on the proposed biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-2007.
Views were expressed that the General Assembly should consider any further specific issues relating to the narratives of budget fascicles in the context of its review of the proposed programme budget for 2006-2007.
Concern was expressed that a number of sections of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 were not identical in the programmatic parts and had not been issued in time for consideration by the Committee in accordance with regulation 5.7 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation, and that since all the sections of the proposed programme budget had not been issued, they had not been exhaustively reviewed by the Committee.
While the efforts made by the Secretariat to implement paragraph 9 of resolution 58/269 were recognized, concern was expressed that there were some discrepancies between the programmatic aspects of the sections of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 and the relevant programmes of the biennial programme plan for the period 2006-2007.
Views were expressed that programmatic portions of the budget sections, i.e., the overview of the sections, the objectives of the Organization, the expected accomplishments of the Secretariat and the indicators of achievement in the subprogrammes, should be identical to the overall orientation of the respective programmes of the biennial programme plan.
Views were expressed that the programmatic aspects of the sections of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007, including the overview portions, should be identical to the respective programmes of the biennial programme plan for the period 2006-2007 and should be revised accordingly for consideration by the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly.
Views were expressed that in order for the Committee to perform its programmatic role in the planning and budgetary process, adequate time should be allocated within its programme of work in budget years to both formal and informal sessions.
Views were expressed that the General Assembly should approve the programme narrative of section 24, Protection of and assistance to refugees, of the proposed programme budget, subject to the following modifications:
(a) In paragraph 24.4, replace the second sentence with the following: “In this connection, the programme of work includes the implementation of the Agenda for Protection, adopted by Executive Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner at its fifty-third session, held at Geneva from 30 September to 4 October 2002 (A/57/12/Add.1, annex IV), as well as the actions approved by the Assembly in its resolution 58/153 on strengthening the capacity of UNHCR.”
(b) At the end of paragraph 24.2, add the following sentence: “Due attention will be paid to the particular needs and capacities of refugee women and elderly refugees and the special needs of refugee children and adolescents.”
Views were expressed that the General Assembly should approve the programme narrative of section 18, Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific, of the proposed programme budget, subject to the following modification:
In paragraph 18.4, for Millennium Development Goals 1, 3, 6, 7 and 8, read the Millennium Development Goals.
Views were expressed that the General Assembly should approve the programme narrative of section 4, Disarmament, of the proposed programme budget, subject to the following modification:
Replace the last sentence of paragraph 4.2 with the following sentences: “Weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, continue to be of primary concern to the Organization.
Conventional disarmament, especially with regard to major weapons systems, small arms and light weapons and land mines, has received growing attention from the international community over the past few years.”
Views were expressed that the General Assembly should approve the programme narrative of section 16, International drug control, crime prevention and criminal justice, of the proposed programme budget subject to the deletion from paragraph 16.3 of the sentence starting in line 7.
In this context, the decisions taken at the 13th session of the Commission on Sustainable Development, which followed the adoption of the biennial programme plan for the period 2006-2007, were recalled.
Bearing in mind that no amendments to the logical framework of subprogrammes 2, Monitoring the Habitat agenda, and 3, Regional and technical cooperation, of section 15, Human settlements, of the proposed programme budget are required, views were expressed that the Secretary-General should submit to the General Assembly proposals for the refinement of the outputs of subprogramme 3 to ensure that the United Nations Human Settlements Programme supports regional institutions, such as the African Ministerial Conference on Housing and Urban Development, and the enhanced framework of implementation.
Views were expressed that the General Assembly should approve the narrative of subprogramme 2, Services to the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly and to the Committee for Programme and Coordination, of section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, of the proposed programme budget, and that the Secretary-General should include the subprogramme in the revised biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-2007.
The difference between the programme narratives in sections 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, and 28E, Administration, Geneva, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 and programme 24, Management and support services, of the biennial programme plan for the period 2006-2007 was noted.
Views were expressed that the Secretary-General should ensure that the logical framework in table 28A.12 of the proposed programme budget is identical to the narrative approved in the biennial programme plan and is submitted to the General Assembly in the context of its consideration of the proposed programme budget.
Views were expressed that the Secretary-General should revise section 28E, Administration, Geneva, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 to reflect the indicator of achievement that was omitted from table 28E.10, and submit the revised budget section to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.
The inclusion of a new indicator of achievement in subprogramme 4, Meetings and publishing services (see table 2.19), under Conference Management, New York, of section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/275 of 23 December 2004, was noted.
Views were expressed that the General Assembly should adopt the revised programme narrative in section 2 of the proposed programme budget and programme 1, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management, of the biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-2007.
Views were expressed that the General Assembly should adopt the programme narrative of section 33, Safety and security, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 once it has adopted programme 27 of the biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-2007.
It was affirmed that the programme narratives of the subprogrammes of section 33 and programme 27 were identical.
Views were expressed that the attention of the General Assembly should be drawn to the revisions made to section 28D, Office of Central Support Services, of the proposed programme budget, as subprogramme 4, Support services, of programme 24, Management and support services, has been replaced by programme 27 of the biennial programme plan.
Views were expressed that the General Assembly should consider the programme narratives of the budget sections that were not introduced to the Committee on Programme and Coordination at its forty-fifth session.
Regret was expressed that the Secretariat had not fully complied with General Assembly resolution 58/269 when preparing the budget fascicles of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007, and in this regard, regret was also expressed that as a result, many difficulties had been faced during the consideration of the budget fascicles.
Views were expressed that table 28A.12 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 should be revised as follows:
Under expected accomplishment (a), the word “consistent” should be replaced by the words “fair and effective”.
Views were expressed that table 28E.5 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 should be revised as follows:
Under expected accomplishment (c), the word “consistent” should be replaced by the words “fair and effective”.
Views were expressed that table 28F.6 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 should be revised as follows:
Under expected accomplishment (b), the word “consistent” should be replaced by the words “fair and effective”.
Views were expressed that table 28G.5 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 should be revised as follows:
Under expected accomplishment (c), the word “consistent” should be replaced by the words “fair and effective”.
Views were expressed that section 33, Safety and security, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007, should be revised as follows:
(a) Paragraph 33.3: after the words “Department of Safety and Security”, insert the words “in full coordination with the host country law enforcement agencies”;
(b) Paragraph 33.3 (e): at the end of the paragraph, add the words “taking into account the international character of the Organization”;
(c) On page 12, under Subprogramme 1: at the end of the title “Security and safety coordination”, add the word “activities”;
(d) Paragraph 33.24 (d): at the end of the paragraph, insert the words “in full coordination with the host country law enforcement agencies”;
(e) Paragraph 33.24 (h): at the end of the paragraph, insert the words “in full coordination with the host country law enforcement agencies”;
(f) Table 33.15, indicator (a) (i): at the end of the indicator, insert the words “in full coordination with the host country law enforcement agencies”;
(g) Table 33.15, indicator (b) (i): at the end of the indicator insert the words “, in full coordination with the host country law enforcement agencies”.
Paragraphs 5 and 6 of General Assembly resolution 59/275 were recalled.
Views were expressed that the plan outline should be coordinated at the highest level of the Secretariat.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee recommended that the Secretary-General take all legislative mandates fully into account when preparing the strategic framework for the biennium 2008-2009 to be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session, through the Committee at its forty-sixth session.
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the narrative parts of sections 1 to 3, 5, 6, 8, 10 to 15, 17, 19 to 22, 25, 26, 29 and 30 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007, subject to the recommendations given below.
The Committee noted, inter alia, that in sections 4, 16, 18, 24 and 28, the programmatic narratives in the budget fascicles for the biennium 2006-2007, in particular the overview parts, were different from the overall orientation parts in the plan, and recommended that in its consideration of the proposed programme budget, the General Assembly take the necessary action to ensure that these narratives of the budget fascicles, including the overview parts, are identical to the respective programmes of the plan, including their overall orientation parts.
The Committee recommended that the Secretary-General be requested to ensure that the implementation of the overview parts of the budget sections for 2006-2007 be in full conformity with the overall orientation parts of the biennial programme plan for 2006-2007.
The Committee recalled that the biennial programme plan for the period 2006-2007 provides the policy framework for the preparation of the proposed programme budget.
The Committee welcomed the application of the results-based logical framework to the executive direction and management component in several budget sections, and requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals to the General Assembly, in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009, on expanding the logical framework to the above components in the remaining sections of the programme budget, where relevant, with a view to enhancing managerial responsibility for programme implementation.
The Committee recalled that the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 is only the second budget to include performance targets in the logical framework, which will enable managers to track progress towards the overall direction of their activities and enhance reporting on programme performance.
The Committee welcomed the refinements made to the logical framework and recognized that some aspects of the work carried out by the United Nations are less quantifiable than others.
The Committee also acknowledged that results-based budgeting is still at the early stages of implementation and that further improvements will be required to clarify to what extent the outputs contribute to the attainment of objectives and expected accomplishments.
The Committee further stressed the importance of assigning responsibility for the achievement of results to programme managers.
The Committee requested the Secretary-General to further develop and strengthen mechanisms to monitor, evaluate and measure the results and impact of programmes and activities.
The Committee noted that 3,019 outputs were proposed for termination during the biennium 2006-2007.
The Committee was informed that in some instances, intergovernmental bodies had been involved in the review of the programme of work for the upcoming biennium, which resulted in the discontinuation of several outputs.
The Committee welcomed the interaction between programme managers and relevant intergovernmental bodies, which may facilitate the consideration by the General Assembly of the programme of work.
The Committee furthermore noted that several resolutions and decisions had been adopted since the preparation and adoption of the biennial programme plan for the biennium 2006-2007.
The Committee was informed that the legislative mandates did not require any revision to the programme narratives of the subprogrammes of the relevant sections of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007.
The Committee was also informed that the Secretariat, if necessary, may revise the outputs of subprogrammes in order to ensure the implementation of legislative decisions that were approved after the preparation and adoption of the plan.
The Committee recommended that the Secretariat provide the General Assembly, in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007, with a list of outputs that may require either revision to or inclusion in the proposed programme budget due to legislative decisions taken by the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session.
The Committee was informed that, in accordance with rule 106.1 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation, additional outputs required by a legislative decision subsequent to the approval of the proposed programme budget will be reflected in the programme performance report for the biennium 2006-2007.
The Committee, in reviewing the implementation of paragraph 14 of General Assembly resolution 58/269, noted that the programmatic aspects of the narratives of the budget fascicles were not identical to the biennial programme plan.
The Committee recommended that in addition to the logical framework, the narratives of the overview parts of budget sections should be identical with respect to programmatic issues to the overall orientation parts of the biennial programme plan, while recognizing that additional budgetary information, where necessary, should be made available in separate paragraphs in the overview part.
The Committee recommended that in those budget sections containing parts on policymaking organs, executive direction and management and/or introduction to subprogrammes, unless the same information is already contained in the relevant biennial programme plan, such parts should be limited only to budgetary information and should not be expanded to include programmatic aspects.
The Committee furthermore noted that the programmatic narratives of the subprogrammes of budget fascicles were largely identical.
The Committee acknowledged that full implementation of paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution 58/269 should facilitate its consideration of the programmatic aspects of the budget fascicles in future.
The Committee also noted that the General Assembly had adopted several legislative mandates at its fifty-ninth session.
The Committee recommended that the Secretariat submit to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session a list of new and/or revised mandates approved by the Assembly subsequent to the adoption of the biennial programme plan.
The Committee recommended that in the next proposed programme budget, the Secretariat ensure the implementation of paragraph 12 of General Assembly resolution 58/269.
C. Evaluation
Evaluation of linkages between headquarters and field activities: a review of best practices for poverty eradication in the framework of the United Nations Millennium Declaration
At its 8th and 9th meetings, on 10 and 13 June 2005, the Committee considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on linkages between headquarters and field activities: a review of best practices for poverty eradication in the framework of the Millennium Declaration (E/AC.51/2005/2).
The representative of the Office of Internal Oversight Services introduced the report and responded to the questions raised during the Committee's consideration of the report.
A representative of the Regional Commissions New York Office also made a statement.
Discussion
The pilot thematic evaluation was welcomed as useful and timely given the upcoming High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly in September 2005.
It was noted that the goal of poverty eradication is of critical significance and an integral part of the work of the United Nations.
It was further noted that the report was a good example of how a thematic approach to evaluation could be useful.
Several delegations noted that the report provided a helpful and perceptive analysis of linkages between headquarters and field offices.
In particular, support was expressed for the conclusions of the Office of Internal Oversight Services that the complexity of current linkage structures was not conducive to effective and efficient collaboration between headquarters and the field and that, given its multifaceted nature, poverty must be tackled through a comprehensive, multisectoral and coordinated approach.
It was also generally agreed that strong linkages were crucial to such an approach.
It was also noted that information-sharing among agencies at the headquarters, regional and field levels, as well as between United Nations offices and Member States, was important for effective linkages.
In particular, the importance of better informing country offices about the relevant work of agencies with no field presence was stressed.
Additionally, the view was expressed that greater inter-agency coordination was needed for stronger linkages.
It was pointed out that enhanced collaboration between inter-agency coordinating bodies should also positively influence United Nations country teams and strengthen the resident coordinator system, and that proper intergovernmental oversight was needed for any efforts to enhance coordination among United Nations agencies.
Several delegations expressed concern that the report did not adequately address the issue of coordination between Member States and United Nations agencies.
The Office of Internal Oversight Services acknowledged the importance of such coordination but clarified that such an assessment was beyond the scope of the evaluation.
It was noted that poverty eradication and, specifically, the Millennium Declaration targets were the responsibility of national Governments, and therefore due attention should be given to the role of national Governments as the central stakeholders in headquarters/field linkages.
The point was made that synergies between field offices and national Governments should be created, and also that greater cohesion and interaction between the field and national Governments would minimize the risk of duplication and facilitate learning and the promotion of best practices.
It was further noted that the United Nations agenda should be harmonized with the needs and priorities of national Governments and that Member States drive their own development process.
It was generally agreed that enhanced headquarters/field linkages should ultimately strengthen the capacities of recipient Member States.
While broad support was expressed for the recommendations contained in the report, questions were raised about several of the recommendations regarding implementation, resource implications and impact on the work programmes of United Nations agencies.
It was suggested that the words “hunger and” be included before the word “poverty” in paragraph 72, recommendation 6 and paragraph 77 (b) of the Office of Internal Oversight Services report.
The views were also expressed that priority attention should be given to recommendations 6, 7 and 8, as well as to improving information technology networking between the field and United Nations Headquarters with a view to improving delivery results in the field.
With regard to recommendation 3, it was suggested that the United Nations Development Group be requested to develop specific and systemic measures to facilitate access by Member States at the country level to the relevant expertise and technical capacities of the regional commissions and other non-resident agencies, and to facilitate, at the request of the recipient country, the involvement of regional commissions in the preparation of common country assessments and the United Nations development assistance frameworks.
In this regard, the regional commissions should also strengthen their cooperation and coordination with the country teams for these purposes, in accordance with paragraph 76 of General Assembly resolution 59/250.
Support and appreciation were expressed for the role and activities of the regional commissions.
It was stressed that the regional commissions, through their regional perspective and outreach, could play an important role in linking the United Nations efforts for poverty eradication at the global and country levels.
The need was reaffirmed for the United Nations system, including through the resident coordinator system, to benefit from the expertise and capacities of the regional commissions and to facilitate access for Member States at the country level to those expertise and technical capacities, in particular on issues with cross-border, subregional and regional dimensions.
In this regard, it was emphasized that the perspective of the current United Nations frameworks at the country level should be broadened to incorporate cross-border, subregional and regional issues so as to ensure policy coherence at those levels.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee recommended approval of recommendations 1 to 9, subject to the provisions set out below.
The Committee recommended that the Secretary-General consider appropriate and balanced representation in the working group mentioned in recommendation 1 of the Office of Internal Oversight Services report and, in this context, further recommended that the Secretary-General take steps to enhance inter-agency coordination to fight hunger in the framework of the Millennium Declaration.
The Committee noted that the report did not treat in detail the issue of coordination between United Nations bodies and national Governments, which is of crucial importance in field activities.
It emphasized that in order to strengthen this coordination and, ultimately, linkages between headquarters and field activities, the United Nations programmes should be harmonized with the needs and priorities of national Governments.
The Committee recommended that the regional commissions and the country offices establish mechanisms for the regular exchange of information and knowledge-sharing in areas of mutual interest, in particular poverty-eradication activities.
The Committee urged the regional commissions to consider how to strengthen their websites as platforms for the exchange of regional best practices and lessons learned and encouraged the Regional Commissions New York Office to continue its efforts in disseminating and sharing interregional best practices and experiences, including through the use of a joint website for that purpose.
In-depth evaluation of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
At its 8th and 9th meetings, on 10 and 13 June 2005, the Committee considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) on the in-depth evaluation of the United Nations Human Settlement Programme (UN-Habitat) (E/AC.51/2005/3).
Representatives of the Office of Internal Oversight Services introduced the report and responded to the questions raised during the Committee's consideration of the report.
The representative of UN-Habitat made a statement concerning the report's findings and responded to questions.
Discussion
Support was expressed for the very important work conducted by UN-Habitat, particularly in implementing the Millennium Development Goals.
The Committee expressed satisfaction with the recommendations made by OIOS, noting the overall positive assessment of the Programme expressed in the report.
Some members noted the concern expressed in the report about the imbalance between earmarked and non-earmarked contributions, which lessens the ability of UN-Habitat to allocate resources according to priorities.
Additional information was requested on the comments of the intergovernmental body that reviewed the evaluation report.
In that regard, the importance of receiving contributions from the relevant intergovernmental body in order to facilitate the Committee's consideration of the relevant recommendations was reiterated.
However, given the importance of receiving such contributions from the intergovernmental body, members urged that future in-depth evaluation reports be submitted in advance of sessions of the Governing Council in order to facilitate the proper consideration of the evaluation reports by the intergovernmental body.
Support was expressed with the main finding of OIOS that UN-Habitat needs to sharpen its focus and narrow the scope of its activities.
Several delegations expressed the view that there was a need to increase the regular budget resources of UN-Habitat.
In that regard, concern was expressed on the negative impact that limited resources had in the implementation of the programme.
Some members noted with appreciation the deployment of UN-Habitat programme managers as a cost-effective means of integrating human settlements issues into the United Nations country programme.
Support was expressed for improving the coordination of fund-raising efforts and the need was highlighted for developing new financial rules and regulations by treating recommendation 8 (c) of OIOS as a separate recommendation.
Reservations were expressed on the adoption of recommendations 3 and 4 on mainstreaming housing rights and consolidating the two UN-Habitat flagship reports.
Concern was expressed with regard to the observation that there was a general lack of coordination of fund-raising efforts by UN-Habitat senior officials.
The explanation from the Secretariat was that a note verbale had been sent to Member States to fill the position of the Deputy Executive Director, who is responsible for fund-raising.
It was noted with satisfaction that the Executive Director was actively recruiting a Deputy Executive Director.
The view was expressed that in paragraph 60 (d) of the report, the use of the word “donors” was too general, since not all the donors are able to make multi-year core funding arrangements owing to their budgetary systems.
With regard to recommendation 3, many members supported the proposal that UN-Habitat should strengthen awareness of the progressive and full realization of access to adequate housing, including security of tenure and slum upgrading, within all activities of UN-Habitat.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly endorse recommendations 1, 2 and 5-13, taking into account the comments of the Committee in paragraphs 15 and 16 below.
The Committee emphasized the relevant role of the UN-Habitat Governing Council in implementing recommendation 1.
The Committee took note of the assurances of the Secretariat and the comments of OIOS that an agreed course of action was under way with respect to reviewing the future of the flagship publications.
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly endorse the other elements of recommendation 4.
The Committee recommended that recommendation 7 be replaced by the following:
“An independent strategic evaluation of the performance and impact of the UN-Habitat programme managers should be conducted before the end of 2006 for review by senior management at both UN-Habitat and the United Nations Development Programme and reported to the UN-Habitat Governing Council at its twenty-first session.”
The Committee recommended that the Financial Rules and Regulations of the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation be issued and adopted no later than the end of 2005.
The Committee commended UN-Habitat for the support and technical assistance it continues to provide to Member States, in particular for developing countries, and urged it to continue its efforts, in accordance with its mandate.
The Committee stressed the importance of ensuring that human settlements continue to be among the priorities of the global development agenda and recognized the importance of an effective UN-Habitat in the attainment of this objective.
The Committee recognized that UN-Habitat was one of the United Nations agencies that had headquarters in Africa and urged it to continue its efforts to support the work of regional bodies, in particular for the African Ministerial Conference on Housing and Urban Development.
Triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee at its forty-second session on the in-depth evaluation of legal affairs
At its 8th to 12th meetings, on 10, 13, 14 and 15 June 2005, the Committee considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) on the triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-second session on the in-depth evaluation of legal affairs (see E/AC.51/2005/5).
The representative of the Office of Internal Oversight Services introduced the report and responded to the questions raised during the Committee's consideration of it.
Discussion
Views were expressed welcoming the substantial implementation of the recommendations contained in the in-depth evaluation (E/AC.51/2002/5), as reported on in the triennial review.
Several delegations noted the importance of and expressed support for the work of the Office of Legal Affairs.
Reference was made to the issue raised in recommendation 9 on the responses from Governments to requests for information from United Nations organs.
It was noted that the annual debate in the Sixth Committee elicited detailed information from delegations and it was suggested that the summaries of those debates should be made more specific and used as a source of information.
Furthermore, increased effort should be made to ensure that reports were available on a timely basis.
The Office of Legal Affairs was requested to provide support to developing countries in terms of fellowships and to make provision for such fellowships in the biennial programme budget.
In terms of recommendations 1 and 5, a question was raised as to whether it was appropriate for the Legal Counsel to offer his views on the recommendations made by OIOS in the manner reflected in the report, while others were of the view that the comments offered by the Office of Legal Affairs were reasonable and were a matter of procedure.
Concern was expressed regarding recommendation 12 on the backlog and production of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs.
OIOS updated the information contained in the triennial review and clarified that the trust fund to be established in accordance with resolution 59/44 of 2 December 2004 had been set up in April 2005 and that arrangements were in place to reduce the backlog of at least some volumes of the Repertory by 2007.
Therefore, events had overtaken the issues raised in paragraphs 34 and 35 of the triennial review report.
In the light of this new information, OIOS has concluded that the Office of Legal Affairs has formulated and implemented a strategy to eliminate the backlog, and recommendation 12 is considered to have been implemented.
Conclusions and recommendations
Following the clarifications received during the formal session, the Committee recommended that the General Assembly take note of the findings of the triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at the forty-second session on the in-depth evaluation of legal affairs.
Triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee at its forty-second session on the in-depth evaluation of General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and Economic and Social Council support and coordination
At its 8th and 10th meetings, on 10 and 13 June 2005, the Committee considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) on the triennial review of the implementation of the recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-second session on the in-depth evaluation of General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and Economic and Social Council support and coordination (E/AC.51/2005/4).
The representative of OIOS introduced the report and responded to the questions raised during the Committee's consideration of it.
Discussion
Several delegations expressed regret about the lack of action by the relevant intergovernmental bodies.
The view was expressed that the Economic and Social Council and the Committee on Conferences were the competent bodies to review matters pertaining to the efficient functioning of the Council and the General Assembly.
The view was expressed that in future, such requests by the Committee for Programme and Coordination for intergovernmental review would need to be implemented in a timely and systematic manner.
Views were expressed that the OIOS recommendations had been overtaken by the Secretariat's actions, such as the efforts to improve the methods of work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies and the efforts by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management to improve the efficiency of its operations.
Delegations noted that there were ongoing discussions within the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly and its Main Committees on how to improve their respective methods of work and efficiency.
It was also noted that those bodies were the appropriate and competent bodies to develop reform-oriented recommendations.
Some delegations expressed support for the continuing relevance of some of the recommendations of OIOS.
For example, the timeliness of Council and Assembly documentation and the efficient use of conference services were still in need of improvement.
Regarding the issue of revitalization of the General Assembly, which was addressed in the report of OIOS on the in-depth evaluation of the subprogrammes on General Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs and Economic and Social Council support and coordination (see E/AC.51/2002/4, para.
85, recommendation 1 (a)), (see E/AC.51/2005/4, annex, sect.
B, recommendation 1 (a)), the view was expressed that there was a continuing need to streamline the agendas of the Second and Third Committees.
Reservations were expressed regarding recommendation 1 (b) in section A of the annex to the OIOS report, as the added value of the proposed additional documentation and the potential budget implications would require further clarification.
Reservations were also expressed regarding the second part of recommendation 1 (c) in section A of the annex to the report, as advance documentation of the anticipated outcome of discussions in the meetings could run contrary to the spirit of an open exchange of views.
Views were expressed that since the intergovernmental review of the OIOS recommendations requested by the Committee at its forty-second session had not taken place and as those recommendations had been overtaken by events, there was no need for the Committee to recommend follow-up action.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee emphasized the importance of the contribution of the relevant intergovernmental bodies, the General Assembly and its Main Committees.
The Committee reiterated its view that the relevant intergovernmental bodies, the Economic and Social Council and the Main Committees of the General Assembly should include in their programmes of work a review of the recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination relevant to their work and take appropriate action.
The Committee regretted that the relevant intergovernmental bodies have not reviewed the recommendations arising from its in-depth evaluation.
The Committee noted that consideration of the recommendations contained in the report was still ongoing.
Conference room paper on proposals for future thematic evaluations by the Office of Internal Oversight Services
At its 8th, 9th and 10th meetings, on 10, 13 and 15 June 2005, the Committee considered the conference room paper on proposals for future thematic evaluations by the Office of Internal Oversight Services (E/AC.51/2005/CRP.1).
The representative of the Office of Internal Oversight Services introduced the conference room paper and responded to the questions raised during the Committee's consideration of the report.
Discussion
Several delegations indicated that the topics presented in the conference room paper were timely and relevant.
The point was made that thematic evaluations were a positive addition to the agenda of the Committee.
It was also noted that the next thematic evaluation should result in a report with actionable conclusions and recommendations.
Concern was expressed regarding the context within which the conference room paper was presented, since there was no specific mandate for it.
In this regard, the Committee's decision to review the usefulness of the pilot thematic evaluation project at its forty-sixth session was recalled.
The Office of Internal Oversight Services clarified that, given the Committee's decision in 2002 (A/57/16, para.
255) that it should conduct one in-depth and one thematic evaluation each year, the conference room paper was presented only as a service to the Committee to facilitate its decision on a topic for the subsequent thematic evaluation.
Several delegations indicated that topics A, B and C all had merit.
Support was expressed for proposal A, on knowledge management networks.
The point was made that this topic would be a relevant follow-up to the first Office of Internal Oversight Services thematic evaluation on headquarters/field linkages and would logically follow as the next thematic evaluation.
It was also noted that it would be helpful if the evaluation included an assessment of information technology networks.
Several delegations expressed their preference for proposal C, on follow-up to major United Nations conferences and summits.
It was noted that this was an all-inclusive topic of relevance to the ongoing reform process in the United Nations, and in particular to the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.
It was also suggested that the evaluation could be more narrowly scoped by focusing on summits and conferences related to resource mobilization within the context of poverty eradication.
Support was also expressed for proposal B, on gender mainstreaming.
It was noted that this topic was timely and an important part of the work of the United Nations.
Some delegations reiterated the decision of the Committee to review the usefulness of thematic evaluation reports at its forty-sixth session.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee recommended the theme “Knowledge management networks in the pursuit of the goals of the Millennium Declaration” for the next thematic evaluation by the Office of Internal Oversight Services as a follow-up to the report presented at its forty-fifth session.
Chapter IV
Coordination questions
Annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2004/2005
At its 10th-12th meetings, from 13 to 15 June 2005, the Committee considered the annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB) for 2004/05 (E/2005/63).
The Director of CEB introduced the report and responded to queries raised during the Committee's consideration of it.
The report highlighted the issues addressed by CEB and its high-level committees in both the programme and management areas.
On the programme side, the main focus was on organizing and coordinating the contribution of the United Nations system to the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly to be held in September and the preparation of a system-wide report on the overall response by the system to the Millennium Declaration.
A CEB report entitled “One United Nations — catalyst for progress and change: how the Millennium Declaration is changing the way the United Nations system works” is expected to be launched at the 2005 session of the Economic and Social Council and presented to the General Assembly as a collective contribution of the system to the review process.
Other programme issues addressed by CEB included information and communication technology, with a focus on coherence in the policy advice the system provides to countries for development and as a tool for knowledge management to improve programme delivery; the prevention and management of armed conflict; curbing of transnational organized crime; inter-agency collaboration against hunger as requested by the Committee; system-wide support for Africa and the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD); and increasing the effectiveness and coherence of the United Nations system's activities at the country level.
In the management area, the report presented the issues dealt with by CEB, including staff security and safety, human resources management, financial resources management and United Nations system oversight.
Discussion
Delegations noted that the annual overview report of CEB provided a comprehensive and informative overview of major developments in inter-agency cooperation within the purview of CEB during 2004 and the early part of 2005.
It was also noted that the report continued the practice introduced in 2004 of including the outcome of the latest session of CEB (April 2005) to give Member States up-to-date information on work of the system.
Delegations also welcomed the information provided in annexes to the report on specific accomplishments of CEB and its high-level committees in the programme and management areas.
Delegations welcomed the priority given by CEB to elaborating the system's collective contribution to the comprehensive review of the implementation of the Millennium Declaration at the 2005 high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly.
Views were expressed encouraging CEB to develop more specific benchmarks against which the overall United Nations system efforts to facilitate the implementation of the Millennium Declaration, and the Millennium Development Goals in particular, can be assessed.
This was especially relevant to efforts by organizations of the system to assist African countries to reach the Millennium Development Goals.
The importance of information and communication technology for accelerating development in developing countries was emphasized by members of the Committee.
The renewed attention CEB is devoting to this issue, particularly in the context of bridging the digital divide and for enhancing inter-agency cooperation to improve programme delivery, was strongly supported by members of the Committee.
CEB was encouraged to continue to give priority attention to this issue in its future work.
With regard to preventing and managing conflict, views were expressed in support of the growing emphasis by the system of a prevention strategy and of addressing the root causes of conflicts.
Views were also expressed stressing the need for a comprehensive and balanced approach to prevention and for the system's analytical work to give attention to both domestic and external factors influencing conflict.
Delegations underscored the importance of harnessing the expertise and capacities that exist in the organizations of the system for conflict prevention.
In developing approaches to prevent and manage conflicts, it was suggested that the United Nations system should make greater use of facilitation and mediation.
Views were expressed requesting CEB to provide an update of its ongoing efforts in conflict prevention in the next annual overview report.
Views were expressed that any measure taken by CEB in that regard should be in full conformity with the relevant mandates.
Views were also expressed reaffirming the importance of inter-agency collaboration in curbing transnational organized crime.
Delegations welcomed the progress made by CEB in ensuring a coordinated approach by the system on this issue.
Some delegations invited CEB to give greater attention to illegal migration, illicit human trafficking and the recovery of illegally obtained assets by their countries of origin.
On inter-agency collaboration against hunger, appreciation was expressed for the information presented in the report on existing mechanisms to coordinate the fight against hunger.
While appreciating the coordination that was taking place between the food agencies — the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development and the World Food Programme — members of the Committee sought information on the needs of and the obstacles and problems encountered by the mechanisms in coordinating the fight against hunger.
Members of the Committee also requested information on the system in place for determining priorities in extending food aid.
Delegations took note of the ongoing efforts by the food organizations in the United Nations system, as well as those of the Secretary-General, to mobilize the resources required to meet immediate needs related to feeding the world's approximately 800 million people suffering from hunger and ultimately to eradicate poverty.
Delegations welcomed the high priority that CEB continued to attach to ensuring effective and coordinated system-wide support for the sustainable development of Africa, particularly for the New Partnership for Africa's Development.
Views were expressed in support of the efforts of CEB to scale up its assistance and, in particular, of its efforts to provide policy guidance to ensure that United Nations system support for NEPAD remained responsive to the needs of Africa.
Some members invited CEB to address the factors impeding a focused and coherent United Nations system approach to supporting Africa and NEPAD.
Views were expressed regarding the importance of ensuring that the system's support for Africa and NEPAD takes fully into account ongoing intergovernmental processes in order to harness resources in the most productive way.
Delegations welcomed the importance CEB attached to increasing the effectiveness and coherence of United Nations system activities at the country level.
Stressing the importance of this issue, CEB was called upon to ensure coordinated system-wide follow-up of General Assembly resolution 59/250 of 22 December 2004 on the triennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development.
On management issues, some delegations offered a number of observations, sought clarification and requested additional information on cost-sharing arrangements for field-related staff security; inter-agency mobility and the new inter-agency mobility accord; the Senior Management Network; a uniform code of conduct for the international civil service; accountability and transparency; Joint Inspection Unit reports and the collective response of the system; information and communication technology and bridging the digital divide; implementation of results-based management in the United Nations system; the United Nations system accounting standards; the impact of the changing relationship between regular and voluntary funding; and the harmonization of remuneration packages.
Several members of the Committee discussed the views of the executive heads of CEB on the issue of strengthening the international civil service and noted that that matter would be taken up by the General Assembly in the light of its decision 59/561 of 13 April 2005.
Members pointed out that CEB was not able to substantiate and produce arguments in support of its claim that the International Civil Service Commission should strive towards greater relevance and concrete and tangible results (E/2005/63, para.
It was also emphasized that CEB measures aimed at enhancing inter-agency mobility should be in conformity with the regulatory framework and policies in the field of human resources management set out by the governing bodies of United Nations system organizations.
The ongoing efforts at the level of CEB to ensure greater coordination among the organizations of the system in implementing the recommendations of oversight bodies, was noted.
Recalling the governance review requested by the General Assembly in its resolutions 57/278 A of 20 December 2002 and 59/264 of 23 December 2004, views were expressed urging CEB to include information on the status of the review in its next annual report.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee took note of the annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2004/05, subject to the observations set out below.
The Committee expressed support for the high priority CEB continued to attach to ensuring effective and coordinated United Nations system support for Africa and NEPAD and requested CEB to ensure that support for NEPAD remained a priority of the United Nations system.
It encouraged CEB member organizations to further align their priorities with those of NEPAD and to scale up their efforts in support of NEPAD.
The Committee requested CEB to provide an update on its further efforts to ensure effective and coordinated system-wide support for NEPAD in its next annual overview report.
The Committee underscored the importance of effective coordination of system-wide efforts against hunger.
It took note of the information on existing inter-agency mechanisms to coordinate the fight against hunger and poverty and recommended that CEB include in its next annual overview report information on the obstacles, problems and needs encountered by the inter-agency mechanisms.
The Committee also invited CEB to continue to monitor the effective coordination of system-wide efforts against hunger and poverty.
The Committee took note of the efforts of CEB to contribute to the system-wide capacity for conflict prevention, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the mandates of the CEB member organizations.
The Committee also recommended that the transfer of assets of illicit origin and returning such assets to the countries of origin, as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 59/242 of 22 December 2004, be added to the list of specific areas identified for joint work in the report.
The Committee took note of the Board's efforts to contribute to tackling the problem of transnational organized crime and its causes.
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly encourage the Secretary-General to take steps, in collaboration with relevant organizations, to improve the presentation of his report on the budgetary and financial situation of organizations of the United Nations system by providing, to the extent possible, information consistently on all contributions, including on both core funding and non-core funding, as well as a clear definition of regular funding and voluntary funding.
The Committee recalled its terms of reference and its role as the main subsidiary body of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council for planning, programming and coordination.
The Committee further recognized that it should reflect on its reporting on the CEB annual overview report to ensure that it provides inputs and recommendations that strengthen the coordination role of the Economic and Social Council.
The Committee also invited the Assembly and the Council to give due consideration to its recommendations on coordination.
The Committee recognized that in its future consideration of CEB reports, it should give more attention to the programmatic aspects of the report.
The Committee thus invited the CEB to expand its reporting on those aspects.
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to ensure that CEB, in developing common approaches to address the changing relationship between regular and voluntary funding in the various participating organizations of the CEB, continues to focus, inter alia, on measures to ensure that programme delivery corresponds to legislative mandates and that the impact on management and programmes of the changing relationship between regular and voluntary funding is brought to the attention of the relevant legislative bodies.
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly seek from CEB further elaboration of its view that the International Civil Service Commission should strive towards more relevant and concrete tangible results during the Assembly's consideration of the relevant agenda item.
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly review the new inter-organizational mobility accord at its sixty-first session under the agenda item entitled “Human resources management”.
New Partnership for Africa's Development
United Nations system support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development
At its 12th and 13th meetings, on 15 and 16 June 2005, the Committee considered the report of the Secretary-General on United Nations system support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) (E/AC.51/2005/6).
The Chief of the Policy Analysis and Monitoring Unit of the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa introduced the report and responded to questions raised during the Committee's consideration of it.
The Committee decided to convene an informal consultation on 17 June at which time it would examine the issues requiring further clarification.
Discussion
Much appreciation was expressed for the comprehensive and useful nature of the report.
There was acknowledgement of the impressive work done by the United Nations system agencies and organizations and the level of cooperation among the United Nations system entities.
Appreciation was also expressed for the fact that the United Nations system had organized its activities around the seven thematic clusters corresponding to the priorities of NEPAD.
It was noted that, while considerable progress had been achieved on both the African side and the side of the United Nations system, major challenges remained constraining the full implementation of the NEPAD programme, in particular the lack of adequate human and institutional capacity as well as financial resources.
There was much recognition of the role of NEPAD in terms of providing the framework for achieving the Millennium Development Goals in Africa.
Note was taken of the fact that many recent reports on Africa's progress in achieving the Millennium Development Goals have concluded that Africa is far from reaching the level of international support required to scale up and accelerate measures to achieve the Goals, eradicate hunger and poverty and achieve sustainable development and growth.
The linkage between development and peace was underlined.
It was emphasized that development was not possible without peace and that stability and security in Africa was not possible without addressing the socio-economic root causes of conflicts.
It was reiterated that the mobilization of financial resources was the key precondition to the implementation of NEPAD.
The delegations listed a number of crucial areas in which international support to Africa was urgently needed, including significant increases in development assistance, substantial debt reduction for the least developed countries and a successful conclusion of the Doha round of trade negotiations enabling the African countries to have more market access and on better terms.
In order to alleviate the financial capacity constraints facing the African countries, it was suggested that development funds should be established to provide the financial resources necessary for the implementation of NEPAD programmes in key sectors, such as agriculture, education, health and infrastructure development.
It was noted that international partners and the United Nations system should place more emphasis on resource mobilization for the implementation of programmes, building technical expertise for the development and management of programmes and strengthening the regional economic communities and the African Union.
While the work of the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa in support of NEPAD was welcomed, it was suggested that the Office should continue both to place greater emphasis on advocacy work with a view to mobilizing financial resources for Africa and to promote collaboration among headquarters department and agencies to provide a coordinated and integrated response to NEPAD.
Similarly, special emphasis was placed on the need to strengthen the consultation mechanism under the Economic Commission for Africa.
It was important for representatives from the Commission's headquarters and regional offices to participate in the regional consultations.
It was emphasized, as stated in the recent report of the Secretary-General's Advisory Panel on International Support for NEPAD, that the support of the United Nations system for NEPAD must yield results-based action.
In this connection, it was suggested that there was a need for the creation of a follow-up mechanism to assess progress made in the implementation of the recommendations and commitments made at various meetings and workshops.
The view was expressed that the report should have included more information on the continuing challenges and constraints faced by the United Nations system agencies in providing more support, in particular in the area of financial resource mobilization, as well as proposals on innovative measures that could be undertaken to address the challenges and constraints.
It was also suggested that the report could have been more forward-looking and could have provided information on plans for future activities, as well as on future coordination efforts.
Some delegations expressed regret at the lack of attention in the report to other communicable diseases besides HIV/AIDS, such as tuberculosis and malaria.
In response to a question regarding the lead agency for post-conflict recovery, it was clarified that the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations would be taking over the lead role for the peace and security component of the governance, peace and security cluster, while the United Nations Development Programme would retain the lead role in governance.
The Committee acknowledged the usefulness of the annex to the report.
In that connection, a number of clarifications were sought regarding the financial and staff resources devoted to Africa during the period 2002-2004, in particular concerning the apparent reduction of resources devoted to Africa in the case of certain entities or initiatives.
It was clarified that certain figures were expected to decrease owing to their nature, for example, the heavily indebted poor countries grants decrease as the loan amounts decrease.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee welcomed the report of the Secretary-General on United Nations system support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development (E/AC.51/2005/6) and noted the consensus agreement that institutional support by the organizations of the United Nations system for the implementation of NEPAD was a major form of assistance to African countries, the African Union, African subregional organizations and the secretariat of NEPAD.
The Committee acknowledged the importance of Africa's ownership and leadership of and growing international support for NEPAD as key to progress in its implementation.
The Committee endorsed the recommendations contained in paragraphs 78-80 of the report.
The Committee reiterated the central and critical role of the Special Adviser on Africa for the global coordination of support for NEPAD and the need for the United Nations system to cooperate fully with the Office of the Special Adviser towards the attainment of the objectives of the United Nations in relation to its support for NEPAD.
The Committee called upon the various components of the United Nations system to make greater efforts to work together to provide focused and coordinated support to NEPAD.
In that regard, the Committee recalled resolution 59/254 of 23 December 2004, in which the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to continue to take measures to strengthen the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa in order to enable it to effectively fulfil its mandate and to coordinate resource and capacity mobilization, institutional support and advocacy to enhance a coordinated and integrated response to the challenges facing Africa.
The Committee recommended that the Economic Commission for Africa and United Nations country offices be utilized more actively for the advocacy of NEPAD programmes to ensure broader understanding of and participation in the programmes by those who would benefit from it.
The Committee recommended that the NEPAD programme be communicated throughout the United Nations system as a whole and that civil society and other partnerships for development be involved in order to facilitate results-based action, which could unleash the potential of Africa.
234 The Committee encouraged the United Nations system to ensure an appropriate mix of representation from the global, regional, subregional and national levels within the coordination mechanism frameworks for NEPAD, cognizant of the beneficial effects of such practices on programme support.
The Committee welcomed the initiatives undertaken by the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to establish a committee to increase support for NEPAD and urged the other entities of the United Nations system to undertake similar efforts.
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly request the United Nations system to explore innovative approaches for funding the priorities and programmes of NEPAD.
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to report to the Committee at its forty-sixth session, and annually thereafter, on the progress, including problems, obstacles and challenges, as well as the goals of the United Nations system to be achieved in support of the New Partnership for Africa's Development.
Chapter V
Reports of the Joint Inspection Unit
Overview of the series of reports on managing for results in the United Nations system
At its 8th meeting, on 10 June 2005, the Committee for Programme and Coordination considered the overview of the series of reports on managing for results in the United Nations system (see A/59/617), which summarizes three reports of the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU): on the implementation of results-based management in the United Nations organizations (A/59/607): part I of the series; the delegation of authority and accountability (A/59/631): part II of the series; and managing performance and contracts (A/59/632): part III of the series, as well as the comments of the Secretary-General and those of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB) thereon (A/59/617/Add.1).
Inspector Even Fontaine Ortiz, in his capacity as Coordinator, introduced the overview and responded to questions raised during its consideration by the Committee.
A representative of the CEB secretariat introduced the report containing the comments of the Secretary-General and the CEB thereon.
Discussion
Delegations commended the inspectors for the quality and timely presentation of the series of reports on a crucial element of the United Nations system reform process.
Views were expressed on the assessed overview, in particular that it was comprehensive, concrete, action-oriented and reader-friendly.
Delegations stressed that the implementation of results-based management was not an event, but a process aimed at changing the managerial culture of the organizations, and that its length would depend on the commitment and support proffered by the legislative organs, the senior managers and by the staff at large in each organization.
Some members shared the views expressed by the inspectors that the process of planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation; the human resources management; and the information management systems were three mutually supporting pillars for a solid implementation of results-based management in the United Nations system, which reforms should be carried out in a coherent, holistic and integrated fashion.
Delegations also expressed agreement with the inspectors' view that while there was no single “road map” to results-based management, and that the specific nature, mandate, structure, size and constraints of each organization should dictate the concrete managerial choices, there were a wide range of similarities among the United Nations organizations, which offered a challenge and an opportunity to work out a common framework for the implementation of results-based management.
It was emphasized that that approach was crucial towards achieving the harmonization of the United Nations system management policies and practices.
Views were expressed calling upon the organizations to share the lessons learned and to disseminate the best practices in the implementation of results-based management with a view to strengthening the common system, while preventing undesirable duplication of efforts and waste of resources.
It was stressed that a culture of knowledge management should be actively developed to support results-based management.
To that end, the staff at all levels must be fully informed about the nature and the purposes of results-based management.
It was stated that the staff would receive the necessary training to enable it to implement this new management method.
Delegations did not concur with the view expressed by CEB that the lack of additional resources justified the slow pace of the introduction of results-based management, its fragmented implementation and the piecemeal approach to the taking of the management initiatives.
In that regard, views were expressed requesting the Secretariat to submit to it a statement of the alleged financial implications if the JIU-proposed benchmarking framework was adopted.
Conversely, the Committee was of the opinion that the introduction of results-based management should help the organizations streamline the administrative and management processes, thus releasing sufficient resources with which to undertake training and other activities required to implement results-based management.
Delegations noted that the efforts of the United Nations in managing for results had varied depending on the organizations and that the changeover to a results-based culture had been lengthy and difficult, and also noted that present policies and practices of human resources management required reforming if they were to be conducive to a genuinely results-based approach, with spending on human resources at about 80 per cent of total budgetary resources.
Views were presented expressing appreciation of the assurances given by Inspector Fontaine Ortiz that the Unit was actively considering the best ways and means to implement the directives given to the Unit for improving its effectiveness by the General Assembly in its resolution 59/267 of 23 December 2004.
Conclusions and recommendations
The Committee recommended that the General Assembly:
(a) Endorse the benchmarking framework proposed by the Joint Inspection Unit as a tool for the Secretary-General and the oversight bodies and for itself in order to measure the progress towards an effective implementation of results-based management in the United Nations;
(b) Request the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the United Nations Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to play a more active role in respect of harmonizing, within the benchmarking framework, the implementation of results-based management throughout the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, taking into account the special needs and specific character and mandate of each organization, and to report systematically thereon;
(c) Also request the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the United Nations Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to encourage relevant participating organizations to take the necessary steps to endorse the benchmarking framework as a tool for them, without prejudice to legislative action by those organizations;
(d) Request the Secretary-General to implement the recommendations for achieving the benchmarks suggested by the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular benchmarks with regard to accountability and performance management, in working on current management reform initiatives undertaken by the Secretary-General and, where appropriate, adopted by the General Assembly, and to report on the implementation thereof;
(e) Also request the Secretary-General to ensure that, as results-based management is implemented, the staff responsible for applying this broad management strategy are trained.
Chapter VI
Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate
At its 2nd, 4th, 6th and 7th meetings, on 6, 7 and 9 June 2005, the Committee considered agenda item 7, entitled “Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate”.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it a compilation of relevant extracts from the reports of the Committee on its thirty-eighth to forty-fourth sessions, as well as the various proposals put forward by delegations at its forty-fourth session.
The Committee held nine rounds of informal consultations and a number of “informal informal” consultations to consider proposals that had been put forward during informal consultations.
Discussion
Delegations recalled that in paragraph 18 of its resolution 58/269 of 23 December 2003 entitled “Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for further change”, the General Assembly had invited the Committee to submit, at its forty-fourth session, recommendations on improving its effectiveness.
Also recalled was paragraph 25 of Assembly resolution 59/275 of 23 December 2004 entitled “Programme planning”, in which the Assembly had welcomed the decision of the Committee to revert to the agenda item entitled “Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate”, as a matter of priority, at the beginning of its forty-fifth session.
It was pointed out that over the past years, there had been an interesting exchange of views on the working methods, but that no substantial negotiations on recommendations had been achieved.
The present session provided an opportunity to work on those issues in a results-oriented manner.
It was also stated that in light of the overall efforts to reform and streamline the bodies of the United Nations, the improvement of the working methods of the Committee should not be put aside.
Optimizing the fulfilment of the Committee's coordination function was emphasized.
The view was expressed that despite efforts made by delegations during the forty-fourth session, the Committee had not been able to fulfil its mandate owing to a lack of will among some member delegations to engage on this issue.
The main session of the Fifth Committee during the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly had provided a second opportunity to examine this issue but there had been no noticeable outcome.
During the course of the discussions, views were expressed that measures for improving the working methods of the Committee needed to be practical and realistic and cognizant of the different cycles of the Committee in the budget and off-budget years.
Delegates stressed the importance of the timely submission of documentation and the strict implementation of relevant resolutions on the issuance of documentation in accordance with the six-week rule so as to facilitate the preparatory and decision-making process of the Committee.
Views were expressed that in order to allow proper preparation by delegations, the consideration of reports that had not been issued by the time of the organizational session should be deferred.
Views were expressed on the importance of the role of the Bureau and it was proposed that the outgoing Bureau should meet with the incoming Bureau shortly after its term began to share its experiences and facilitate the preparations for the forthcoming session.
It was also pointed out that the Bureau should establish and enforce clear deadlines for the submission of draft proposals: they should be distributed to delegations at least 24 hours before an issue was taken up in informals.
It was pointed out that there was a need for more interactive discussion with programme managers, with the focus on existing mandates, particularly during the consideration of programme performance reports.
The Committee needed to have an interactive debate with programme managers when considering the plan outline of the strategic framework.
Views were also expressed regarding time limits for the presentations by the Secretariat.
It was also pointed out that programme managers who were not based at Headquarters should make their presentation through videoconferencing.
The view was expressed that it would be useful for the Committee to devote the first day of its session to informal briefings for members and observer delegations on the technical issues to be addressed by the Committee.
It was proposed that during budget years, the Committee should evaluate the programme narratives of the proposed programme budget, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/269, as well as reports on evaluation and reports of the Joint Inspection Unit.
In off-budget years, the Committee would consider, inter alia, the strategic framework and programme performance reports.
Views were also expressed that the formal discussions of the strategic framework should be scheduled in clusters corresponding to parts of the budget.
It was also proposed that the session should consist of two segments.
In the first segment, on coordination and evaluation, the Committee would produce concrete recommendations on how to improve system-wide coordination and programme performance and present them to the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly.
This segment would cover current agenda items on evaluation, the report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, and other coordination reports, and the reports of the Joint Inspection Unit.
In the second segment, on programme planning, the Committee would, in off-budget years, review the proposed strategic framework and present recommendations to the Assembly.
In budget years, the Committee would review the programmatic aspects of the new and/or revised mandates, as well as any differences that might have arisen between the biennial programme plan and the programmatic aspects of the proposed programme budget, according to Assembly resolution 58/269.
It was also proposed that, in order to enhance the Committee's role in evaluation, to afford more time for intergovernmental bodies to review evaluation reports and to devote more time to the strategic framework, evaluation reports should be considered during budget years, when the Committee would not be reviewing the strategic framework.
It was further pointed out that it was too early to take an informed decision on whether or not the session of the Committee during the budget years might be shortened without preventing it from performing its programmatic role in the planning and budgeting process, as reaffirmed in General Assembly resolutions 58/269 and 57/300 of 20 December 2002.
Consideration could be given to reverting to the resumed session during the off-budget year when the strategic framework was submitted to the Committee.
In this connection, it was proposed that the first session could concentrate on the strategic framework while the resumed session could consider the programme performance report and monitoring of the evaluation aspects.
Views were also expressed that in order to better reflect the Committee's mandates, the session should meet for two weeks during budget years and for four weeks during non-budget years.
The view was expressed that there was scope for improvements with respect to the format of the Committee report.
The view was expressed that the current “conclusions and recommendations” section should give overall direction to the Secretariat.
The discussion part of the various programmes should be retained to give a short historical record of the discussions.
Views were also expressed that the reports of the Committee should be prepared in a reader-friendly format, should be restricted to conclusions and recommendations, and should not contain a complete account of the discussion.
The Committee should concentrate on presenting agreed changes to objectives, expected accomplishments and indicators, as well as substantive recommendations to the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
On the question of observers, views were expressed that their participation should be welcomed inasmuch as it would enrich the deliberations of the Committee.
Views were also expressed that, in formal meetings, observers could be invited to present a statement or questions in writing.
Observer delegations would be invited to attend informal meetings but not encouraged to make interventions thereat.
It was also pointed out that the secretariat of the Committee should ensure that the recommendations of the Committee were communicated to the various departments of the Secretariat, following the adoption of the report of the Committee by the General Assembly.
Chapter VII
Provisional agenda for the forty-sixth session of the Committee
Note by the Secretariat
In pursuance of paragraph 2 (e) of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/41 and paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 34/50, the Committee shall submit to the Council and to the Assembly, for their review, the provisional agenda for its forty-sixth session, together with the required documentation.
In its decision 1983/163, the Economic and Social Council requested the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of intergovernmental and expert bodies, before decisions were adopted, any request for documentation that exceeded the ability of the Secretariat to prepare and process on time and within its approved resources, and to draw the attention of intergovernmental bodies to areas where duplication of documentation was likely to occur and/or where opportunities for integrating or consolidating documents that dealt with related or similar themes might exist, with a view to rationalizing documentation.
The draft provisional agenda for the forty-sixth session of the Committee, as set out below, has been prepared on the basis of existing legislative authority and in the light of recommendations adopted by the Committee.
Provisional agenda for the forty-sixth session of the Committee
Election of officers.
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work.
Programme questions:
(a) Programme planning;
Documentation
Report of the Secretary-General on the proposed strategic framework for the period 2008-2009: part A, plan outline, and part B, biennial programme plan (para.
5 of General Assembly resolution 59/275)
(b) Programme performance;
Documentation
Report of the Secretary-General on programme performance for the biennium 2004-2005
(c) Evaluation.
Strengthening the role of evaluation findings in programme design, delivery and policy directives
Documentation
Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the role of evaluation findings in programme design, delivery and policy directives
Thematic evaluation
Documentation
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the thematic evaluation on “Knowledge management networks in the pursuit of the goals of the Millennium Declaration” (E/AC.51/2005/L.4/Add.9)
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the usefulness of the pilot evaluation (para.
22 of General Assembly resolution 59/275)
In-depth evaluation
Documentation
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on an in-depth evaluation on political affairs (para.
22 of General Assembly resolution 59/275)
Triennial review
Documentation
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the triennial review of the implementation made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-third session on the in-depth evaluation of the programme on the law of the sea and ocean affairs (para.
4 of General Assembly resolution 58/268)
Coordination questions:
(a) Report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination;
Documentation
Annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2005/06
(b) New Partnership for Africa's Development.
Documentation
Report of the Secretary-General on the progress, including problems, obstacles and challenges, as well as the goals of the United Nations system to be achieved in support of the New Partnership for Africa's Development (para.
25 of E/AC.51/2005/L.4/Add.11)
Report(s) of the Joint Inspection Unit.
Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate.
Provisional agenda for the forty-seventh session.
Adoption of the report of the Committee on its forty-sixth session.
Notes
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/59/16), para.
2 Ibid., Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/51/6).
3 Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 6 and corrigendum (A/57/6 and Corr.1).
4 Ibid., Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (A/58/7 and Corr.1), para.
5 Ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/59/6/Rev.1).
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/59/6/Rev.1/Corr.1).
Annex I
Agenda for the forty-fifth session of the Committee
Election of officers.
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work.
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
Programme questions:
(a) Programme planning;
(b) Proposed programme budget for the period 2006-2007;a
(c) Evaluation.
Coordination questions:
(a) Report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination;
(b) New Partnership for Africa's Development.
Report(s) of the Joint Inspection Unit.
Improving the working methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination within the framework of its mandate.
Provisional agenda for the forty-sixth session.
Adoption of the report of the Committee on its forty-fifth session.
a In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/269.
Annex II
List of documents before the Committee at its forty-fifth session
A/59/87 Report of the Secretary-General on priority-setting
A/59/806 Note by the Secretary-General transmitting proposed programme 27, Safety and security, of the biennial programme plan and priorities for the period 2006-2007
A/60/70 Report of the Secretary-General on the progress and impact assessment of management improvement measures
A/60/73a Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the strengthening and monitoring of programme performance and evaluation
E/2005/63 Annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2004/05
E/AC.51/2005/1 Annotated provisional agenda
E/AC.51/2005/2 Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the evaluation of linkages between headquarters and field activities: a review of best practices for poverty eradication in the framework of the United Nations Millennium Declaration
E/AC.51/2005/3 Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the in-depth evaluation of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)
E/AC.51/2005/4 Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the triennial review of the implementation of recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-second session on the in-depth evaluation of General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and Economic and Social Council support and coordination
E/AC.51/2005/5 Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the triennial review of the implementation of recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty- second session on the in-depth evaluation of legal affairs
E/AC.51/2005/6 Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations system support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development
E/AC.51/2005/L.1 Note by the Secretariat on the status of documentation and and Rev.1 for the forty-fifth session
a Provided for background information.
E/AC.51/2005/L.2 Note by the Secretariat on the reports of the Joint Inspection Unit
E/AC.51/2005/L.3 Note by the Secretariat containing the provisional agenda and documentation requirements for the forty-sixth session of the Committee
E/AC.51/2005/L.4 Draft report of the Committee on its forty-fifth session and Add.1-13
E/AC.51/2005/CRP.1 Conference room paper on proposals for future thematic evaluation by the Office of Internal Oversight Services
E/AC.51/2005/INF.1 List of delegations
iv
iii