# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Burma should not receive any better treatment from the international community than South Africa and Chile did back in the Eighties.
If it does, then we are using double standards.
Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi should at long last receive an effective response to her peaceful protest.
What would she otherwise gain from a Nobel Prize and Sakharov Prize if she does not actually receive support in order to free herself and her country from this terrible plight?
Football: "Euro 2000" and preventing hooliganism
Mr President, I must declare an interest because I am a Class I soccer referee and very active in that and have been involved in football at many levels for 18 years.
This resolution looks at the security and safety arrangements ahead of Euro 2000 so that decent football-loving supporters from across Europe can go to, watch and come away from football games this summer without fear or concern for their safety: a fairly apt thing to call for considering the recent events in Copenhagen.
Most Members will find this motion uncontentious.
However, I do understand that there are some queries about the question of the suitability of the Charleroi stadium and its ability to safely host the England versus Germany game on 17 June.
These I will tackle now because I believe these points are what people want to hear about.
I thank the BBC Watchdog Programme for providing me with details of the findings of a renowned British sports stadia expert, Dr Jim Dickey.
He found, after just a brief examination of the temporary structure above the north stand in Charleroi, that there were too many seats in the rows, the stand is too steep, the safety barriers are too low, the exits from the stand are too narrow and the stairways at the back of the stand are too wide.
This stand, like all the others, will be full to capacity on 17 June.
Meanwhile, a few miles up the road, the King Baudouin stadium, Belgium's national stadium, and now probably one of the safest stadia in all of Europe, will lie empty that day.
I understand the regional pride of many members from Belgium and I do not question that much time is being spent by the organisers of Euro 2000 looking into the safety and security aspects of the competition.
But surely, common sense should prevail and the future of this particular fixture at its current venue should be actively re-examined.
I do hope that Members will support this motion, because this is something we can actually change for the better.
Why not look at an event beforehand and not worry about the consequences of the bad actions of a few violent people after such a football event.
Mr President, I hope there will be a great football match on 17 June between England and Germany.
Most people are looking forward to a good match and hope that it will be safe.
But, unfortunately, that is not the view of everybody.
The German police anti-hooligan task force has said that it is pretty confident there will be hooligans there.
I cannot say anything about German hooligans but I can talk about English football hooligans - I cannot say 'fans' and even the word 'hooligan' is not strong enough for them.
There is a group of people who very definitely are planning to be there.
If you doubt me, just look at the press photographs of the problems that occurred in Copenhagen last night.
As well as the problems my colleague referred to that could occur inside the stadium at Charleroi, there is a serious problem that may occur in the streets around that stadium.
The head of the Belgian Police Federation has said that he is concerned.
We are saying now to the Belgian authorities and the European football authorities that they should choose the option of a safer ground that is available elsewhere in Belgium, and the stadium in Brussels has been cited.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, after discussing all these terrible events in the world, it is certainly refreshing to consider other problems even though, on reflection, these also involve images which cannot be tolerated.
I do not believe, however, that the motion before us deals with the problem correctly.
For example, paragraph 2 of the motion is wrong.
In this paragraph Parliament expresses its concern about the fact that the Charleroi stadium, which is to host several games, in particular the England versus Germany match, does not meet the relevant Belgian safety standards.
This is wrong for several reasons.
The first is that the organisers of any game in Belgium and the promoters of any stadium must sign a public-law agreement with the municipality in which the stadium is situated.
This agreement engages the personal responsibility of the burgomaster.
Our fellow Member has spoken of regional pride.
Belgians are aware of the good and bad sides of regional pride and, as a result, the use of a stadium requires not only the signature of the burgomaster but also that of the Minister of the Interior.
It is therefore completely wrong to talk of regional rivalries.
Furthermore, everyone knows or should know that it is not the inhabitants of Charleroi who chose this game any more than the others.
Finally, in the context of Euro 2000, there is an additional requirement that the stadium must be approved by the European Union and UEFA.
For all the stadiums which have been converted to accommodate an adequate number of visitors, UEFA has not only given its final authorisation to the process but has also been involved in the practical organisation of the stadium reviews.
I know something about this as I have worked, in my capacity as burgomaster of the town of Liege, on the preparation of a similar stadium.
To conclude, I regret to say that our colleagues are using arguments which are inaccurate and which can therefore only lead to wrong conclusions.
I am not the only one to think this as Mr Desama would have said the same if he had been able to speak.
Our Dutch colleague, Mr van den Berg, also agrees as he asked me to say that in this case he has witnessed, in addition to a responsible attitude from the Belgians,...
... very close cooperation with the Dutch government and it started at the very beginning and we extended this cooperation with France on account of the lessons of the World Cup and a host of other countries, 14, I believe, including the United Kingdom, of course, because we wanted to have contacts with the countries which might send teams to Belgium.
Mr President, I will conclude by saying that the third and last point is that I think Parliament should make rules and not bother about taking chances.
Are we going to deal tomorrow or next week with the trains leaving Paddington Station?
Mr President, there are a number of advantages to this text.
Firstly, it gives us the opportunity to reiterate that we all condemn hooliganism and that we all obviously want to fight this phenomenon to the best of our ability.
I must also point out, however, that, for two years now, in both the Netherlands and Belgium, the sporting, political and police authorities have been preparing in a professional manner for Euro 2000 and, in practical terms, huge investments have been made.
Despite that, is there still a risk?
Of course, but then there is always a risk.
When faced with such a phenomenon, you can never say that nothing will happen.
However, I must say very sportingly to our British colleague that this does not justify an event of this type being used from the outset to incite prejudice.
It does not justify the attempt to spread incorrect information in official European Parliament documents either.
Paragraph 2, as indicated by Mr Dehousse, is incorrect.
The Belgian authorities have given authorisation for the Charleroi stadium to be used.
Paragraph 3, which indicates that the King Baudouin stadium in Brussels might be used, is wrong.
No authority and no official has indicated this.
We must therefore be reasonable and certainly not adopt texts like this.
Finally, our fellow member has cited information which he was delighted to indicate was given to him by the BBC.
I should like to mention something which was said on the BBC by someone who is not a football referee like you but who is the coach of the England team.
What did Mr Keegan say - I am nearly finished, Mr President - during his visit to Charleroi?
He said that it is a suitable stadium for a high-level match.
He even said that this stadium differs very little from a large number of stadia in England.
So, be sporting!
As a referee, Mr Heaton-Harris, you have one viewpoint but I prefer that of Mr Kevin Keegan who seems to me to be better qualified.
Therefore, please withdraw your motion.
Mr President, there is no question in my mind that we all want to see the eradication of hooliganism in football at a European level and globally.
However, we must be careful not to do so in a manner that would restrict the enjoyment of the real supporters.
The issue must, therefore, be discussed at a European level, and we should guard against becoming embroiled in local discussions on the capacity and safety of specific stadiums, wherever they might be.
We must ask ourselves why measures taken in the past have repeatedly failed to create a culture of enjoyment in football for everybody.
I welcome the dialogue under way now between the Commission and sports and football clubs on how matters could improve.
The people who run the game are the people who, through constructive dialogue, will eventually be able to find answers to the blight of hooliganism and, it must be said, racism affecting this most popular of all sports.
Mr President, we must take these issues of hooliganism seriously.
We know now that there are tens of millions of people who are passionate about this sport and that, since the World Cup was won by France, they have been impatiently awaiting Euro 2000.
Football has become a sport of the masses and we must think about the safety of our children, our little brothers and the youngsters who frequent the stadiums.
We cannot therefore just say that there are risks and there will always be risks.
We must try to counter this phenomenon of hooliganism to the best of our ability.
I say this because we cannot allow the good image of genuine supporters to be tarnished by the actions of a few violent extremists who use these major gatherings as a pretext for carrying out unacceptable acts.
The motion is good in that it indicates that adequate safety measures must be taken.
During the last World Cup you will remember that hooligans committed very serious acts of violence.
One in particular involved an attack on a police officer who was in a coma for a long time and who is now paralysed for life.
All this is not inevitable and we must find the means, for example, of punishing hooligans in the countries of the European Union in which they commit their offences.
In this respect I believe there to have been a recent example in France which is very important.
For years, under the Nazi banner, French hooligans monopolised a stand at the Parc des Princes in Paris.
They took advantage of matches to vent their hatred, chant Nazi slogans and chase blacks and Arabs on leaving the ground.
The Paris St. Germain club allowed this to happen and even ended up blocking access to the stand in question for any dark skinned person on the pretext of safety.
Following a complaint from the French association, SOS-Racisme, and faced with the threat of prosecution, the club undertook to end this behaviour and to no longer allow the hooligans into the stadium by strictly screening people as they enter.
Before every match, right to the end of the season, Paris St. Germain now shows an anti-racist video clip which celebrates the values of friendship and brotherhood and the pleasures of the sport.
This proves that action can be taken and that violence is not inevitable.
I truly believe that, when you think about what football has become, with tens of thousands of youngsters in these stadia, this shows that we really must try to be careful and not take these matters lightly.
Mr President, the PPE-DE does not support the resolution of the British delegates and has announced that it is to withdraw it later on, not because we would not want to condemn the increasing violence as a result of football matches, but because the resolution is too restrictive and insubstantial as it stands and, to that extent, does not belong in this Chamber.
Surely it is not up to us to get involved in the politics of one specific match at a specific venue and make technical statements about the suitability of one football stadium for one Euro 2000 match?
It would have been much better to point out - and I would like to do so on behalf of many PPE-DE colleagues - that, first of all, safety is an essential good over which extreme care is to be taken and for which many efforts are being made with regard to Euro 2000.
Secondly, all those responsible for safety at Euro 2000 are called on to operate in an extremely preventive manner.
Thirdly, the police forces of all participating countries must be encouraged to negotiate obstacles which would hinder extensive collaboration.
Fourthly, we would like to call on all those involved - organisers, players and supporters - to observe fair play.
It is unfortunate that this resolution led to a match between Belgium and England, first within the PPE-DE and later on in this Chamber, too.
I do hope that this match finishes in a sportsmanlike way and I hope that the Belgians will not just win here but also a number of matches during Euro 2000.
Mr President, hooliganism is not a borderline phenomenon but clearly takes the form of a subculture and is, as such, difficult to control.
In my opinion, zero tolerance is the only way to systematically tackle any infringement and efficiently penalise any breach.
The content of the current resolution overlooks the causes of hooliganism, whether or not consciously.
It is clear that the initiators of the resolution are more concerned with slating the organisation of Euro 2000.
The Liberals, however, refuse to play this game.
We can appreciate the enormous efforts which the governments of the organising countries have made in order to make Euro 2000 run as smoothly as possible.
All we want to do on the eve of Euro 2000 is to call on each and every one who bears responsibility to exercise the greatest possible alertness so as to reach the set goal, namely to turn Euro 2000 into a party for hundreds of thousands of spectators and millions of viewers, a party which should help us project a positive European image.
Mr President, we are unable to support the submitted resolution.
I was in favour of discussing the topic of hooliganism but this resolution can at best be described as agenda pollution.
This Parliament should not be discussing safety during one particular Euro 2000 match under pressure from what I assume is a portion of British public opinion.
It is also an insult to - in this case - the Belgian organisers of this game and the international authorities involved.
This is a great pity because extensive discussions can be held about the fight against hooliganism itself.
In addition, we continue to learn important lessons, such as for example, how we should really guide the fans?
How can we better educate club managers and organisers of games?
Attention should also be given to the so-called 'second opinion' which is now being applied, by means of which a group outside the organisation analyses the measures taken and suggests improvements.
Mr President, hooligans have managed to spoil the fun of the real fans too often.
It will be different at Euro 2000, as this will be a football party for everyone.
Mr President, I will begin in the Philippines and end, such is the reach and range of the European Parliament, with football.
The Commission shares the honourable Members' concern for the health and safety of the hostages in Jolo and Basilan.
We strongly condemn such terrorist actions.
We were, of course, fully associated with the decision to send the EU High Representative, Javier Solana, to the Philippines.
Mr Solana was sent to convey personally to the Philippine government the European Union' s message concerning the safety of the hostages.
He received assurances from the government of the Philippines that military force would not be used to liberate them.
We are following events in Mindanao and the neighbouring islands closely.
We are concerned at the escalation of political violence that has taken place after the suspension of the peace negotiations between the government of the Philippines and various armed groups.
We believe that only an early resumption of peace negotiations, as requested by the leaders of civil society and of religious groups, offers prospects for a lasting improvement of the situation in Mindanao.
I should wish to add one final point about the 21 hostages - seven of them are European Union citizens.
Obviously, we all hope for their early release.
Our thoughts are, I am sure, with their families.
I hope, too, that we will receive early news about the welfare of the journalists who went to cover the story and have subsequently gone missing.
I hope that their whereabouts will soon be discovered.
Moving on to Equatorial Guinea.
We have been closely monitoring the human rights situation there for several years.
We share the concerns of the European Parliament about the local elections there.
Those concerns were reflected in the presidency declaration at the beginning of May.
During a recent mission by the Commission services, the issues that Parliament is addressing were raised directly with the President.
An official request for an electoral monitoring mission was sent on 2 May by the Equatorial Guinea government to Commissioner Nielson.
An answer containing detailed reasons for the refusal is being sent by the Commission to President Obiang.
The request from the government of Guinea-Bissau arrived very late and, in keeping with our guidelines, electoral observation missions should be prepared at an early stage in the electoral process so that we can ensure that the process is accurate and fair.
It is relevant that the opposition parties in Equatorial Guinea have contested the electoral lists and have already decided to boycott the ballot.
We therefore consider that, at this stage, the presence of international observers would not only fail to improve the quality and the transparency of the local elections, there is also a very real risk that this mission could be misused by local authorities as a way to legitimise an unsatisfactory process.
However, we intend to involve ourselves in promoting the process of democratisation in Equatorial Guinea.
On Iran, the Commission fully shares Parliament' s concern over the lack of freedom of expression there.
In the comprehensive dialogue between the European Union and Iran, questions regarding human rights, including press freedom, are regularly raised by the Commission.
The Iranian authorities are well aware of the importance we attach to these issues.
Clearly the present position is a very delicate one: the opponents of reform have used their control of the judiciary and of the security forces to intimidate intellectuals and to ban reformist papers.
The current trial of the 13 Jews on charges of espionage is also very disturbing.
The reformists have remained calm, and so should we, hoping that the convening of parliament will shortly help improve the situation.
I turn to Burma.
We deplore the continued violation of human rights by the Burmese military regime.
In particular, we deplore the continued extra-judicial killings, the widespread imposition of forced labour and the forced displacement of local populations, as well as the repression of political opponents and the prevention of the free functioning of legitimate political parties.
This includes the restrictions on the freedom of movement of Aung San Suu Kyi and other members of the National League for Democracy and the routine practice of arbitrary arrests.
We have strongly supported the EU common position on Burma and the decision of the April 2000 General Affairs Council to strengthen that common position.
We use every opportunity to press our Asian partners to urge, what is called - with a touch of George Orwell - the "State Peace and Development Council" to enter into a substantial dialogue with the democratically elected representatives and the ethnic minorities with a view to arriving at a mutually agreed internal solution to the problems of Burma and to respect for international human rights standards there.
Lastly, on football hooliganism: the responsibility for ensuring adequate safety for spectators and players during the Euro 2000 matches lies with the relevant national authorities and the relevant football associations.
I just wish to make two additional points.
Firstly, we want Parliament to recall that, last June, the Justice and Home Affairs Council requested Member States to step up cooperation in order to prevent and control violence and disturbances in connection with international football matches.
At the same time a handbook was made available with examples of working methods to police forces.
Secondly, the Community' s programme for police and customs cooperation finances a project prepared between the police authorities of the Netherlands and Belgium in which police forces from other Member States participate.
This aims at drawing lessons from the organisation of Euro 2000 in order to improve, when necessary, the organisations of future similar events.
I would just like to add one point.
I very much hope that Euro 2000 is a great success.
However, I hope with equal fervour that the games during Euro 2000 are a great deal better than the one I watched on television last night.
The debate is closed.
The vote will be taken at 6 p.m.
Mr President, on a point of order.
I will be very brief but I rise on a matter which is dear to the hearts of most Members here.
On a number of occasions this week the Members bar has had in it visitors from outside Parliament and, actually, just members of the public.
I know a number of Members during the week have been unable to get any food.
Could we have some clarification from the Quaestors so that we can have a Members bar?
We have a Members bar in Brussels.
I am not against taking one or two members of staff or whoever it might be into the bar, but to bring visiting groups of 20 or more into it is wrong.
I hope we can have some clarification.
Thank you, Mr Sturdy.
We will refer that to the College of Quaestors, as you requested.
Mr President, I understand that we are to vote on the last two resolutions, concerning Guatemala and the non-proliferation agreement, without a debate.
I am not going to object to that, but I would note the anomaly in Parliament being able to devote half an hour' s discussion to football hooliganism - and I am nonetheless a great football enthusiast - but not having a spare minute to discuss the biggest form of hooliganism we have, namely the presence of nuclear weapons in the world.
Your point is well made.
The decision was taken this morning that we would vote at 6 p.m. and that the urgencies not reached would be voted on even though they were not debated.
The matter of football hooliganism was under the human rights matters.
That debate has been concluded.
So we have finished that whole section.
I do not want lots of debates.
We have a lot of voting to get through tonight.
Mr President, I quite understand that you want to avoid a long debate now, but I do not think it was clear when we decided on this this morning that the urgencieswould simply go by the board.
If that had been the case, some Members might have voted differently.
This House should certainly not get into the habit of letting subjects which have been on the agenda since the beginning of the week go by the board.
We were going to discuss Guatemala.
MPs from Guatemala have been with us the whole week, and we are trying to convince them to improve their democracy and their respect for human rights.
I do not think we will be setting a very good example if we then fail to even discuss this issue!
I would just point out to you Rule 50, paragraph 6: "The President and political group chairmen may decide that that the motion for a resolution shall be put to the vote without debate" .
That was the rule under which this practice has been established.
I agree with you that it should not become a precedent.
Let us move forward now to the vote.
Mr President, I rise to make a point about the vote: it would be quite possible to challenge this vote either because of non-observance of the 24-hour deadline, or, possibly, because of the quorum position.
I do not want to do this, but I would like to ask Mrs Buitenweg and her friends to call a truce tomorrow and to refrain from their sabotage tactics in this House!
Mr President, I rise to make a point of order along exactly the same lines as my fellow Member.
I regret that Mrs Buitenweg has involved herself in sabotage tactics and I would like to respond to the repeated claims we have heard from Mrs Buitenweg, Mrs Van Lancker and Mr Howitt, who are accusing others of sabotage, when, in fact, it has been Mrs Buitenweg herself who has been at the forefront of the action to sabotage the functioning of this Chamber.
Mr President, on a point of order.
I should like to move that we proceed to a vote straight away.
We had the debate on this this morning, we made our decision, let us just get on with it.
Vote
Mr President, people are different, yet of equal value.
In our opinion, human society should be based on solidarity, human dignity and equality.
Everyone is entitled to this.
Unfortunately, there is a long tradition of unequal treatment, first and foremost by people who have the power to make other people dependent on them.
They can treat those who are dependent on them unequally by rewarding or punishing them for features which are out of their control.
This was not only done by slave owners and colonial military, but has also been the tactic of employers and those with political authority.
There is also discrimination if the basic requirements of people are made unnecessarily scarce.
If everyone has to fight for a job, a place in education or house, a battle of interests will ensue.
People then start to think along the lines of: if the others were not here, there would be more for us.
From a racist angle, the question then simply is: who can have those scarce provisions and who cannot?
Anyone belonging to a different group can be seen as an unwanted competitor on the job or housing market.
In Western Europe, employers and the police are still ruled by prejudice and a tendency to treat people unequally.
In addition, there are groups who seek political gain from scarcity and short-sightedness by setting people against each other.
The fact that in the recently formed new states of Eastern Europe, the language of workers and farmers has become the language of the state and education, forms part of the necessary democratisation process but should not go hand in hand with discriminating against, and even driving out, minorities living within the particular state' s territory.
Everyone is entitled to protection from those seeking political and economic gain from discrimination.
Vital tools for achieving this are suffrage for newcomers, humane treatment of political refugees, equal treatment of all residents of the European Union, irrespective of their nationality, and the reversal of the burden of proof in legal cases.
The Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left has opted in favour of maximum reinforcement of the position of the victims of discrimination and against all attempts to prejudice this protection.
Mr President, I voted for the proposal for the race directive.
I did so very willingly and, particularly in my capacity as representative of the Pensioners' Party, I am glad to have been able to use my vote to contribute to the adoption of this directive.
Today' s pensioners and elderly people lived through the Second World War: they know what racism means.
They hoped that the issue would never have to be raised again, let alone regulated by laws banning racist acts.
I hope that this law will soon be out of date, for that will mean that antiracist behaviour has ceased.
I hope that this and every other law against discrimination will become obsolete.
Since, sadly, this is not the case at present, Europe is acting wisely in publicly making its position so clear.
The Commission' s proposal for a directive on implementing in Europe the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin clearly shows that it is better to let well alone.
This is even truer with regard to the Buitenweg report to the European Parliament.
The proposal initially seemed to be well intentioned as it aimed to improve protection for victims of racism in the European Union.
In reality, however, the text before us is so obsessed with hunting down discrimination that it completely loses sight of the basic principles of the rule of law and even, to crown it all, the principle of equal treatment between persons.
In addition, the proposal for a directive as usual fails to respect subsidiarity and allow the Member States the necessary room for assessment.
On the issue of the rule of law, it is particularly astonishing to read in Article 8 of the Commission' s text that if, in a given situation, a case of discrimination is assumed, it is the defendant' s responsibility to prove that there has been no violation of the principle of equal treatment.
This flouts the traditional principle of our law which states that it is the responsibility of the accuser to provide proof of the culpability of the accused and not the responsibility of the accused to provide proof of his innocence.
The effect of such a provision would be all the more devastating as the assumed discrimination could be 'indirect discrimination' which occurs, according to Article 2(2)(b), 'where an apparently neutral provision, criterion or practice is liable to affect adversely a person or a group of persons of a particular racial or ethnic origin' .
However, this dedication to anti-discrimination soon comes to a halt in the Commission' s text as Article 5 states that specific measures may be adopted to compensate for the handicaps of a supposedly disadvantaged ethnic group.
This sows the seed for the famous American policy of 'positive discrimination' which is nowadays much disputed, even in the USA.
And this is just the Commission' s text which is the most moderate.
The European Parliament report adds to this in all respects.
Some people in the Commission seem to be having doubts as they have taken the trouble to add a form to the proposal for a directive which explains the possible impact of the directive on enterprises.
This unusual procedure clearly shows that the issue is not cut and dried.
In this form, the Commission simply states that "the Directive will strengthen the competitiveness of European companies by ensuring that they have at their disposal a wider pool of skills and resources than at present and that use is made of such skills irrespective of racial or ethnic origin" .
Unfortunately, this statement, which is solely intended to give the authors a clear conscience, is completely false.
It is quite clear that employers risk being plagued, particularly in the area of recruitment, with threats from people whose applications have been rejected.
Yet it cannot be denied that the immigrants currently entering the European countries are mainly unskilled and come from countries where work experience in businesses such as ours is very scarce.
Threatened by this new legislation and in order to keep the peace, employers may be forced to employ people without any real justification which will hinder the competitiveness of their companies.
For all these reasons, we reject the Buitenweg report.
We hope that the Council, which must act unanimously pursuant to Article 13 of the EC Treaty, will in turn reject the Commission proposal.
I was going to vote in favour of the motion given its positive points and the hopes to which certain points may legitimately give rise.
However, two interventions by Mr Désir highlighted that the texts, at least in the French version, contained provisions totally contrary to the principles of international law and, in particular, to the European Convention on Human Rights.
This is why I abstained during the vote on the legislative resolution.
We have voted for the Buitenweg report which supports and improves, in several respects, the proposal for a Council directive on implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin.
However, as we said during the vote on Amendment No 39, we totally disagree with the wording of Article 4 of the draft directive.
By providing that "a difference of treatment which is based on a characteristic related to racial or ethnic origin shall not constitute discrimination where, by reason of the nature of the particular occupational activities concerned or of the context in which they are carried out, such a characteristic constitutes a genuine occupational qualification" , this totally contradicts the provisions of the international and European conventions on human rights and the elimination of all forms of social discrimination.
It should be noted that these conventions are binding on the European Union and the Member States which have ratified them.
This wording also contradicts the laws and constitutions of several EU Member States.
This article cannot be transposed into French law, for example, as the Constitutional Council would rightly be forced to oppose this.
If retained in the final version of the directive, this article would, for the first time, constitute a legal basis for discrimination in the right to work based on 'a characteristic related to racial or ethnic origin' .
We were anxious to accompany our vote with this reservation which also applies to the totally inappropriate use in several articles, in the French version at least, of the word 'race' .
In Article 2, for example, it is used to describe 'a group of persons' and not as a characteristic of unacceptable discrimination.
This therefore seems to justify this concept and allows it to be validly and properly used to describe a person or group.
The fight against racism is clearly based precisely on the rejection of the concept of race, on its denunciation and on the refusal to place men and women in this category and to divide humanity according to this concept.
- I am voting in favour of the Race Directive for the following reasons.
As a British Asian woman, I have experienced first-hand the damaging effects racism can have on people and communities.
Although there have been tremendous strides over the last few years to fight racism in all its forms, it still continues to blight people' s lives.
For example, in my own region, the West Midlands, we have recently seen some worrying instances of racist violence.
The attack on the white partner of the world-class black athlete Ashia Hansen is a sickening example.
This report is a real breakthrough in reversing the burden of proof in civil race discrimination cases.
Once the facts of the case are established, it will fall to those accused of racism to prove their innocence.
I particularly welcome the measures included in the directive which will allow individuals to take civil proceedings if they are victimised on the grounds of race.
I am also glad that the legislation takes account of the notion of "indirect discrimination" , where apparently neutral provisions can have an adverse effect on a person or a group of a particular race or ethnic origin.
Right-wing extremism is increasing, not just in Austria, but throughout Europe.
This directive provides some of the most effective anti-racism legislation that Europe has ever seen, and the most effective piece of race relations legislation to affect my own Member State since the 1976 Race Relations Act.
Minority groups must be given a greater stake in Europe.
The EU should pay more attention to their problems and aspirations.
We need to connect EU institutions to all the communities of the Union.
Europe must be inclusive, not exclusive.
We must tackle racism wherever and whenever it occurs.
The race directive is a stand against racism and a major step towards stamping it out.
- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the report by Kathalijne Maria Buitenweg on the Council' s directive for implementing the principle of equal treatment for all, irrespective of race or ethnic origin.
We were delighted to do so, because the European Parliament is hereby complying with its task in connection with implementing Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
According to Article 13 of the Treaty, the European Parliament is merely to be heard on this matter.
In our voting, it has therefore been important that Parliament' s opinion - both the individual points and the opinion as a whole - should have very broad political backing.
We have nonetheless been unable to vote in favour of those amendments directly affecting matters which come within the sphere of the Member States' criminal law.
These matters continue to be national concerns.
In connection with the debate on the report, we have pointed out that the present directive only deals with discrimination on the grounds of race or ethnic origin.
But what about all the other protective considerations listed in Article 13 of the Treaty?
We are concerned that, by only proceeding on the basis of these two considerations in the present directive, the EU will, in practice, create a hierarchy of possible grounds for discrimination.
We would therefore especially draw attention to Amendment No 6 concerning a new consideration which is absolutely crucial for ourselves.
- Given the worrying evidence that racism is on the rise I warmly welcome this report which aims to ensure equal treatment in the employment and social sector between persons of all ethnic backgrounds.
The rapporteur seeks to ensure a common minimum level of protection including the reversal of the burden of proof in civil race discrimination cases and giving individuals the right to take civil proceedings if they are harassed or victimised on the grounds of race.
The Portuguese Presidency is to be congratulated for their readiness to put this matter on the Council' s agenda.
The fight against discrimination is an issue which has been on the agenda of the French Assembly since 1979.
Two inquiries on racism have already been established and the French Parliament was the instigator in 1986 of a joint interinstitutional declaration.
However, such initiatives are no longer enough.
We must go further and legislate.
The Buitenweg report is timely as racism and anti-Semitism are still of concern in Europe.
Is this the right moment to reiterate our vigilance with regard to certain parties now in power?
With Mr Deprez and Mr De Clercq I tabled an amendment to the title of the directive.
In the French version the Commission' s initial text uses the phrase 'sans distinction de race ou d' origine ethnique' .
The concept of origin is fundamental as discrimination may relate not only to the current status of an individual but also to his origin and descent.
We wanted to introduce the same nuance and precision with regard to the issue of race and therefore proposed 'd' origine raciale' .
This amendment was adopted in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights but I note now that it has simply disappeared from the text submitted to you.
We should like an assurance that this will be duly corrected.
Also, although the issue of religion has been excluded from this directive for legal reasons, it is vital to reiterate that we are definitely not ignoring the forms of discrimination based on religious beliefs.
Parliament has still to examine another Commission text in this respect.
To conclude, the Buitenweg report is inspired by a proactive and progressive approach which I have supported.
The risk of a resurgence of the neo-fascist and racist hydra requires close vigilance from us, more so now than ever before.
We must lead the way in this fight.
That concludes the vote.
Trafficking in women (continuation)
The next item is the continuation of the debate on trafficking in women.
Mr President, Commissioner, I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on the magnificent work she has carried out on such a serious problem.
The trafficking in women is having a very great impact, especially in the border countries of the European Union, where mafias are forming which deceive women with promises of employment and a better life, and which lead them eventually into prostitution and, in many cases, into situations which can only be described as slavery.
This is a phenomenon related to our current society, in which immigration is beginning to cause a serious problem, since we are seeing significant movements of people who are seeking the kind of welfare society which we enjoy in the majority, or practically all, of the European Union countries.
This situation requires a series of new measures, most importantly aiding victims and prosecuting the people involved in the trafficking in women and children - since it is not just a problem for women, but children as well - for sexual exploitation.
Amongst the measures proposed in this report are basically aid to victims and the request that Member States amend their legislation in a way which will allow quicker and more coordinated action amongst the various countries in order to resolve this very serious problem.
The victims do not only require material aid, but also legal assistance - because we are generally talking about people with no documentation, with no options and who are living in fear and need help - which, at the same time, protects their identity and guarantees that they will not suffer even worse problems if they return to their countries of origin.
The different countries of the European Union must harmonise their legislation in this respect and implement sufficient measures to help these victims.
The trade in sex is increasing at an alarming rate.
Women and children are involved.
I believe that the media should also aid this process, because we are seeing more and more adverts in the press - sometimes in the very serious newspapers - behind which lies the trafficking in women and exploitation.
However, it is not only through legal assistance and through protecting the victims that we must address the problem, but also through information campaigns, mainly in the countries of origin, so that these women know what they are really exposing themselves to, since the majority of them are being deceived and do not realise the hell they are about to walk into.
Mr President, every year, half a million women are tricked or forced into lives as sex slaves.
This greatly increasing trade is more profitable than drug smuggling and is increasingly being directed by an organised mafia for trafficking in women.
Despite this grim reality, the penalty for trafficking in women is exceedingly small compared with that for serious drug smuggling.
It amounts to perhaps two years' imprisonment compared with ten to fifteen years for serious drug-related offences.
Few offenders are brought to court, and still fewer prosecuted.
The EU has so far exemplified the fact that words are not always translated into reality.
Despite a number of statements from the EU about the appalling traffic in women, there is still no complete database with information about victims, trade routes, legislation or measures to be taken.
The European women' s lobby reports that only 0.036 per cent of the EU' s budget for the year 2000 has been set aside for issues of equality and that only a fraction of this fraction goes on measures to combat trafficking in women.
A growing number of women are being smuggled in from the candidate States.
In spite of this, the EU has not made demands upon these countries to prevent, and to introduce measures against, trafficking in women, similar to the demands that have been made regarding economic and environmental objectives to be attained by the candidate States.
By not complying with existing laws and not creating new laws to tackle the mafia concerned, the governments of Europe are indirectly allowing this demand-driven trade to increase.
There is a lack of legislation, not only in terms of measures to combat the aforesaid mafia, but also in terms of laws to protect the victims.
All but two Member States send victims of the trafficking in women back to their countries of origin, in spite of the possibility that their lives may be in danger.
We are voting today, or hopefully tomorrow, on an attempt to convert rhetoric and fine words into concrete measures.
The Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities is demanding that the Member States provide women who give evidence with protection and refugee status.
We demand tough, exemplary penalties for trafficking in women, together with national informants on trafficking in women, able to inform their governments about developments in their own countries, as well as in other countries.
We demand measures to combat the increasing use of the Internet for the purpose of trafficking in women, and we demand that national police forces and embassy officials be given appropriate training and that increased resources be made available for the voluntary organisations which provide aid to victims.
Before the end of this year, the governments of the Member States will presumably have decided upon a new Treaty.
We assume that this Treaty will contain a clear legal basis for combating all forms of violence against women, including, of course, trafficking in women, and that we shall be devising a common European policy for combating the trade in human beings.
Among the issues which should be covered by this policy is that of immigration and asylum, especially that of the right to asylum on the grounds of sexually motivated oppression and sexually motivated persecution.
In the United States and Russia, slavery was abolished in the 1860s.
It has to be said, however, that the incidence of slavery is increasing, despite the fact that we have now entered the twenty-first century.
This new form of slavery mainly affects women and girls but, irrespective of who is being enslaved, the mere presence of slavery is humanity' s best evidence of poverty.
Many now support the demand to put a stop to the female slave trade, but more is needed in terms of manpower, intervention by governments and concrete action.
Mr President, it is quite incredible to stand in this Chamber - I can hardly call it an Assembly right now - and realise that we, in fact, have an on-going slave trade in the European Union, too - here, where we commend ourselves for creating peace, freedom, democracy and human rights.
It is a serious matter that we should have this type of trade, because it is often not even adult women who are affected but near-children and very, very young people.
This trade is very closely linked to drugs and money laundering.
Presumably, it is different types of mafia which control it.
This report is very good.
Like the previous speaker, I want to emphasise that we need to see action taken and that police cooperation needs to be developed and more information made available.
I am often sceptical about the very large demands, for example with regard to the environment, which are being made of the candidate States.
At the same time, I think it would be reasonable to demand that information be provided to the countries' own citizens, with other information being directed specially at young women.
This measure would not, in fact, require large resources, and it is entirely feasible to implement it.
I can therefore only appeal to everyone to vote in favour of the report and to go home and work on their own governments, organisations and the media, too.
Mr President, prevention is better than cure.
This seems to be an impossible task in the case of trafficking in women.
Within EU territory and especially in the Central and Eastern European countries, the commercial exploitation of women is flourishing.
In the rapporteur' s report, it appears that the measures taken so far have been to little avail.
If we really want to prevent trafficking in women, we will need to adopt a different approach.
We cannot put a stop to this trade by amending immigration and asylum policy and the legalisation of prostitution.
And although I am generally in favour of good working conditions, these too cannot halt the trafficking in women.
After all, as long as the demand for prostitutes is still there, there will always be women who, enticed by better prospects presented to them, will - often unwittingly - make themselves available as merchandise.
It is not only heartless criminal organisations, but also rich, and not so rich, customers who help perpetuate the slave labour of these women who have no other prospects.
We cannot bridge this chasm between rich and poor with a few initiatives organised at Community level.
In addition to a sound and generous development policy in order to improve the living conditions of women in our own countries, it is necessary to question the lack of moral standards within our society.
By imposing heavy penalties on criminal organisations which indulge in trafficking in people, we clearly denounce this type of practice.
Only in this way can trafficking in women be effectively pushed back.
I would like to thank the rapporteur for her very valuable report.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, in 1996, we more or less got the political go-ahead to tackle trafficking in women at European level, and I am delighted to tell you that the then Belgian government played a vital role in bringing about this green light.
But I think we need to ask ourselves whether, after four years of work, Europe is sufficiently equipped to be able to fight this trafficking in women effectively.
I think I can assume that the Sörensen report makes it abundantly clear that this is not the case.
We back Mrs Sörensen' s report 100% and I would like to congratulate her on her sterling work.
I would especially like to re-emphasise the fact that the resolutions, which we will be approving tomorrow, fail to display a coherent legal framework for tackling trafficking in women, an issue which, in fact, the Belgian government made a point of hammering home at the time.
I think that everyone by now realises that a coherent approach to trafficking in people first and foremost presupposes a clear definition of trafficking in women, which, indeed, is not restricted to forced prostitution, although this is very important, but encompasses all types of trafficking in women and which is linked to deterrent sanctions involving trafficking in people.
I think it is beyond dispute that the national laws and methods for tracing victims and prosecuting offenders within the world of trafficking in women should be harmonised as a matter of urgency and that it is important that police forces work together more effectively.
A second point which is essential to us in this report - and we have been hammering on about this for a while now - is the fact that we need to continue to be committed to the protection of women who are the victims of such types of trafficking.
All too often in many countries, those women are criminalised whereas, in fact, they are the victims.
What we are advocating is a legal residence status for those women so that they can be protected.
Thirdly, I think it is clear that without such a legal framework, we will never reach a solution to this problem.
In fact, I would like to congratulate Commissioner Vitorino at this stage on his intention to present a framework decision to the Council within the course of this year, as a result of which we would then be able to resolve a number of these bottlenecks and issues.
Patsy Sörensen, our rapporteur, knows the topic of her report like the back of her hand.
I would therefore ask the Commissioner, since he is here, when drafting his future policy on trafficking in people, to talk to police forces and the civil service - this goes without saying - but I would very much urge him to make ample time for workers at base and aid workers in the field.
After all, it is also their expertise which can ensure that our approach to trafficking in women is coherent and all-encompassing.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mrs Sörensen for her report, which contains many proposals, and for the emphasis placed on the fact that trafficking in women and children is a violation of human rights.
The body and the human person are not commodities.
Even though many women choose to become prostitutes as an easy way of making a living, I would make no distinction between voluntary and forced prostitution: all prostitution is exploitation.
I would like to stress three points: firstly, trafficking and immigration.
A closed border policy prompts immigrants to turn to criminal organisations in order to procure visas or enter the country concerned illegally.
The Member States must develop a more united, responsible policy.
Thirdly: the victims' rights.
It was proposed that the European Union issue temporary residence permits to victims which would be conditional upon the victims giving evidence against the traffickers, but, as yet, Italy is the only State to issue permits which are not conditional upon the giving of evidence.
I would like to finish by raising the question of clients.
Commissioner Vitorino repeatedly stated the need to take into account the demand of this market, that is the clients.
But who are the clients?
They could be our fathers, our sons or ourselves.
It is our duty to do our part to bring about a radical change in the mentality and culture of our society.
This means promoting policies which support women.
Mr President, if we are to discuss trafficking in women, we have to be aware that we are talking about a form of slavery, a modern form of slavery in which the majority of the victims are women subjected to trafficking run by organised crime networks.
Trafficking in human beings supplies various markets: the market in organs for medical transplants, the market in new-born babies for those who do not have any children and the sweatshop market.
However, the greatest area of crime involves women, the majority of whom are victims of trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation.
The poverty and marginalisation of the women in their countries of origin, the high earnings guaranteed to traffickers and the low risks they incur, and the substantial demand for women for prostitution and other forms of sexual exploitation are the factors behind the growth of this trade.
The Tampere European Council recently charged the European Union to fight against illegal immigration and, amongst other things, against those who profit from the trafficking in human beings.
Mrs Sörensen' s report goes beyond this perspective and gives absolute priority to the fight against trafficking in human beings.
It is estimated that 500 000 women are trafficked every year, the majority of whom then work illegally, but the underground nature of the trade means that the true extent of the problem is unknown.
The contribution of non-governmental organisations in revealing the causes, methods and consequences of the trafficking in women for sexual exploitation, and the support they provide for the victims, has brought about greater awareness of these issues.
The STOP and DAPHNE programmes already represent a major contribution of the European Union, but we must not stop there.
Mrs Sörensen' s excellent report stresses the links between the trafficking in human beings and the policy on immigration and asylum, and calls, in the first place, upon the Intergovernmental Conference to bring about integral communitarisation of European policy in this field.
As the report requests, it will therefore be necessary to establish a legal framework and effective prevention, protection and victim support measures at European level.
On the other hand, the Member States and candidate countries must intervene themselves at legislative, administrative and police levels in order to eliminate this crime and, at the same time, increase international cooperation with Europol and Interpol to fight criminal networks.
At national level, refugee status must be granted to the victims of trafficking and they must be issued with residence permits.
Some countries - Italy and Belgium - assisted by NGOs, have already introduced some early measures.
Furthermore, information campaigns must be launched in the victims' countries of origin and an awareness action pursued in the Member States to raise public awareness, in particular, among the male population.
- (EL) Mr President, with millions of people victim to the criminal activities of worldwide international trafficking gangs throughout the world and the terrifying spread of these networks to the European Union, we urgently need to take steps to fight this contemporary Lernaean Hydra.
The Union and the Member States currently have no powers whatsoever to intervene efficiently and break up the gangs operating almost undisturbed in our midst and in our neighbourhoods.
The public in Athens was shocked recently at the revelation that an Albanian immigrant, who had declared that he was a doctor, had kept a 13-year-old girl imprisoned in his apartment in a peaceful neighbourhood of Athens for nine months and prostituted her to some 50-60 respectable customers a day.
I personally advocate therefore that all the strategies used to fight trafficking in and the sexual exploitation of women and children should call for harsh punishment, both for those who profit from the trade in human beings and for those who use the services of prostitutes, as is the case under Swedish and Canadian law.
It would appear that the increase in human trafficking has coincided with the recent mass migration of people and the impoverishment of large sections of society.
Le Monde recently published shocking information on the activities of human traffickers, who are taking advantage of the situation in Kosovo and working with international illegal immigration organisations in order to sexually exploit some 300 000 women in France, Germany and Belgium, women mainly from Kosovo, but also from Moldavia, Romania and Bosnia.
Women are being held in concentration camps in conditions of true slavery and are being tortured before being forced into prostitution.
What is happening is a disgrace to Europe in the 21st century and betrays a lack of political will and commitment to prioritise this issue.
The Commission communication is satisfactory and Mrs Sörensen has presented an excellent report, but good intentions alone will not combat international organised crime.
We need initiatives on several fronts: legislative and administrative measures, harmonisation of legislation and prosecution methods, harsh punishment, protection for victims and collaboration between police and judicial authorities.
We also need to strengthen Europol with more funds and more staff so that it can start making joint prevention and prosecution plans with all the Member States and, of course, we need to strengthen non-governmental organisations.
In other words, we need to implement all the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere conclusions immediately.
All these are issues, Commissioner, on which we are making no progress whatsoever.
Mr President and honourable Members of Parliament, the Commission welcomes the opportunity of participating in this debate on how to develop our common efforts in the fight against trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation following the Commission' s second communication of December 1998.
I take the opportunity of paying my respects to my predecessor, Mrs Gradin, who was the author of that communication.
May I extend my congratulations to the honourable Member, Mrs Sörensen.
Her report is a very valuable contribution towards continuing our work.
Before going into the more substantial parts of this subject, I would like to state that the Commission remains fully committed to keeping the fight against this degrading form of violation of human rights and human dignity high on the political agenda.
We have proved that in the proposals that we put to the European Council of Tampere last October.
As several Members have already emphasised, preventive and repressive measures, as well as measures to support the victims, together with international cooperation, must be given further encouragement.
I noted that the resolution that you are going to vote on tomorrow and the report that we are discussing today contain a large number of requests to the Commission.
I will therefore try to address a few of these key issues.
I wish first of all to address the matter of improving existing penal law in the Member States as regards the criminalisation of traffickers of human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation.
As a starting point in this exercise, we have here the February 1997 instrument, but it has become quite clear that it has its shortcomings.
As I understand, during the hearing in August, the Commission will present at the end of this semester a package of proposals on trafficking and the sexual exploitation of women and children.
We have, in my opinion, a firm basis for this in the Treaty of Amsterdam, the Vienna Action Plan of 1998 and the conclusions of the European Council in Tampere.
Therefore, we do not need to wait for any change in the Treaties: we have a clear legal basis to address this issue of making trafficking in women a criminal offence.
Mrs Van Lancker said the proposal is based on a Council framework decision which will look in particular at how to ensure that all Member States have common definitions, common criminal offences and common sanctions.
In addition, we need to consider in the drafting exercise horizontal judicial issues such as defining the competent jurisdiction, the rules on extradition and seizure of the proceeds of crime.
One important aspect for the future is that when finally adopted, this proposal will form a part of the acquis communautaire.
This means that the candidate countries will have to take it on board in the context of enlargement.
Another important element closely related to improving efficiency in the conviction of traffickers is, as I have already mentioned to Parliament, granting temporary residence permits to victims of trafficking who are willing to give evidence.
This was one of the Commission' s suggestions in its second communication.
The package of proposals that I mentioned before will, therefore, be completed a bit later this year with a proposal for a directive that will cover the issue of temporary residence permits so as to ensure the protection of various victims of trafficking including the victims of trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation.
This element must, however, be seen as a crucial complement to the first set of initiatives.
As a matter of fact, there is a real difficulty in convicting those who are responsible for trafficking.
Without the cooperation of the victims, we can never make sure that those who profit from this traffic are brought before a court and are duly convicted.
It is extremely important to couple these two kinds of measures: criminalisation of trafficking and, at the same time, having a proactive policy on promoting the cooperation of the victims with the police and with the judiciary in convicting those who are responsible for such degrading activity.
Talking about significant developments in the field of trafficking in women at European level, we also need to take a look at the various activities that are, and have been, supported by the STOP programme.
Previous and future projects under the STOP programme cover several points that are highlighted in Mrs Sörensen' s report.
In particular, I would like to mention two of the priorities set for this year, namely, assistance to victims and prevention.
In applying a multidisciplinary approach, this will involve NGOs as well as law enforcement services and I believe that it is necessary to promote closer dialogue between the NGOs that act in this area and the law enforcement authorities.
As the STOP Programme is now in its last financial year and has made a valuable contribution to the fight against trafficking at European level, the Commission will put forward a proposal for a renewal of the programme for another five-year period starting in 2001.
The proposal will, of course, build on experience gained from the first programme.
We also intend to offer the possibility of running multiannual projects which will improve the efficiency of the programmes.
A word also needs to be said about implementation of the new DAPHNE Programme following the DAPHNE initiative adopted in 1997.
Its scope, as you know, is to prevent and combat all forms of violence against women and children.
This includes trafficking in women and the sexual exploitation of women.
The programme will allow us, in addition to the STOP programme, to help victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation by providing a financial contribution of EUR 20 million in the period from 2000 to 2003.
In addition, more focus has been given and needs to be given to developing our cooperation through specific projects with the candidate countries such as several Members have mentioned of Parliament.
We share with these candidate countries a serious common problem, since there is a clear trend involving the Central and Eastern European countries as the most important region of origin of both victims of trafficking and perpetrators.
The Commission has, therefore, opened DAPHNE to the candidate countries and will do the same under the STOP Programme.
Finally, the Commission has also mobilised other sources of financing to promote both support to local NGOs in the candidate countries and prevention campaigns in countries of origin.
In the framework of the new Transatlantic Agenda and in cooperation with the government of the United States of America, it has, for instance, carried out various information campaigns in Poland, Ukraine, Hungary and Bulgaria, to raise an awareness within the population and the public bodies of these countries.
For the future we are exploring the possibility of new campaigns targeting new areas and new countries.
This is an issue that has a relevant role to play in the Stability Pact for the Balkans.
Last but not least, I wish to clearly underline the importance of the Union being involved in wider forms of international cooperation.
The Commission is now actively participating in the work on the draft United Nations protocol on trafficking to supplement the draft convention on trans-national organised crime and I sincerely hope that the members of the United Nations will be able to adopt this new convention in autumn this year.
In conclusion, I would like to draw your attention to a point that we need to keep in mind when working against trafficking in women at European level.
That point is that even though the European Union can, and must, play an active role against trafficking, the Member States have the prime responsibility.
This means that we need to be careful when talking about measures such as automatic non-criminalisation of victims of trafficking, possibilities of NGOs bringing court action on behalf of the victims and investigative methods in criminal matters.
In other words, we need to be clear about which objectives can be better achieved at European level taking into account the level of cross-border cooperation in place among the Member States.
Honourable Members have an opportunity of adapting what I consider a piece of good work that not only confirms a coherent and multidisciplinary European policy on trafficking but also adds new impetus for further actions which are undoubtedly necessary at European level.
I want to thank Mrs Sörensen for her knowledge, her expertise and her contribution to this common fight.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Readmission of third country nationals
The next item is the report (A5-0110/2000) by Ms Karamanou, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the Initiative of the Republic of Finland with a view to the adoption of a Council regulation determining obligations as between Member States for the readmission of third country nationals (12488/1999 - C5-0319/1999 - 1999/0823(CNS)).
Mr President, my report does indeed concern the proposal for a regulation submitted by the Finnish Presidency on the relations and obligations as between the Member States for the readmission of third country nationals inside the European Union.
I am really sorry to have to say, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, that the proposal for a regulation has not been given the due attention, study and careful preparation needed when handling such a delicate and complicated matter.
This lack of preparation has resulted in serious reservations, rejection or a lack of interest in the proposal for a directive by the European Commission and the Council and by the parliamentary committees responsible, i.e. the Committee on Freedoms and the Committee on Legal Affairs, as well as on the part of non-governmental organisations, which the Finnish Presidency does not appear to have consulted.
The Tampere conclusions noted that the Union needed a comprehensive approach to the phenomenon of immigration, which is clearly linked to a whole series of political questions which have remained unanswered.
It is linked to respect for human rights and to the economic, social, political and cultural conditions in the person' s country of origin.
As far as the question of readmission is concerned, the Member States already have the experience of agreements under European Political Collaboration and Schengen-type cooperation.
This is a sensitive issue which calls for diplomatic collaboration.
As far as the content of the Finnish initiative is concerned, there is no explanatory statement attached to the draft regulation.
The initiative does not show any strategic vision.
The draft seeks to lay down a Dublin-style system for illegal immigrants, following the model of the Convention on asylum seekers, the application of which, as we know, has proven to be highly problematic and ineffective.
Priority is given in the proposal for a regulation to send back foreigners illegally present on the territory of Member States under a system of compulsory readmission operating between Member States.
The regulation aims to determine which Member State is obliged to readmit a third country national in order to implement the agreement in question.
The draft regulation does not debar a Member State from sending a foreigner who does not meet the conditions of entry or residence in a Member State back to his or her country of origin or another third country.
This provision seems to empower Member States to take more severe decisions outside the scope of the proposed regulation.
Other points which deserve criticism are the fact that any kind of solidarity between Member States is precluded, in particular as far as illegal border crossings and responsibility for the external borders of the European Union are concerned.
The proposal is perhaps a way of exercising indirect pressure for the borders of the European Union to be fortified.
Similarly, absolutely no consideration is given to the particular circumstances of persons who may have spent a long period of time in a Member State before being classed as illegal.
Residence permits for asylum seekers are not included in the documents provided for in the regulation, thereby creating the possibility of undermining the protection afforded to them.
The regulation permits readmission to another Member State to be requested within six months from the time when the authorities of the requesting Member State became aware that a third country national may be (not "is" ) illegally present.
In other words, the proposal allows entry to the territory of a Member State to be proven on the basis of hypothetical evidence.
The way in which the data required to identify persons to be readmitted is determined is open to every kind of abuse.
However, the basic problem appears to be that no strategy or European policy has been devised on immigration.
I consider, Commissioner, that we urgently need to prepare legal tools for the immigration directive, rather than confining ourselves to suppression and policing measures which are not subject to democratic control.
We urgently need to implement the Tampere conclusions and devise a common European policy on asylum and immigration based on European humanitarian values and respect for fundamental human rights.
Finally, we call on the European Commission to take the necessary legislative initiatives on all the issues which touch on immigration and, of course, to define the mutual obligations as between the Member States.
We are aware, Commissioner, of your personal interest and of the difficulties facing the Council and assure you that any initiatives which you may table in this direction will have our undivided support.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first like to thank Mrs Karamanou for cooperating in such a straightforward and excellent way.
I know that we all had to work very quickly on this document, and at that time she was under additional pressure because of commitments at national level.
She has already mentioned very many points, and I would just like to say that, as regards content, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was in agreement, as it was with the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.
We only differed on a formal detail.
On behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs, we are also requesting that this Initiative of the Republic of Finland should be withdrawn.
I am certain that it was very well intended, but it has not been thought through sufficiently.
Legally speaking, it has thrown up more questions than it has supplied explanations.
I would like to add a few important points.
An initiative of this kind should not mean that people can just be shipped back and forth within our territory.
Furthermore, as Mrs Karamanou has just said, this represents a programme singularly lacking in solidarity between the Member States.
With regard to readmission agreements, they should not be used as a possible way of twisting the arms of countries in receipt of development aid by saying that they will only receive development aid and funds or cooperation if they also sign readmission agreements.
This is bordering on blackmail.
Last but not least, I would like to say that the readmission of persons illegally residing in our territory is another problem that can only be solved jointly, by working together to fight the root causes and to finally address the issues of integration and asylum in cooperation.
Mr President, allow me to begin by highlighting the work of both the rapporteur and Mrs Echerer, the draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
I have had the opportunity to work with the rapporteur in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs and it has been an honour for me to chair the committee that voted for Mrs Echerer' s excellent opinion.
Mr President, we are facing a situation which is real problem: the progressive disappearance of internal borders means that non-EU citizens in both legal and illegal situations are moving freely amongst the Member States.
If we are going to be realistic, this is a problem which, as the two rapporteurs have stressed, we must deal with fully, and, I might add, as a matter of urgency.
My view of the Finnish initiative is much less critical than theirs.
I believe we should stress the fact that the Finnish initiative was a very significant step forward from the moment it was put on the table, because it led the Council to get involved in a very urgent issue.
In other words, at the time, the Finnish initiative played a fundamental role, and we might say that it has died as a result of its own success.
The thinking behind the Finnish initiative means that its proposals no longer have any point, because they have now been fully adopted.
What we need now is not a provocative initiative which points its finger at the problem and starts a debate, but rather we need to get down - calmly but immediately - to resolving this problem.
Apart from that, I agree with many of the criticisms that have been made.
I also agree with one which has been made implicitly but which has not been stated directly.
We, as a legislating institution, cannot amend just any text; there are texts which are not amendable and texts which require a complete amendment.
This is what we have done in the case of the Finnish initiative, at least in the PPE Group.
We welcome the courage of the Finnish initiative, but we believe that this initiative will not seriously enable us to carry out the responsibilities that the European public has entrusted to us.
Why not?
For the reasons which have been expressed, and which I would probably just be repeating: this initiative takes account of one aspect, the most repressive one, but that is only one aspect of the problem.
What we need now, given the developments since Tampere, is a more global vision.
The rapporteur is absolutely right to point out that this initiative does not take account of questions of procedure, or fundamental guarantees for the procedure, nor does it provide the necessary protection for the fundamental rights of those people who will be caught up in this type of procedure.
Finally, it has not been pointed out - and I think it is important that it is - that what we do in this area must be coherent with the Member States' principles regarding readmission of third country nationals.
All these types of bilateral agreement that are required are being negotiated.
The PPE has presented two amendments which I hope this House - to take up what the two previous speakers have said - will support in tomorrow' s vote, thereby sending a political signal, and we ask the Commission to present a complete and coherent text sooner rather than later.
Mr President, I would first like to thank the rapporteur and the draftsperson for their report and opinion.
I would also like to say on behalf of my Group that we fully support the proposal to refer this initiative back.
We did not come to this conclusion because we wanted to make things easy for ourselves and not table any amendments, but because - as emerges from the explanatory statement, which is very comprehensive and convincing - too many fundamental requirements have simply not been met.
We have heard about these shortcomings in the debate as well as reading about them in the reports.
However, it is not because of these shortcomings that we are recommending that this specific initiative should be rejected.
What is at stake here is whether it makes sense for the Member States to have the right of initiative in these areas of competence.
The proposals on which Parliament has been consulted up to now under this right of initiative have not, on the whole, been very convincing - including an Austrian proposal that had both technical shortcomings and problems in terms of content.
What these proposals have had in common has been a failure to fit in with a coherent set of measures.
Something else they had in common was that they either conflicted with existing legal instruments or duplicated them.
The advantage of the Commission alone having the right of initiative is surely that this ensures a systematic approach and guarantees that we have documents that are more precise and free from technical and legal contradictions.
This applies in particular to matters for which Commissioner Vitorino is responsible.
Another clear indication of the shortcomings of Member States' right of initiative is that they are seldom received with very much enthusiasm, even by other Member States.
This also applies to the initiative before us today, which the Portuguese Presidency is no longer treating as a priority.
So, as a Parliament, we have more reason than ever before to be sceptical about this right of initiative on the part of Member States.
This is not only because this right skews the balance between the institutions but also because, up to now, it has never really been convincingly exercised.
I would also like to touch upon another problem connected with this, which might perhaps warrant a joint initiative by the Member States.
Officials working at the Schengen external borders are constantly telling us that the residence permits presented by third country nationals and issued by other EU Member States still vary widely and are often difficult to identify as such.
This does not seem to fit in with the Joint Action concerning a uniform format for residence permits.
The Member States should take the initiative here and act in compliance with the EU format in their own administrative area.
Mr President, Commissioner, I want to say that I am speaking as much as a Finn as in my capacity as a representative of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party.
I would thank the rapporteur and the draftsperson of the opinion for the frank, direct and sincere words they have written about Finland' s initiative.
The report states that the initiative was poorly planned, that it contains no justification section, that it was prepared without organisations such as ECRE or UNHCR being consulted and that the relationship between the principles of readmission between the Member States and the principles of readmission to third countries is not made clear.
Furthermore, the report states that there is a lack of strategic vision, something which the rapporteur also said.
No distinction is made between those who do not fulfil and those who no longer fulfil the conditions in force for residence here.
It is all too reminiscent of Austria' s initiative on that famous first day of Austria' s Presidency.
There are also no procedural safeguards, which does not surprise me because, less than two months ago, the same Ministry of the Interior which is behind the present initiative proposed that Finnish immigration law be changed to include rapid repatriation.
My party, the Swedish People' s Party, voted against this initiative, really for the same reasons that Finland' s constitutional committee had when it considered that the same proposal was unconstitutional because, in the case of rapid repatriation, no one has the right to be heard.
It would be wisest, therefore, if Finland were to comply with Parliament' s proposal and withdraw the proposal, as both the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs propose.
I would point out that, of all the members of the Committees, only two supported this initiative.
I regret that the Council' s and Parliament' s time has been used in this way.
I think, like Mrs Berger said, that it could have been used for other things, for example, purely administrative procedures.
The issue of women as asylum seekers might also have been reflected upon, because we need to look at the Tampere decision in its entirety with a view to improving the asylum process.
I would emphasise that I am speaking as a Finn and as a representative of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party.
Mr President, the Karamanou report asks the European Parliament to reject the Finnish proposal to establish, within the European Union, a system for returning illegal immigrants to the Member State responsible.
According to this initiative, a Member State which arrests illegal immigrants in its territory could return them to the Member State through which they entered, with the expectation that the latter would probably return them to the third country from which they originally came.
This idea is interesting for three reasons.
Firstly, it responds to a genuine problem caused by the abolition of internal borders within Europe.
It therefore fills a legal void by establishing a system for the return of illegal immigrants based on the Schengen acquis and modelled on the Dublin Convention of 1990 on asylum seekers.
Secondly, it forces the Member State which is negligent in monitoring its borders to take responsibility for illegal immigrants who use it to get into neighbouring countries.
Thirdly, it shows the usefulness - whatever the previous speakers may have said - of the Member States' right of initiative which the Treaty of Amsterdam retained as a transitional measure in matters relating to immigration and the movement of people.
In these areas, it is important that the national governments, which are still closer to the people than the Commission, should retain a full right to make proposals and, of course, decide on these.
The Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights totally rejects this Finnish initiative however, and, in so doing, shows a tendency to exaggerate.
It uses the pretext of legal shortcomings to reject the whole proposal whereas it could very easily, in a more positive spirit, have itself proposed corrections.
However, this initiative is disliked by the federalists who would prefer a less intergovernmental and more Community-based approach, in other words granting more power to the Commission and the European Parliament.
It is also disliked by the pro-immigration pressure groups whose influence is apparent in the explanatory statement which highlights the positive contribution of immigration and rejects a supposedly repressive initiative.
This reasoning is, of course, diametrically opposed to ours.
Mr President, the Commission would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her report.
Since we completely agree with her analysis and conclusion and share the view that it cannot be adopted, as it stands, I shall be very brief.
Mrs Karamanou' s report has clearly demonstrated that the subject of readmission rules between European Union Member States, although a very technical and specific issue, touches upon some very sensitive policy issues that simply need more thorough reflection and preparation before they are again tackled by the Union.
I recognise that this initiative has drawn the attention of the Council to the necessity of drafting a coherent and consistent approach to immigration policy.
That is why I stated to Parliament the Commission' s intention of presenting to the Council and Parliament in the autumn of this year a communication on immigration policy, precisely to give us the broader picture within which these partial and sectoral issues can be fully and properly integrated.
I can assure you that the Commission thinks that we should not start with this question of readmission.
We think that though questions of readmission are no doubt relevant, they should be mainly addressed in the readmission agreements that the Union is now negotiating with third countries.
Nevertheless, for the time being, it is better to see the whole picture before we start discussing small details.
So the Commission can subscribe to the approach of the rapporteur and, apparently, the large majority in Parliament, in the sense that this initiative, as it stands - and I am not passing judgement on the intention behind it - is unacceptable.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 7.50 p.m.)