# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Mr President, I would like to make a comment in relation to yesterday' s Minutes.
I do not appear amongst the signatories of the attendance register.
I was present all day yesterday and during the vote which took place at noon, but I do not appear in the Minutes.
I would be grateful if this error could be corrected.
We will check the list, Mr Valdivielso de Cué, and make the necessary correction.
Mr President, I would like to inform the House, under Rule 111, that last Thursday, the offices of the Moss Media Group in Moscow comprising independent television and a number of newspapers and magazines were raided by so-called tax police, uniformed and armed.
Documents were taken away, the telephones were cut off and threats of legal action remain.
Mr President, this matter is one of the utmost importance.
It involves freedom of the press in Russia and further outrages are expected over the next two or three days.
Mr Robin Cook is in Moscow today.
He will discuss the matter with Mr Ivanov, the Russian Foreign Minister, and the 15 Ministers are thinking of a joint démarche.
But we in the European Parliament - what are we doing?
Nothing.
The matter is, if you like, too urgent to take on board because it happened last Thursday and cannot be brought forward as an urgency.
Could you please refer this question to the Conference of Presidents so that some system can be found to deal with very urgent and important matters such as this one?
We take note of your comment and your suggestion, Lord Bethell, and we will pass them on to the President.
Mr President, I would just like to make the House and the Presidency aware, as I believe it will be of interest to them, that yesterday, on the occasion of the Conference of Reconciliation in Vienna, an agreement was reached between the Austrian government representative, Mr Schaumeyer, and the American Deputy Finance Minister, Stuart Eizenstat, on compensation payments for the victims of Nazi forced labour in Austria.
The lawyers - and I feel I should take the opportunity to mention this as well - Michael Hausfeld and Martin Mendelson, who represent some of the governments of Eastern European countries, commented at the time that, in some respects, Austria is in fact providing more generous compensation payments than Germany, because in the first place, we are including the agricultural workers, and secondly, we are also paying compensation for children under the age of 12 and women who gave birth whilst in forced labour camps.
I believe this is worth sharing with the House.
Thank you for your statement, Mrs Stenzel.
(The Minutes were approved)
Broad outlines of economic policies
The next item is the report (A5-0134/2000) by Mr Katiforis, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission recommendation for the 2000 broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and the Community (drawn up pursuant to Article 99(2) of the Treaty establishing the European Community).
.
(EL) Mr President, broadly speaking, the report tabled before plenary by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs contains a particularly positive appraisal of the Commission' s recommendation for the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States.
The committee has worked with its usual efficiency and diligence and has supported its proposals with an impressive econometric analysis which I should like to praise here in public.
The recommendation for the year 2000 has been formulated at a time of favourable developments and optimistic prospects for the European economy.
The prospects of an increase in the national wage in Europe in excess of 3% for 2000 and 2001 - 3.4% according to the latest forecasts for 2000 - are much higher than the disappointing actual average rates of increase throughout the 1990s.
These results, provided that they are realised, offer a window of opportunity, a springboard from which the European economy can launch on to a course which will lead to a permanently high and ecologically sustainable rate of growth.
It goes without saying that permanently high rates of growth are the sine qua non for improving the employment situation and strengthening the competitiveness of Europe in the global economy.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs accepts that the requisite rate of progress is best expressed through a growth rate of GDP of 3% or more, that this rate cannot be maintained over time without a substantial rise in the potential product of the EU economy and that there can be no increase in the potential product without productive investment.
The Commission, however, has avoided specifying the ratio of investment to GDP.
The Committee on Economic Affairs takes the view that quantitative economic targets may be useful, but insists that the fixing of such targets must not undermine the goals established in the stability pact, which are the fundamental guide for the economic policies in the euro zone.
Despite this general reservation, the report by the Committee on Economic Affairs expresses the committee' s satisfaction at the restatement in the Commission recommendation of the quantified target, set in the Presidency conclusions of the European Council at Lisbon, of raising labour force participation from 61% to 70% of the population by 2010 and of increasing the participation of women from 51% to over 60% by 2000.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs maintains that the requisite economic growth must be based on price stability and budgetary discipline, reasonable wage increases taking account of price stability, productivity increases and a reduction in unit labour costs, even in the case of reductions in working hours.
It also believes in greater liberalisation of competition, strengthening national competition authorities, providing special support for associations of small- and medium-sized enterprises and further developing the single market - especially in the public utilities and financial services sectors.
As far as financial services are concerned, having reached a broad consensus of agreement, we shall be tabling a joint amendment calling for the action plan for financial services to be applied more quickly, i.e. by 2003 rather than 2005.
The majority of the committee believes that mobilising the market will result in the need to increase investments using purely market instruments.
At the same time, however, it approves of the restructuring of government spending in favour of investment which must be justified - when it is justified - by the cost-benefit ratio, but rejects using public investments simply to manage the economy.
On a more general note, the committee approves of the challenges identified by the Extraordinary Council in Lisbon of full employment, a knowledge-based economy, modernisation of social protection systems and dealing with the impact of the ageing population, but expresses its concern at the gap between the key challenges and the often routine specific policy recommendations.
It therefore calls upon the Commission and Council to seriously consider the need for a drastic renewal of the intellectual apparatus behind the general guidelines.
The committee also reiterates Parliament' s previous call for an interinstitutional agreement between the Council, the Commission and the European Parliament on the subject of the adoption of the resolution, although it thanks the Portuguese Presidency for its willingness to cooperate on this matter.
This is ad hoc cooperation, however, not cooperation reflected in an interinstitutional agreement, and we consider this a shortcoming in our procedure.
Ladies and gentlemen, we achieved a significant degree of consensus in our work in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
I should like to stress the general acceptance of the feasibility of the objective of achieving full employment within the next decade.
Of course, there are certain differences in our assessment of the best way of achieving these targets.
Some of us believe that setting quantitative targets, even without mechanisms for imposing them, would help Europe give concrete expression to its efforts to move in the right direction.
This comment applies in particular to the target investment rate, which requires us to increase the potential rate of growth of the economy to 3% on a permanent basis.
This percentage is a familiar figure.
The Commission set it repeatedly in its studies and it would not have hurt to have included it.
We could also have given more categorical expression to the, I believe, general feeling that we need to relaunch the trans-European networks and address the need for new forms of financing for them and the issue of the involvement of private capital and public investment in this sector.
Without, in any way, giving the green light to squander public spending, we could have tried to give the public sector of the economy a slightly more positive role than merely that of 'guard-dog' for price stability.
There are margins for all this, especially through the window of opportunity, if the main risk to our economy is from the probability of a crisis on the American money markets which could paralyse the private investment mechanism.
Just imagine, ladies and gentlemen, if that were to happen and we, in the meantime, had forgotten how to handle public investment.
The European economy has a huge margin for growth; it is true that the European economy can become more productive, but we need to be bolder in the way we go about it.
Mr President, when drawing up this draft opinion for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, the Committee on Social Affairs fully appreciated the importance of this resolution, Parliament' s first resolution on economic policy guidelines since the Lisbon Summit.
In particular, it stressed the importance of the connection between these two priorities and considered that the common elements of the broad guidelines of economic policy should be fully exploited and the various implementing processes adopted by the Councils over the years coordinated, and by this I am referring to the objectives of the Luxembourg, Cardiff and Cologne processes.
In our opinion, the open method of coordination, which was introduced on an experimental basis in Lisbon, should allow for the full exploitation of the connection between growth and employment, which, we feel, cannot be ignored.
The subsidiarity principle needs to be steered in this direction with regard to the role both of the governments and of the decentralised institutions, without diminishing the decisive part played by greater synergy, greater coordination between the broad guidelines, and by placing greater focus on the European Community dimension with a view to developing an economic policy which can enhance the potential for development in Europe and allow us to effectively achieve the goals which we set ourselves with regard to full employment.
We have taken the chapters of the broad guidelines into account, in particular the aspects related to the introduction of flexibility and efficiency elements in the products market, the financial services market and the labour market, but we have also acknowledged the importance of the negotiations of the Social Partners and of social objectives.
A further consideration: we consider - and for the remainder we refer you to the text of the opinion - that Parliament' s role in this matter must be consolidated by formal institution of the procedure laying down a specific interinstitutional agreement on the participation of Parliament in formal consultations on the economic policy guidelines and on the monitoring of their effects.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, during a previous debate on economic policy, Jacques Delors said in this House that these days, 70% of the economic framework conditions that are enacted in the form of laws are European directives.
I would not wish to commit myself to a percentage in this respect, but we should all be aware that some of the economic framework conditions are established by the European Union and others are established by the Member States.
This state of affairs will only prove successful in the long term if it is accomplished on the basis of common principles.
The principle enshrined in the Treaty is that of the market economy - the majority in this House would say the social market economy - and there are two key aspects to this.
Firstly, there is competition.
The European Union is very good at creating conditions for competition.
I welcome with open arms the initiatives produced by the Commission aimed at gradually decentralising competition policy and this desire to foster competition and to allow the individual Member States and the regions to play their part in the process.
This is a very important development.
The second important cornerstone of the social market economy is the stability of the currency.
Firstly, we have the European Central Bank, a strong European institution.
Secondly, we have the social partners, who are responsible for currency stability, and thirdly, there are the national governments and parliaments, which draft their budgets.
I feel I should point out that not only is currency stability one of the cornerstones of economic policy, it is also one of the cornerstones of any social policy, because currency stability is the starting point for social policy, and inflation does not affect those with huge assets at their disposal, but those who have to manage on a small income.
That is why currency stability is such an important cornerstone of our policy.
And one of the crucial cornerstones we have created is the Stability and Growth Pact.
I am delighted that this report is now calling for the Stability and Growth Pact to be rigorously applied, for what we want for the European Union is growth based on currency stability.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report and I am pleased that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, which is to negotiate, for the first time, with the troika of EU Finance Ministers on the broad outlines of economic policy, will enter into these negotiations with a report that will attract a broad consensus.
We all know that Lisbon brought a fresh wind of change, and it would only be to the good if the broad outlines of economic policy were to exude more of the spirit of the Lisbon EU Summit.
The main issue facing the European Union, combating unemployment that is, is still not being treated as the most important aspect of the broad outlines of economic policies.
After all, the cost of unemployment in the European Union is estimated to be 12% of European GDP.
Therefore, the European Union is right to make full employment its goal.
What concerns me most is that the broad outlines of economic policy are still lacking in commitment when it comes to taking advantage of increased investment activity.
We are certainly doing the right thing in aiming for structural reform of the goods, services, capital and labour markets.
However, whilst we do not yet know what effects structural reforms of this kind will have on employment, we do know what the effects of investment-backed growth are.
We know that public investment can boost growth and employment as well.
That is why we should welcome the introduction of quantitative targets for growth and employment quotas, for they supplement quantitative targets and benchmarking for investments.
I also regret the fact that the targets set at Lisbon - and consequently, those set in relation to the broad outlines of economic policy as well - are not qualitative in nature.
Surely this could only benefit Europe, which wants to be the most competitive zone in the whole world.
Nor is there any indication whatsoever as to what level of investment as a share of GDP we need to aim for in what time frame, in order to produce a sustainable upturn.
The current upward trend is encouraging, especially since the German and Italian economies, which account for half of the net product in euroland, are at last starting to move.
This is a perfect illustration of how interdependent and interwoven the European national economies are, for they have not exactly acted as engines of growth on the European economy as a whole.
Consequently, we are aware that we need a form of economic government in Europe.
Europe must sing from the same hymn sheet when it comes to economic policy.
We therefore need better coordination than we have had hitherto.
Hence, I hope that the broad outlines of economic policy will be given substance, so as to render the language of the Lisbon decisions more comprehensible, and enable a timetable to be set.
Of course, we must support the rapporteur in his desire for something we have repeatedly called for ourselves: what we need is an interinstitutional agreement between the Council, the Commission and Parliament, so as to overcome the democratic deficit in Economic and Monetary Union.
Mr President, the Liberal Group will support the Katiforis report on the broad guidelines for economic policies, which we are especially satisfied with since many of our observations were accepted during the debate in committee.
At a time when we are debating the weakness of the euro, at least in relation to the dollar, I think that we would do well to remember that the state of the European economy is solid and offers a framework for stability and solidity as well as excellent prospects for growth and employment.
In short, we can look forward to very positive development over the next few years.
Therefore, the fact that, in some ways, the US economy is doing better than the European economy, at least in terms of growth forecasts, should not mask the fact that the European economy is doing well at the moment.
Furthermore, it is the European economy which is funding a good portion of US development.
However, we should not only be concentrating on the more positive aspects; we should also be taking note of the fragility of continued growth and solidity in the European economy.
In order to overcome this fragility, in our view, we need the European economy to function better, since it is still subject to excessive corporate rigidity, in both the public and private sectors, and on the part of both economic and social operators.
We therefore propose greater adaptability and flexibility in the labour market.
This would clearly involve the removal of the existing obstacles to the proper functioning of the European internal market and a deep reform of the tax system, with the adoption of a tax package at European level.
To sum up, we should overcome the conservatism which still exists in certain economic and social areas of the European Union.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, let me tell you why the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance did not vote in favour of the Katiforis report as amended by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
Obviously, we endorse the general thrust of the Katiforis report.
In particular, we approve of the ambition to achieve full employment as well as its ambition in terms of sound social and, above all, salary agreements.
On the other hand, we did not endorse a raft of amendments which we considered to be extremely dangerous.
We shall reject these amendments.
Indeed, we shall reject them systematically, and we hope within the current parliamentary term to convince our fellow Members, including those in the Group of the European People' s Party, how dangerous they are.
In the first place, we can no longer continue to call for the flexibility of wage contracts to be reformed and increased without specifying our thinking more precisely.
Endorsing the goal of a European society which is as competitive as possible in terms of know-how means maximising investment in human capital.
Well, enhanced human capital is not a commodity to be taken and then dispensed with, but rather something to be respected, something that is offered to an individual by allowing them time to be trained, to gain and enhance experience.
So if there must be structural reform in wages, then it must be in the direction of greater, and not less, stability in employment.
There is a second fundamental point of which I desperately hope to convince my fellow Members in the next five - now four - years, and that is that we cannot claim to wish to respect the Kyoto Agreement by the year 2008.
We are aware, and the report acknowledges as much, that, at the moment, it is contradictory to attempt to reconcile an objective of 3% annual growth with the rejection of the urgent requirement to invest in energy saving, transport systems, in improving accommodation, in such a way as to make the Kyoto objectives and the objective of 3% growth compatible.
- (EL) Mr President, the Commission' s recommendation for the broad economic guidelines for 2000 may well accept a return to full employment, but it has stood by the basic approach of previous years.
Although I recognise the contribution made by Parliament and our rapporteur in gaining acceptance once again for the concept of full employment, I think that the rapporteur himself, whom I congratulate on his efforts, would agree that we need to redefine what we mean by employment and by full employment.
What does employed mean when we have before us a policy which dismantles working relations, minimises employment and, as a result, makes general poverty a mass phenomenon.
As far as its general approach is concerned, the Commission' s recommendation forms part of a more general neo-liberal economic and social policy which, with the support of the majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, finds expression in the report under discussion.
As far as we are concerned, the basic policy objectives should be to support public investment, stable, permanent and full employment, protect and improve the social security system and the system of social protection in general and strengthen active demand by improving the purchasing power of the workers.
This is the direction the broad guidelines should be taking.
The amendments which we propose to the European Parliament move in precisely this direction and we call on our fellow members to vote in favour of them.
Mr President, reading the broad guidelines for the economic policy presented by the Commission for the year 2000 leaves one with a strange impression that something is missing because nowhere is there any mention of the single currency, except in a brief and fleeting reference, stating the importance of the Maastricht criterion regarding the rationalisation of public finances or the need to gear monetary policy towards price stability.
There is not a word, however, on the current depreciation of the euro and its influence on the economy and economic policies.
This seems all the more surprising because every few pages the Commission document reiterates the idea that efficiency demands an overall strategy.
The same is unfortunately true of the European Parliament' s report since, out of the 35 points raised in the resolution, not one relates to the single currency, and it is only briefly referred to in the recitals.
Apparently, the rule of silence is prevailing, as it did when the major groups within Parliament rejected the proposal from the Union for a Europe of Nations Group to organise, as of today, a debate on the implications of fluctuations in the euro.
This debate has been deferred once again, even though there is a great deal to be discussed.
For years, all the economic and financial advantages a strong euro was going to offer have been trotted out for our benefit.
Now the euro is weak, are we to assume that the loss of these advantages has no implications worth mentioning?
This is surely some mistake!
The weak euro favours exports, as is often boasted.
It also, however, presents serious disadvantages which are concealed, such as the misappropriation of capital, third party buyouts of euro zone businesses or weakening of the incentive for structural reforms, even though these are so necessary.
Finally, the basic problem still remains.
This depreciation in the euro has occurred because it is perceived as an artificial currency, but until this is clearly stated it will not be possible to remedy the situation.
In this instance too, then, let us hope that the European Parliament agrees to organise a debate in the near future, before it is too late.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, having scarcely emerged from the dull 80s, Europe has been plunged into the throes of international speculation.
We were promised a euro-cum-mark that would be stronger than the dollar, and which would compensate for the weakness of economic growth by means of the on-going revaluation of assets.
We have an ersatz currency whose volatility is enhanced by its non-identifiable character.
Formerly, speculation on the exchange market involved the pound.
Now it is the euro.
This is nothing particularly surprising for us Members of the European Parliament who are accustomed to seeing Europe operating on a daily basis amid differences and antagonisms.
What will the situation be like after enlargement, when the markets will react to any event affecting any one of the thirty odd countries which make up the European technostructure?
It would almost be like the United Nations issuing a currency.
This reduction in the value of the euro is not something that Mr Duisenberg can do anything about, as this European Central Bank, whatever they say, is the brainchild of the two main States in the euro zone, and the French and German Governments have given the order to do nothing.
In order to maintain the value of the euro in relation to the dollar, we should have to raise euro interest rates to a level which is slightly higher than that of the dollar, perhaps to a level in the order of 50 base points.
From my standpoint as a post-Keynesian, I see this as having little impact on economic growth, since this depends on various other factors, the most important of which are psychological.
Obviously, we cannot agree to all assets located in France being devalued if the downward slide of the euro continues beyond the short term.
If this should happen, and obviously we hope it does not, then we should have to point the finger at the parties responsible, and this would not mean Mr Duisenberg.
We shall judge the candidates in the French presidential elections according to the efforts they have made to get us out of this bind.
Mr President, the report is self-contradictory.
Paragraph 14 supports the Stability Pact' s demand that price stability should always precede employment-related considerations.
Elsewhere, the desire is for higher employment and more democratic influence upon economic policy.
However, inflation should always, of course, be between zero and two per cent.
This is something that is supported, even though inflation has only stood at that rate for a period of six years in post-war Germany and Denmark.
It is now quite certain, however, that this state of affairs will always be best for all countries at all times.
We no longer have any need for elected representatives to devise the right policy mix.
We have a Central Bank which establishes interest rates on the basis of inflation.
In this way, the euro is allowed to depreciate and interest rates are increased with the result that there may be lower rates of growth and increased unemployment.
It is worse than the sacred cows in India, yet the report does not protest against this.
In paragraph G, on the other hand, a new sacred cow is to be found: that of high taxation.
Social security arrangements must be critically examined and social expenditure reduced, but savings can also be made on social expenditure by making higher employment the top economic objective.
In that way, people receiving cash benefits and unemployment benefit will be able to exchange these for proper wages.
That is an alternative recipe for economic policy, but one which is contrary to the Treaty.
The balance of trade deficit is normally to be no more than one per cent of GNP, irrespective of whether the money is used for investments, which can subsequently produce much larger deficits again.
This would seem to be something which no amount of elections in the Member States or in the EU Parliament can change.
This is absurd.
It runs counter to all experience and is a denial of the principle of democracy which unites our countries and which means that voters can go to the polls and vote in favour of higher employment, even if inflation might, as a result, occasionally rise above the two per cent mark.
Mr President, the European economic locomotive is not really picking up steam.
Unemployment levels in Europe are too high, particularly as the more vulnerable members of society, i.e. young people, women and the long-term unemployed, are affected.
In addition to launching a technical offensive in economic terms within the Union, for example, by setting up highways of information and focusing on research and development expenditure, it is of paramount importance to step up investment by approximately 10%, so as to secure growth and bring unemployment levels down.
We must carry on heavily promoting the establishment and continued operation of small- and medium-sized enterprises, by improving access to foreign capital, dismantling bureaucratic hurdles, reducing the burden of taxation and also offering free business advice.
However, we must also reform our administrative systems.
The Union should therefore adopt a directive on administrative simplification, requiring the Member States to only adopt logistical legislation that can be implemented swiftly and easily by the citizens, and which is simple and also comprehensible to them.
Mr President, I enthusiastically support the further deepening of integration.
Many matters are best dealt with at Community level, but when I read the report of my colleague Mr Katiforis - which provides several guidelines which are favourable to the market economy and therefore worthy of support - I cannot agree with some of the proposals in it.
The dynamism and desired growth of the European economy will not come about by creating Union-wide integrated programmes, whether they be applied with good intentions in the area of training or entrepreneurship or whether they be common support systems for the benefit of SME organisations.
I also have my personal doubts about the superiority of a European scientific community, if it is to be created from above, i.e. by the volition of the Commission and the Council, and not allowed to develop naturally through networking between the scientific communities, from one business or university to another; financing, both at a national and European level, must naturally be secured.
Something which I have reservations about is the faith in the importance of top-level structures which stands out in this report; a programme and planning from the top may actually put the brakes on development rather than make it dynamic.
At present, European dynamism will be improved by dismantling top-level structures, for example, barriers to trade, which are still hindering the creation of a genuine internal market.
This is what Mr Katiforis is also calling for, albeit of the Commission, when it should be demanded of those nation states, which - in a few individual cases - practice obstructionism, for example, in the areas of transport, public procurement or energy.
When discussing economic policies in the context of this report, we should not forget about competition policy.
Recently, the neutrality of the Communities' competition policy has been called into question - justifiably so - inter alia in the case of Volvo-Scania.
The reason given for regional monopolies and concentration of power in regions with a small population base is rather lame.
It is clearly a real blow to the industry and trade of small and remote countries while they are making efforts to increase their competitiveness within the Union area.
Mr President, I congratulate Mr Katiforis and Commissioner Solbes, both of whom have displayed a broader than usual understanding of what is necessary for a successful economy.
We must take advantage of the fact that we are in the European Union to do things collectively.
I wish to concentrate on research and development.
I regret that the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy did not draw up an opinion on Mr Katiforis' s report - it should have done.
Compared to the US and Japan, we are woefully lacking in a proper research strategy in almost all Member States except Finland, Sweden and the Republic of Ireland - countries shown in the Commission paper to have had unusual success.
We need scientists in order to have research and development.
Let us stop young people choosing to do other things.
Let us encourage women.
Let us ensure that competence in widely-used languages is increased.
Above all, let us look at the salaries paid to scientists and technologists.
That is what makes them choose other careers.
Of course, we need infrastructure in science facilities and communications.
We need a strategy.
Jacques Delors spelt it out in his White Paper, so we do not need to reinvent his thoughts.
However, the big difference between us and the successful economies of the world - the US in particular - is that they spend far more money on investment in science, and it pays off.
Commissioner Busquin' s communication on the European research area is very good.
However, what is important is the next stage: transferring that knowledge into goods and products and processes which can be sold.
Let us be innovative in the European Union.
Let us start by bringing the innovation unit back from Luxembourg to Brussels, where it can use its skills working with other departments of the Commission.
That would be a not very revolutionary but a sensible thing to do.
Mr President, as everyone is pointing out, the euro has just lost almost 30% of its value in sixteen months, but the European Commission, like the Central Bank, does not seem to be in much of a hurry to learn the lessons of this experience, as that would be liable to challenge the current monetary policy which benefits only stock exchange transactions and speculation.
The ambition to achieve full employment and a modern economy, as declared in Lisbon, are indeed laudable objectives, but they are now effectively coming up against the liberal yoke.
In its document on the broad economic guidelines, the Commission pursues this liberal approach, and these guidelines now represent the reference text for the coordination of economic policy in the Member States.
The Commission, indeed, shows no compunction in issuing orders to this or that State with a view to drawing up its budget.
It clearly stresses the target of budgetary streamlining, even going beyond the requirements of the Stability Pact.
Following the example of the Central Bank, it demands wage moderation as well as structural reform of the labour market, especially in order to make it more flexible.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs' report is in line with this approach and with the continuation of the Lisbon decisions.
It advocates accelerating the liberalisation process as well as the process of applying pressure to wages.
It proposes increasing the flexibility of the labour market.
This is why I am unable to approve of the guidelines contained in this report, especially when made exacerbated by the many amendments introduced by the right wing.
The current economic situation, particularly with the decline in the euro, ought to lead the Union and the Member State governments to strive towards the reorientation of European policy, so as to enable it at last to fulfil expectations regarding social issues.
We must shake up the dogma of the Stability Pact.
We must reverse the current approach, which makes social policy nothing more than a consequence of economic and monetary policy, responsible only for making good the damage caused by the market by means of a policy of aid.
This new policy should be particularly based on support to investment that creates jobs by means of a selective policy of credit, the improvement in living and working conditions and a reduction of working hours without flexibility or increased precariousness, taxation on income and financial measures to curb speculation and to release new resources.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on the very points which so displeased the previous speaker, i.e. the sections of the reports which display a liberal approach.
In fact, as recent events concerning the euro illustrate, the European Union and the institutions are currently at a crossroads: we have the choice between the road to prosperity and growth, undertaking radical structural liberalisation reforms that Europe must implement boldly, and the road of preservation and the perpetuation of a corporate, statist vision of the economy which is condemning many European countries to levels of unemployment which are two or three times higher than those in America and to a marginal role in the most innovative and dynamic sectors of the economy.
Having said that, I cannot fail to welcome the Katiforis and Pomés Ruiz reports, which clearly stress the way in which the liberalisation and flexible nature of the markets - especially the labour market - the dramatic reduction in tax pressure, a thorough reform of state pension systems and the gradual separation of state and economy - first and foremost through the privatisation of public companies - are all choices which cannot now be put off any longer if we want to avoid building a Europe which may well be united, but united by unemployment, marginalisation of the most vulnerable, in particular women and children, and by the endless red tape surrounding the social initiatives of the society, a Europe, that is, which will fail to create either growth or employment.
This is one of the shortcomings of the euro, a currency which is suffering from a structural crisis and inflexible, excessively regulated markets.
Some say that political control of the economy at European level would be a way of resolving this crisis.
Beware!
If political control has to be a means of control which transfers the interventionism of national economies to Brussels, this would be a bad move.
We Italian Radicals are also in favour of political control, but federalist, liberal control, with a limited number of clear laws and no state intervention in the economy, even by the European State.
Mr President, the present draft resolution by Mr Katiforis contains many valid points.
We should, however, qualify one key point concerning a matter of principle.
Both the Commission' s recommendation and the resolution claim high economically sustainable growth as the highest good and pursue this remorselessly.
This is odd, given the global relations in which the rich West is seen as an exclusive residential neighbourhood.
Do we want even more?
Do we really need so much growth or can we combat unemployment by other means?
The lopsided emphasis on material goods is bound to have a detrimental effect on our society.
It stimulates egocentricity, social exclusion, a blurring of moral standards and moral decay.
The corruption of society eventually harms economic development.
On a positive note, attention is paid to the effects of an ageing population on the sustainability of government funds.
Only since 1999 have both government expenditure and revenue fallen.
A further consolidation, a reduction in the debt burden, is desperately needed in many Member States, so as to ensure that funds are available in future for health care and provision for old age.
Taxes and social security contributions in the European Union are high compared to the United States, but the picture changes fundamentally when we consider the sometimes extortionate insurance premiums which American citizens have to pay.
The amendments which aim to shift the tax burden from labour to the use of scarce raw materials and minerals receive our support.
After all, the Kyoto Agreement more than merits compliance.
Mr President, I want to associate myself this morning with those people who have spoken in this debate and expressed some desire to challenge an atmosphere of complacency about the current state of the European economy.
I share the view expressed earlier by Mrs McNally that you can look to the United States and see that there has been investment in research.
That is one of the reasons why the United States is doing better than Europe.
But we must also emphasise that one of the other reasons why the United States continues to do so much better than Europe is because Europe has not yet properly addressed the issue of structural reform and market liberalisation.
I refer to the remarks made earlier by Mr Lipietz for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
I am very pleased to engage in a debate with him over the next four years on this issue of market liberalisation.
The fact is that we have not yet seen the agreed market liberalisation within Europe applied in some Member States, not least his own.
I have a shared concern about the jobs of workers.
I would be very pleased to bring Mr Lipietz to speak to workers in the United Kingdom who may lose their jobs as a result of decisions made by a French owner of energy companies in the UK, when British companies are not allowed to gain access to the French market because the French have not applied agreed European policy.
That is a structural reform we must drive through.
It is not just in that area.
We see that the wealthiest states within the European Union continue to be the states that apply the strongest amount of state aid.
That is robbing the jobs of some of the poorer states who are represented here.
That is also one of the reasons why I do not share the view expressed by Mr von Wogau in relation to competition policy.
My concern, where decentralisation is concerned, is that there should not be a repatriation of competition policy.
Mr President, over the past few days, the debate on a European economic government has gained momentum once again in different quarters.
It is evident that more economic management is required at European level, but it is not so evident that only the 11 euro zone countries or the Ecofin Council will need to take on that coordination.
At the Lisbon Summit, a decision was made precisely in favour of a wider socio-economic approach in which employment, economic reform and social cohesion are seen as being interrelated.
In my opinion, the key conclusion that was reached at that summit was that the European Council will itself adopt an active, guiding and coordinating role.
Each spring, our government leaders will discuss the socio-economic policy on the basis of an integrated progress report from the European Commission.
Unfortunately, spring had already started this year.
The text for the broad economic guidelines for 2000 had already been drafted, very much along established lines.
Why did the Commission not take more time and, in line with Lisbon, draft the guidelines in an interdisciplinary manner, as prepared by the different DGs?
Why do we not let the Commission continue with, and further develop, this type of cooperation, which also typified the preparatory work for Lisbon, in a socio-economic field?
That seems to me a highly interesting challenge for the Commission' s new Secretary General, David O'Sullivan.
I would suggest taking into account conclusion 29 of the present report, which advocates a drastic renewal of the intellectual apparatus behind economic policy-making to bring it in line with the Lisbon conclusions.
I would also like to make reference to the conclusions of this Parliament' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, compiled by Mr Cocilovo.
He proposes the drawing up of a single annual report on the economic and social state of the Union, and one set of annual guidelines for sustainable growth, employment and social cohesion.
One additional suggestion I would like to make is to include the socio-economic forum, which is scheduled for next month, earlier on in the annual cycle, i.e. at the very beginning of the year.
At the moment, it is just tacked on at the end.
Finally, I would like to draw the attention of the Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs to the consensus-oriented cooperation which we have enjoyed in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in this sphere and add that we in this Parliament should break though the compartmentalisation and endeavour to rise above the hobbyhorses of this or the other side and to have an input in, for example, next month' s forum, precisely on that basis.
Mr President, I have very mixed feelings about the recommendations on economic policy put forward by the Commission, and also about the report by Mr Katiforis, and I feel there is a great deal of food for thought.
However, we reject the overall view.
Firstly, it is quite astonishing how ready the other groups are to accept, without criticism, a fairly dogmatic kind of neo-liberalism.
Reference is made in the recitals, with evident concern, to the decline in public investment in infrastructure, yet in the conclusions one is expressly warned against an active public investment policy.
In my view, flexibility, liberalisation and monetarism are the one-sided aspects of this policy.
Given that express reference is made to the fact that current economic policy is guided by the objectives of the Stability Pact, and the Commission wants to go further still, then it is obvious that social, cultural and environmental needs will inevitably be sacrificed to this as a matter of principle.
Secondly, owing to radical technological change, and I quote: "an overall revision in the conditions of work, remuneration and taxation" is being called for, with no reference to the need to conserve and rejuvenate the social and participatory institutions that have determined the nature and success of the European social model.
Thirdly, as someone has already mentioned, this report talks in terms of a new fetishism for growth.
Full employment, and even the transition to the knowledge-based society are thought to be almost exclusively dependent on higher growth.
On the other hand, there is no reference whatsoever to the fair distribution of available gainful employment, the realisation of a modern, third economic sector for social, cultural and environmental services, regionalisation of economic cycles, demand-orientated policy, or even the content of a knowledge-based society in social, educational policy and cultural terms.
It is evident from the recitals that, for the sake of economic growth, allowance is even made for transgression of the vital Kyoto Agreement on the climate.
Now that is what I call scandalous!
Fourthly, the report advocates further flexibilisation of the financial systems, as opposed to at last getting to grips with the fact that this policy benefits speculative currencies and share operations, and disadvantages real economic investment, which clearly accounts for the structural weakness of investments lamented in the report.
In economic policy terms, reason dictates that we should at last think seriously about concepts such as the Tobin tax.
The Commission' s recommendation and report may be evaluated in the light of the euro system' s most fundamental problems, and these are undeniably major and glaringly apparent.
I come from a country whose people enjoy the rare privilege of being consulted in connection with such far-reaching decisions as participation in the euro system.
Among Danes, there is a great deal of scepticism about, and opposition to, the national currency being swallowed up by the euro.
I have no doubt that this scepticism and opposition are shared by large and growing groups of the populations of the other Member States, who are not being consulted.
I only have time to mention a couple of points.
The first is one which is extremely important to the whole problem surrounding the euro.
Nobel Prize-winner Franco Modigliani points out that, in his view, unemployment has certainly been used by the European Central Bank as an instrument of economic policy designed to control inflation.
This is a crucial point.
The other absolutely crucial point I would mention is directly connected with the subject of the current motion for a resolution: the political weakness of the euro system.
What is missing, of course, is a political superstructure for steering economic policy.
This is the background to the French government' s proposal that the EU' s euro system should be equipped with a form of proper economic government.
It is these political consequences which are so crucial to the issue of the Danish people' s consent.
I can predict that the question of whether or not the euro zone is to be enlarged to include Denmark, Sweden and Great Britain will be decided in Denmark in the referendum on 28 September.
The scepticism I have expressed here continues to grow.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is evident from the debate and the report that we are taking an optimistic attitude to this report, because of the forecasts and the upturn in the European economy since the summer of 1999.
However, we are also level-headed and determined in our approach.
We are being level-headed about the prospects, deficits and external value of the euro, and are determined to overcome the deficit vis-à-vis the United States as swiftly and as soon as possible.
The deficit stems from the fact that we have a lower level of growth, higher unemployment, lower investment levels, less research and development activity, a slower rate of turnover and a low average income.
This is what has led us to draw up a plan comprising a variety of objectives and necessary measures, such as accelerated growth with no capacity bottlenecks or inflationary pressure, preserving price stability in other words, careful wage development, stepping up our efforts in research and development and a further reduction of deficits and debts.
We need to continue to pursue structural reform measures, and to do so with courage and determination, and to continue liberalisation, thus reducing the level of state ownership.
We need to direct our efforts at creating new jobs, i.e. we need to support the new economy, and we must make the transition to the knowledge-based economy, which can be ascribed to the fact that we need competition when it comes to getting into telecommunications technology in education, training and research.
If we go down this path, then, for the first time in years, there is a chance that we could return to full employment in Europe, and that is our goal.
Mr President, the Katiforis report is no more than a mundane vindication of the broad guidelines for the economic policies of the Member States.
Of its 29 paragraphs, 8 go in for approval and then 4 indulge in self-congratulation.
As far as the working population of the countries of the European Union is concerned, there really is not much to be pleased about.
What use is the economic growth that the report boasts about, if it is only going to recommend - addressing employees of course - adopting a reasonable attitude in wage negotiations, going so far as to claim that the pension system must be radically revised with a view to protecting their financial position?
This is one way of admitting that there is no place in this growth for employed workers or for retired workers.
Once again, the Council and the Commission are acting as spokespersons for big business, asking Parliament to sanction it.
For our part, we have not been elected to offer congratulations to governments that come to the assistance of big business and major financial groups in order to enable them to accrue even greater wealth by exacerbating inequalities, leaving 18 million women and men unemployed, making flexibility at work and job instability more widespread, by making swingeing cuts in the total wage bill in order to ensure the continued growth of income from capital, including its most parasitic speculative forms.
If it is true, as the report states, that we have seen a return to growth, then it is all the more appalling that, throughout Europe, only a tiny minority benefits from it.
We shall therefore be voting against this report.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the European Union is having to compete with a series of challenges generated by globalisation and the creation of a new economy based on knowledge and new technologies.
The Union' s strategic goal for the forthcoming decade must be to ensure economic growth and free enterprise, without violating the social question, with guidelines based on competitiveness, sustainable development and the creation of new jobs.
On the subject of this last point, as the Katiforis report stressed, there has been a slight fall in unemployment in Europe, but unemployment is still unacceptably high, particularly as regards the level of unemployment among women and young people.
The situation appears worse in certain regions of Southern Europe, in particular in the South of Italy, where 21.9% of the workforce is unemployed, including 56.6% of the 14-25 age group.
Consequently, in my opinion, broad guidelines for economic growth and a rise in employment should include measures to render the European market more competitive and increase job flexibility.
In order to bring about sustainable growth, we need to finalise creation of the internal market and remove all the remaining barriers by liberalising those sectors which are not yet totally open to free competition, such as transport, gas, electricity and the postal services.
We need to introduce the reforms which will have to be implemented by the Member States in order to alleviate the burden on firms, reduce labour costs, sustain actions supporting lifelong learning in the context of a knowledge-based economy and support research to close the gap between Europe and the United States and Japan.
We need to facilitate public administration structural reform in the countries where excessive red tape is a barrier to private investment and bring the social protection and taxation systems into line with the requirements imposed by the new economic rules and with the constraints established by the Stability and Growth Pact.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the message of the Lisbon Summit was clear and unambiguous: it put the spotlight back on the people as the architects of economic success.
That is the key concept: a knowledge-based economy in which each and every individual is able to develop his or her talents.
It is also central to the combination of innovation and social participation that we intend to use to mobilise society' s full potential and overall assets, so as to achieve full employment again.
It is the task of the economic policy guidelines to convert this noble aim into concrete policy.
However, the Commission' s recommendations are to be found wanting in this respect.
All too often, they are fainthearted and wedded to outmoded ideas, when what they should be doing is developing an outline for a promising new form of policy mix.
That is why it is necessary for these guidelines to be improved on, and what we need most of all, in future, is for a joint spring report to be drafted which is capable of properly combining sustainable growth, employment and social cohesion.
This must also have a noticeable effect on practical politics.
This will have certain consequences, in two areas in particular.
Sustainable economic growth of 3% or more requires a dramatic increase in investment, particularly in environmentally friendly sectors.
This applies both to the private and the public sectors.
The Commission has a decision to make in this respect.
It cannot simultaneously pursue the Lisbon objectives and put the case for a policy of overall tax reductions and expenditure cuts!
Mr President, we do not support the Commission' s guidelines.
They are outdated and obsoleted by events and do not contain any prospect of a solution to the extremely serious problems which are both holding back economic development and, in particular, weighing down the citizens.
The proposed formulae will lead to ruin: flexibility at all costs, further dismantling of the Welfare State with pension cuts, the imposition of unjustified salary restrictions across the board, and even discrimination between regions, a decrease in public investment and obsessive recourse to the Stability Pact and the monetarism which have not only already caused irreparable harm in the past but have certainly not done anything to support a euro which is yielding increasingly to the supremacy of the dollar.
The acclaimed macroeconomic development for job creation is so tied up in the self-regulation of the free market that it has not yet created any jobs, rather it has destroyed stable jobs, while, in the worst of cases, contributing to keeping salaries low in precarious employment sectors.
This is not the way to fight unemployment, but it will heighten social poverty, increase the democratic deficit and feed public scepticism towards the democratic institutions.
Mr President, firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur and the committee for their magnificent work, and all the speakers in today' s debate for the additional ideas they have contributed, which will no doubt be useful to the Commission and the debate in the Council of Ministers.
Today, together with the broad guidelines for economic policies, other issues have been raised, particularly in relation to the euro.
When speaking of the euro, I would point out two things: firstly, I would ask that the problem be looked at in its entirety, not simply the exchange rate problem.
Secondly, I would point out that the Commission' s position remains the same; that is to say, clear growth and price stability must logically lead to an improvement in the euro.
This is not an issue we can go into today, but I wanted to make those points.
Today, we are discussing in particular the broad guidelines for economic policies.
The new broad guidelines differ from previous ones in that they partially incorporate Lisbon.
It has been said that they do not incorporate it fully.
This is true in the sense that Lisbon is too close to the presentation of the broad guidelines and the bulk of the work had been done previously.
Nevertheless, I believe that there were elements prior to Lisbon which anticipated or foresaw what was going to happen there and which have been incorporated into the broad guidelines.
Many of you have referred to the idea of full employment as a fundamental element.
Full employment, according to the Commission' s initial document - which formed the basis of the Lisbon decision - is something which can be achieved as long as the proposed policies are implemented.
The problem of full employment is patently one of our primary concerns.
We can put a figure on both our employment objectives as well as on what we take the expression "full employment" to mean, as some of you have suggested.
It all depends on what we consider the objectives to be.
It is absolutely essential, in speaking of these objectives, that we know whether they are political objectives or whether they represent the possibility of achieving certain economic results, as a consequence of the policies we implement.
In any event, I would say to those who are concerned about this issue that the quantitative and qualitative assessment of full employment will become more efficient when we implement the indicators relating to the different policies.
Some speakers have shown a degree of concern about the Commission' s habitual proposals on the flexibility of the labour market.
In our view, this flexibility will lead to a better balance in supply and demand in the labour market.
It will therefore lead to more employment, but also - as we have always argued - greater quality of employment.
This is something we have regularly stressed.
The flexibility of the labour market involves many other things: we can talk about regulating working time, but also the removal of all the obstacles which currently stand in the way of employment, such as tax-related issues.
A major point of concern throughout this debate has been the development of investment.
The central element of these broad guidelines for economic policies is trying to increase the European Union' s potential for growth.
If we are not capable of doing so, it is blatantly obvious that the current positive growth forecasts of over 3% will only last a relatively short amount of time and this trend will not be allowed to continue.
That is why public and private investment are absolutely essential.
Since 1997, investment has been increasing progressively.
By 2001, public and private investment should reach 21% of GDP and, in 2004, it should reach 23%, which would bring us very close to that objective of 24%, which was mentioned in the Commission' s White Paper on Growth, Employment and Competitiveness.
I would like to raise a point here which seems to me to be essential.
In my opinion, there is no contradiction between greater investment, greater public investment, and the Stability Pact.
On the contrary, I believe that since the Stability Pact has allowed for the rationalisation of public finances, it will bring greater public investment in the future.
I agree with the view that, in these new circumstances, an improvement in the quality of public finances must involve greater public investment.
This is a point which the Commission has highlighted in the different stability and convergence programmes and, clearly, it is a point which we must continue to stress.
Some speakers have also mentioned the importance of research and development and the new economy.
This is one of the key elements of the broad guidelines, but I would like to remind you - as I always do - that the main point of the introduction of the new economy is to improve productivity, which is the element which is most likely to bring future growth.
I would like to make an additional comment on two points.
Firstly, with regard to the interinstitutional agreement, which has been of concern to the Commission, and secondly, the problems of greater coordination in the face of greater subsidiarity.
With regard to the interinstitutional agreement, this is clearly one of Parliament' s recurrent demands.
It is also true that its implementation raises legal problems, as well as problems relating to the status of its participants, but I believe that, in any event, we should be satisfied with the progress made this year.
I promised you some months ago, when we discussed this issue in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, that the Commission would try to make the greatest possible progress with regard to its cooperation with Parliament.
It does not take the form of an interinstitutional agreement, but the presentation of the document on the results of the broad guidelines for economic policies, which will permit a prior debate in Parliament, seems to me to be a positive thing.
There are other more profound elements, such as the introduction of the idea of broader economic discussions, with the participation of Parliament, and the famous entretiens économiques, which will, in the future, offer us new opportunities and ideas for our political debate.
In my opinion, the Portuguese Presidency' s idea - which we support - of also establishing a debate with Parliament on these issues, not at an institutional level as suggested by Parliament, but of a different nature, is also clearly positive.
I believe that this is a good direction to take, and we must continue to cooperate in this regard in the future.
Lastly, I would like to point out that something has been raised which may seem contradictory between those who argue for greater coordination of economic policies and those who argue for greater subsidiarity in the way these policies are applied.
As you all know, economic policies are the responsibility of the Member States and, in this respect, subsidiarity is guaranteed.
In my opinion, the greatest possible coordination is essential.
I therefore argue that we should move ahead with the coordination of economic policies, making reference to the Member States' obligations.
I realise that for some of you this may seem like interference by the Commission in the responsibilities of the Member States, but that is what is laid down in the Treaty, in the legislation which we have created for ourselves, and that is the Commission' s mandate: to make specific recommendations.
I said that coordination is necessary, but I do not believe that this has to be incompatible with subsidiarity.
Greater coordination and greater definition of global policies does not exclude, however, the existence of an additional margin for action on the part of the Member States.
I would like to end my intervention by thanking you all for your contributions, your participation in the debate and for your majority support for the document presented.
Stability and convergence programmes
The next item is the report (A5-0108/2000) by Mr Pomés Ruiz, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the annual assessment of the implementation of the stability and convergence programmes (2000/2041(INI)).
Mr President, Commissioner, I am very happy to reiterate your closing words in the debate on subsidiarity or coordination.
I agree with you, Commissioner, when you say that there is no contradiction between these two terms, and that they should both be perfectly achievable.
Perhaps this debate, on the 11 stability plans presented by the countries participating in the euro and the four convergence plans, is a good time to review the harmonisation between the subsidiarity and coordination required by the introduction and future of the single currency.
This, therefore, is the flip-side of the debate which we have just held on the report by Mr Katiforis, and we must firstly begin to think about the instrument.
This is the first time that this Parliament has debated the 15 plans presented by the Member States.
I suspect that, in subsequent versions, the report will not be a single whole, but rather a detailed study will have to be made of the solutions, the weak and strong points, which this Parliament detects in the economic policies proposed by the Member States.
We are therefore going to ask for more detail in the plans which are submitted, in the structure of expenditure and also of income, paying particular attention to investments.
We would ask that the projections they make in the medium and long term take account of different scenarios relating to the development of interest rates, demographic development and other variables affecting the stability of our accounts in the long term.
We also ask in this regard - and I am returning to the debate on subsidiarity - for greater political commitment from the 15 national parliaments.
We believe that this is a task which falls to everyone, and not just to the European Parliament.
Some Member States have subjected the stability and convergence plans to internal debate in order to seek political support for this idea of jointly building economic unity, and we should ask the Member States who have not done so to debate these programmes in their parliaments in order to try, firstly, to persuade those states and parliaments to participate in this common task and, secondly, to provide political support for the commitments which are agreed to regarding the necessary coordination of economic policies.
Turning to the report' s proposals to the House, I am very pleased to note that all of the budgetary objectives established in previous programmes have been met, and even exceeded.
However, this cause for satisfaction is counter-balanced by the fact that, aside from the possible criticism that the objectives could perhaps have been more demanding and rigorous, we are seeing that the objectives have been achieved, not as a result of the interest and efforts of the Member States, but simply to factors such as the favourable development of interest rates or greater than expected tax revenue.
We therefore believe that, although budgetary consolidation must continue to be a priority, the economic environment - which has improved a lot - must offer us the possibility of speeding up consolidation and, at the same time, undertaking structural reforms in the medium term.
It is not acceptable for this relative economic boom to dissuade the Member States from making decisions - sometimes difficult decisions - on structural reforms.
These include, firstly, labour reform, which we discussed earlier.
It is clear that not all the states have implemented the labour reforms which we consider appropriate.
The improved performance of the labour market - which is clear - has been based on satisfactory economic growth, and not all the Member States have made the rigorous reforms that they must make, more radical reforms, to resolve the unacceptable problem of the high rate of unemployment in the European countries in comparison to other countries and which is not only an economic blight but also, and above all, a personal and family blight which cannot be permitted in the modern Europe of the 21st Century.
It is also crucial that we liberalise the telecommunications and energy markets, and not all countries are doing so in the same way.
With regard to tax reform, we should welcome the reduction in the high level of taxes in France, Germany, the Netherlands and Spain, and we should bear in mind that the high rate of unemployment often relates to the fact that we have high levels of tax.
In the long-term reforms, we should also include the serious problem of population.
In the programmes presented to us, we note that particular attention is given to the ageing of the population.
Perhaps it is time that we insisted that Member States resolve the demographic problem at source, through a suitable approach to both tax revenue policies and social expenditure, in order to protect families with children.
This is the way to tackle the problem at source, and not only its effects.
This is the only way we will prevent the old Europe from becoming a decrepit Europe.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, as far as we are concerned, it is clear that the targets laid down in the Stability Pact constitute the definitive guiding principle for economic policy in the euro zone.
That is why this report is so important, and in the light of the rapporteur' s reference in his explanatory statement to the fact that Greece' s programme is not dealt with in detail in his document as it will form the subject of a special report, then, on behalf of my Group, I am bound to say that it will be too late for the special report as far as we are concerned, because matters are not being handled as they were during the debate on the candidate countries two years ago in 1998.
We also adopted the convergence reports in April of that year, and held the accession debate in May.
Since the next item on the agenda is a debate on Greece' s membership of the euro zone, and we are to take a decision on it tomorrow, our Group has tabled several amendments, so as to enable us to be even-handed in our approach.
This is why I would very briefly like to go into the fact that Greece has not yet completely fulfilled the criteria pertaining to public debt, and that the sustainability requirement, which we set great store by, as far as the inflation rate is concerned at any rate, is viewed by the ECB, as well as the Commission and ourselves, with some concern.
Hence we would emphasise that whilst we welcome Greece' s participation in the EMS since 18 May 1998, and its achievements, the criteria must be applied in full to all candidate countries.
We have noted that, according to reports by the Commission and the ECB, Greece is currently fulfilling the convergence criteria, - when they are given a liberal interpretation, as happened in 1998 too - although one cannot help but have some doubts on the sustainability front.
This relates to the inflation criterion and we would demand a further reduction in the level of debt and the implementation of a programme.
We are also calling for a concrete action plan to further privatise Greek state enterprise and implement the single market.
Mr President, the Group of the Party of European Socialists endorses the rapporteur' s proposals because it is quite clear from the first published report on the stability and convergence programmes that these programmes, along with the review, are not a mere exercise, rather, for the very first time within the European Union, and especially within the euro zone, it is understood that economic developments, the financial perspectives, and also commitment in terms of budgetary policy, are not just the affair of an individual Member State, but of all Member States.
That is why it is right that the European Parliament should take these reports seriously, and go so far as to examine once again not only whether monetary union has created an internal market, with no currency fluctuations or attendant negative effects on growth and employment, but whether the Member States have actually kept their promises; i.e. those that belong to the euro zone and those that are to submit convergence programmes.
After all, monetary union is actually laid down and provided for in the Treaty of Maastricht as a Community of stability.
Only States that have demonstrated their ability to maintain price stability and financial solidity, and that can help to make the monetary union a real Community of stability, are able to join monetary union.
Exactly the same applies to Greece.
We will have further debates on this.
To Mr Karas I have to say that the requirements we make of Italy and Belgium, for example, regarding debt reduction, will, of course, apply to Greece as well.
We will also keep an eye out for overly optimistic data being submitted in this regard.
Greece must be able to make the grade in this respect too.
It is evident from the annual exercise concerning the stability and convergence programmes that the EU Member States are seasoned partners that are able to withstand criticism.
They must allow their partners to scrutinise their economic and budgetary status quo, and accept and act on their conclusions.
Hence, the second round will be far more important than the current one, because, for the first time, actual criticism has been voiced.
We have yet to see what effect this will have on future programmes.
One matter of regret to my mind though, is that the EU Finance Ministers are not yet using the working method of the Luxembourg Process on the employment guidelines as a benchmark.
It is also regrettable that, consequently, it has not been possible to add to the progress made on the stability and convergence front, because the programmes have not been compared in terms of quality.
I therefore believe that if these points were to be taken up, it could further enhance harmonisation, both in the context of the development of the internal market and of the euro zone.
The same applies to coordination of the taxation systems.
Tax coordination worthy of the name must at last prevail within the EU.
Mr President, the Liberal Group supports the rigorous and demanding report by Mr Pomés Ruiz.
It lays out and highlights both the achievements and the shortcomings of the Member States in the way the stability and convergence programmes are applied, which, as I mentioned in my previous intervention on the Katiforis report, have brought satisfactory results for the whole of the European economy.
However, this current satisfactory situation must not mask a series of shortcomings and must lead to the implementation of the series of recommendations which the rapporteur, Mr Pomés Ruiz, correctly makes in his report.
He mentioned one of these recommendations in his speech: the need to take advantage of the current favourable situation, the healthy state of public finances - which on the other hand are disciplined by the stability and convergence programmes - in order to reduce the deficit, and possibly remove it completely, as well as to reduce debt levels, even to below the limits set in the convergence programmes.
This would mean that we could make far-reaching tax reforms which would contribute to a more favourable environment for our economy, for business initiative, to freeing up resources and promoting them by fiscal means in an area which is one of our priority commitments: to be up-to-date and competitive at the most advanced levels of the information society and in the application of new technologies.
I would like to conclude by arguing - and I believe this is one of the conclusions we must draw from Mr Pomés Ruiz' s report - for greater coordination between the Member States with regard to the implementation of these programmes.
I would therefore like to insist once again on the need for a genuine direction for economic and monetary policy at European Union level.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to begin by apologising for the fact that our Austrian Finance Minister was unable, during the previous election period, to achieve the targets set by the Council in March 1998.
However, it is very clear from this report that other Member States besides Austria failed to adhere to all aspects of the Council regulation in question.
Our current Finance Minister, Mr Grasser, had to work under pressure of time when compiling Budget 2000, and it is this budget that fulfilled significant criteria of the Council regulation, the measures pertaining to pensions for example.
The Member States' efforts to overhaul their budgets will only prove successful if there is a clear reduction in the taxation and social contribution burden within the EU.
It was, and still is, a serious mistake to maintain that high taxation and social contribution levels guarantee high tax receipts at the same time.
The opposite is true.
Japan and the USA are living proof of the fact that countries with low rates of taxation can be successful.
The tax burden in the USA averages 30%, as compared with 46% in the Union, and the USA has a budget surplus in excess of USD 250 billion at present.
- (EL) Ladies and gentlemen, the Pomés Ruiz report has the good fortune to assess the implementation of the stability and convergence programmes at a time when the economic climate has helped these programme achieve success.
The rapporteur complains that the objectives are more the result of higher than expected tax revenues and the favourable development of interest rates than of the Member States' own efforts.
This perception betrays a rather narrow-minded budgetary policy.
In my view, there is nothing reprehensible about being able to achieve balanced budgets through development rather than by imposing fasting and prayer on the Member States.
To try and balance the budget solely by cutting expenditure, while, at the same time, wanting to reduce taxation, is something which goes beyond economic restructuring and the spirit of the Stability Pact, at least in my understanding, to limiting the involvement of the public sector in the economy.
It is something in addition to the Stability Pact.
This trend can also be seen from the reference to the fact that tax and social contributions in Europe account for approximately 46% of GDP, while in the USA and Japan they only account for 30%.
But they are higher in Europe because we have a social state.
If Mr Pomés Ruiz' s group wishes to change the policy on the social state, it should table it clearly and not tack it on to the Stability Pact.
I did not find one single reference in the report which justified Greece' s being singled out, as Mr Karas has done, but I should like to say the following, now that the subject has been raised: it is irresponsible to say that inflation in Greece has only fallen over recent months.
Inflation has fallen over eight years from 18% to 2%, thanks to constant and unstinting effort.
I had hoped that we warranted more generous support for this tremendous effort, which has required sacrifices on the part of the Greek people.
To say that Greece will be unable to sustain the criteria, I am sorry, but that is prejudging the facts.
How do we know that they cannot be sustained in Greece but they can be sustained in so many other countries of the European Union?
The Greek people are determined to apply the criteria and they will show their determination in due course.
Mr President, we support the main objective of the motion for a resolution under debate, that is, the need for consistently transparent budget regulation on the part of the individual Member States in line with the objectives of the Stability Pact.
However, we feel that, precisely in consideration of these undertakings and in the light of the current situation, the precise nature of any interventions cannot be identified in advance just for the sake of efficient budget control.
In fact, in a context where there are varying degrees of interdependence between States, there are too many variables at work to be combined to produce more general indicators.
I refer to the constant pressure with regard to restricting welfare expenditure, structural reform of the labour market and privatisation of the telecommunications and energy sectors.
On the other hand, we are aware of the need for a more effective convergence process, for economic cohesion and, therefore, also for the approximation of the single currency, whose oscillation is no longer virtual but is in line with prices and taxes; the need, of course, for more harmonious tax and fiscal policies, but also pricing policies; for more harmonious investment policies as regards both research and the closing of infrastructure gaps, including within the individual States, but also for greater homogeneity in the action of public administrations.
The most representative variable is certainly the time frames and contents of the Treaty reforms and the process of constitutionalisation of the Union, i.e. of a greater or lesser European political presence.
Mr President, I understand that it is not always easy, in a debate such as this, to differentiate between those aspects of our policy which we normally raise in the broad guidelines for economic policies, the stability and growth pacts or the references to the convergence reports, which will be the subject of the third debate this morning.
In the debate we have just held we rather confused the three elements.
I would essentially like to refer to the one which seems essential today, that of the stability pacts, although I will mention certain other points which have been raised.
Firstly, I share Mr Pomés' s view that we need greater coordination, which is not incompatible with subsidiarity, but I am also interested in his additional demands that we work in more detail on expenditure and income, the existence of different scenarios or greater commitments in terms of national policies.
However, I would like to remind him that, within the framework of subsidiarity, it falls to the Member States to define their own stability and growth programmes.
The Commission must judge them, but it is not our job to give instructions on this point.
Nor is it our job to give instructions on the stability programmes or structural reforms, which you have mentioned.
These structural reforms in fact fall within the broad guidelines for economic policies.
However, there is a point - the third which you referred to - which lies between the world of structural reform and the tax obligations relating to the deficit and, above all, the stability of public finances, in particular with regard to debt.
I am referring to the demographic problem and specifically the ageing of the population.
It is true that this is much more than a purely financial problem, but this is the concern which we highlighted in Lisbon.
I would say that, in this case - as in the case referred to by Mrs Randzio-Plath, of the need to compare the quality of programmes and greater harmonisation, or the reference by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm, for example, to deepening tax reforms - in our current thinking there is the reasonable prospect of fulfilling the objectives of the stability and growth programmes, and we believe that we must pay more attention to what we call the sustainability and quality of public finances.
We will present a report in May on this specific point, in which we intend to consider not only the nature of income but also the nature of expenditure as well as how the reduction in public deficit has been achieved and what instruments have been used.
These are instruments of a permanent nature which have the same characteristics in each of the Member States.
We will also tackle the issue of our future obligations.
In many cases the Member States have obligations which are not classed as debt, but which do, in fact, constitute debt in one form or another.
All of this will allow us to hold the debate which you have mentioned.
I believe that that will be the time to carry out this type of comparison in more depth.
Having said this, I am grateful for the effort you have made to assess the work we have done.
I believe that the problems of stability and convergence are basically characterised - as you have correctly highlighted, Mr Pomés - by the fact that, firstly, the objectives set have been met; secondly, because we are following the same line.
However, that fulfilment of the objective, especially with regard to the reduction of public deficits, has been less ambitious - surely as a result of an improved economic situation - and we must take advantage of that improved economic situation so that we do not move backwards, but that we make progress in the right direction.
I said that I wanted to make a couple of additional comments on two points that have been raised concerning issues which are not strictly related to this report, but with the previous report.
Mr Karas referred to the Greek problem and the problems of sustainability with regard to convergence criteria.
In the case of Greece, exactly the same criteria were applied as in previous assessments.
I understand that concern, mentioned in the Commission' s report, about the sustainability of inflation, but I would also like to provide some information which may clarify the situation.
According to the latest figures of the harmonised CPI - published on 15 May and concerning the month of April - Greek inflation is improving considerably in comparison to the previous situation: it has decreased from 2.8% to 2.1%; and the unharmonised index also shows better figures for April as compared with March.
Therefore, I believe that these concerns about Greek inflation are sometimes excessive.
Secondly, you will have to debate the problems relating to the amendments which you wish to raise in the Pomés report.
I will simply say, with regard to two amendments by your Group, that in one of them there is a small error relating to Greece' s entry into the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System.
In my view, in Amendment No 4, it would make more sense to adopt a more positive approach with regard to the Greek government' s future obligations than it would to adopt an approach which raises doubts as to its capacity to fulfil its obligations.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Adoption of single currency by Greece
The next item is the report (A5-0135/2000) by Mr Goebbels, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the proposal for a Council decision for the adoption by Greece of the single currency on 1 January 2001 (COM(2000)274 - C5-0226/2000 - 2000/0110(CNS)).
Mr President, Greece will be the twelfth country to sign up to the euro.
Greece does not have to beg to be allowed into the euro zone; it is fully qualified to join the States that will introduce the euro as an effective and definitive means of payment in 2002.
In Greece, the economic convergence criteria have been met, as a result of a stabilisation policy implemented most consistently by the Greek authorities since 1996.
At the beginning of the 1990s, Greece was considered the sick man of Europe, economically speaking.
The rate of inflation exceeded 20%.
The European Union officially described the budgetary deficit as excessive.
The public sector was notoriously mismanaged.
Almost half of the public debt was due to on-going transfers from the state to public undertakings.
Today, major international bodies such as the IMF, the OECD, the Commission and even the ECB generally speak very highly of the efforts which the Greeks have made.
It must be noted that private operators have also discovered Greece.
In recent years, it has become a significant net recipient of foreign capital.
The stock exchange has undergone rapid expansion.
International rating agencies have improved their rating for Greek loans.
The situation is far from perfect, of course.
There are still problems, particularly regarding the restructuring of the public sector.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs stresses the following points.
Greece must continue to make efforts in order to ensure that the progress achieved in terms of disinflation has a lasting effect.
The government must step up the anti-inflationist bias of the economic policy instruments available to it, particularly in the fields of the budget and income policy.
Cooperation between the two sides of industry seems essential in order to maintain a situation of non-inflationary growth.
Even if considerable progress has been achieved in terms of the implementation of structural reforms, Greece must step up progress in the reforms which are still necessary, including the effective transposition of European legislation into national law.
Parliament has been consulted, in the context of a political decision to be taken by the Economic and Financial Affairs Council, after deliberation by the forthcoming European Council.
Parliament' s response can therefore only be a political one, in favour or against, like any final decision in a genuine democracy.
Greece' s entry into the euro zone does not entail any political risks.
Greece is entitled and, indeed, obliged to join EMU.
There are probably some economic risks but these are more significant for Greece than for the countries in the euro zone.
In joining the euro zone, Greece will be forced to maintain the culture of stability which has been established since 1996, and this involves pursuing a responsible economic policy.
This has, however, already created a virtuous circle leading to sustainable, non-inflationist growth, proving that stability is not an end in itself but that it must serve the purpose of healthy growth.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, by an overwhelming majority, therefore urges Parliament to vote in favour of Greece' s accession to the euro zone in 2001.
Mr President, let me add a few more personal observations.
I should like to congratulate the Danish and Swedish governments on having decided to consult their citizens regarding accession to the single currency.
I hope that the results of these plebiscites will be favourable.
In the same way, I should like to see the United Kingdom opt for the single currency in the very near future.
The shared objective of the fifteen Member States to create a European Union which is ever more closely bound, particularly comprising an area without internal borders, could not be achieved in full without a single currency.
The United Kingdom, as one of the financial capitals of the world, will not be able to claim all the advantages of an ever more integrated European financial market unless it becomes part of it in its own right and takes on all the joint responsibilities and obligations required under Economic and Monetary Union.
There are some Members of Parliament who will vote against my report tomorrow, or who will abstain.
Some are opposed to the euro, as is their right, while others are attempting to make political capital out of the real concerns which our fellow citizens have regarding the dollar-euro exchange rate.
It must be stressed that the euro is a stable currency.
Citizens' purchasing power within the euro zone has remained virtually unchanged since inflation has been, and remains, at a very moderate level.
Of course, the value of the euro has fallen in relation to the dollar and, to a lesser extent, in relation to the yen and the pound.
Such fluctuations are inevitable in a floating exchange rate system.
Even so, the euro has not become a weak currency.
In the last twenty years, the Deutschmark has experienced much more extreme variations in relation to the dollar.
In 1985, the dollar stood at 3.5 DM.
In order to reach such a low level in relation to the dollar, the rate of the euro would have to fall below 0.6 to the dollar.
Some people claim that the financial markets do not value the euro because of Europe' s tardiness in implementing structural reforms.
What structural reforms did Germany undertake after 1985 in order to ensure that the Deutschmark returned to a rate of 1.7 or 1.8 DM to the dollar?
The fact is, the economic position of the European Union is very sound, and is much more favourable than it has been over the last decade.
The only grey area is a rate of unemployment which, although falling, is still excessive.
A return to full employment is certainly not calculated to please the financial markets most of all.
Generally speaking, good news regarding employment makes the stock exchange nervous, as it makes them afraid of a rise in inflation.
Financial markets operate according to their own particular logic.
They look for immediate returns, and currently this is a safer bet in the United States, particularly because of its higher interest rates.
This trend looks set to continue, as the Federal Reserve has just hiked up its interest rates.
With their sheep-like behaviour, however, the markets will ultimately come to realise, Mr President, that, in the medium term, the euro will be a more secure currency than the dollar.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, firstly, I would like to point out, as did the previous speaker, that a functioning internal market needs a single currency.
Secondly, there is a rumour that needs to be dispelled right from the outset of this debate, to the effect that the external value of the euro has something to do with the prospect of Greece adopting the single currency.
It is clear that the external value of the euro has nothing to do with this but everything to do with the lack of resolve shown by certain Member States when it comes to implementation of the necessary structural and liberalisation measures, and it can also be attributed to the fact that there are a number of differences - starting with taxation levels - in the ways that Europe and the United States structure their economies.
Therefore, on behalf of my Group, I would like to congratulate Greece and acknowledge the efforts and progress it has made en route to membership of the Economic and Monetary Union.
Further to what I have already said about the convergence report, we are very much in favour of Greece joining the Economic and Monetary Union.
This clear endorsement is not diminished in any way when, so as to remain true to our firm belief in a strong euro, sustainability, price stability, and equal treatment of all countries, we inevitably make reference to the need for Greece to keep up the good work, and encourage it to do so, and also point out that a great deal still remains to be done in Greece before sustainable price stability and a balanced low-debt state sector are achieved.
I say this because whilst we recognise that there has been a sharp decline in the rate of inflation, this can be attributed in part to transient factors.
It is therefore absolutely essential for Greece to step up its efforts to support sustainable price stability.
I say this because substantial structural reform and continuous budgetary surpluses are required under the terms of the Stability and Growth Pact, so as to gradually reduce the public debt ratio to 60%.
We are in favour of Greek membership, but would call upon and encourage Greece to continue to implement the necessary measures and to guarantee sustainability in the spirit of the Stability Pact.
On a final note though, I would also like to appeal to Sweden to at last discharge its political duties, now that it has fulfilled many of the criteria.
This is because the Swedish government is currently dragging its heels over joining stage 2 of EMU and amending the bank of issue law, which would guarantee the independence of the ECB when a new member joins.
Mr President, the Group of the Party of European Socialists is convinced by the efforts Greece has made to fulfil the convergence criteria.
We support the recommendation and the rapporteur' s report.
It is important for the European internal market to at last be properly completed.
This will only be feasible if every last Member State of the European Union joins monetary union.
It is therefore important from the point of view of business and commerce for all EU States to join, especially those that are able to fulfil the convergence criteria.
Only then will it be possible to protect an even larger part of the economic area against exchange rate fluctuations.
A large currency union would also improve our chances of being able to coordinate economic policies, and hence achieve deeper European integration.
Like any other Member of the European Monetary Union, Greece will have to continue to make efforts and to acquit itself of its responsibilities.
That goes without saying, particularly where the level of debt in Greece is concerned.
As mentioned before, Greece, along with Belgium and Italy, have been singled out for monitoring on this aspect.
But I would also like to ask you once again to consider that the examination of other States' stability programmes that took place last year also gave rise to criticism.
As such, Greece is not the only State to have to keep proving itself over and over again in this respect.
A permanent Community of solidarity - which is precisely what monetary union is - demands sustained harmonisation activity.
That is what the partners of monetary union have promised themselves and they must keep their promise.
Both the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact give expression to this.
Like other Members before it, Greece is going to have to work on being able to sustain its fulfilment of the convergence criteria.
The interest rate adjustments that Greece needs to make to bring it into line with the euro zone are making heavy demands on its economy, society and social partners.
That is why it is so important for there to be consensus between the major political parties and the social partners.
It will enable us to feel confident that Greece will prove to be a successful partner in monetary union.
There is no reason to fear that monetary union will be weakened by Greece joining, because it is the stability of the currency that matters.
Any country that wants to join the euro zone must fulfil the convergence criteria.
In the long term, internal stability is only crucial to the external value of a currency.
The fact that the average rate of inflation in the euro zone is 1.9% is a clear illustration of this.
I would remind you once again, in this connection, that the Treaty of Maastricht states that we need a monetary policy that guarantees the stability of the currency.
This was achieved in the first few months of the euro zone' s existence.
The dollar/euro exchange rate cannot be used to guide monetary policy.
What matters is that the internal purchasing power of the euro is very stable, as used to be the case with the Deutschmark.
Mr President, on behalf of the Liberal Group I would like to welcome Greece into the euro and say that we shall certainly be voting in favour of Greek membership.
For those other 'out' countries, including my own, I very much hope that they will be able to join the euro soon.
I very much regret too that there are so few British Conservatives here in the Chamber today because it shows, with Greece now the twelfth member of the euro zone, how far from reality British euroscepticism about the future of the currency is.
The euro has successfully delivered low inflation, rising growth, falling unemployment and protection for the euro zone economies from the ups and downs of the foreign exchanges.
Indeed, the British perception of the euro as a failure, because of its fall against the dollar, simply misunderstands the whole project.
The key test of a currency is price stability within the economy, not the value of the currency against other currencies outside the economy.
On the test of internal stability, with inflation at less that 2% and growth higher at 3.1% in the euro zone than in Britain, the euro is clearly succeeding.
Indeed, research at the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi recently calculated the euro' s value as if it had existed over the last few decades, weighting each predecessor currency's value to create a synthetic euro.
Historically, that research found that the euro actually swooped between a high of USD 1.70 in December 1979 and a low of just USD 0.69 in February 1985.
In other words, the euro could stay within its historic trading range and happily now either fall by a further 23% or rise by 188%.
Certainly that synthetic euro included currencies such as the Italian Lira, but the same point applies even to the mighty German Mark on its own.
If the euro is a weak currency, than the Mark was positively anaemic.
It plunged to DEM 3.45 against the dollar at the end of February 1985, which is a third below its current rate of DEM 2.16 to the dollar.
Within three years, and a dollar crash, the Mark was back to DEM 1.57 during December 1987.
The truth is that the history of foreign exchange is a history of gross misalignments, of overvaluations and undervaluations, each inflicting either depressive pain or inflationary costs on the economy and, as Greece has rightly recognised, the euro is a way of regaining control over a key part of our economic environment.
- (EL) Mr President, the report under discussion contains accurate information and an objective assessment.
Greece is being judged, just as the first countries in EMU were judged, and this judgement accords Greece the position which it deserves, the position which it could have taken up back then, when it could have become a member of EMU along with everyone else, but which it failed to take up because of the weakness of its government.
In all events, this moment is an historic moment for Greece and, may I say, for Europe too.
I hope that we shall see other such historic moments when other countries join and, even more so, when we proceed, as we must, with the policy to complete unification.
The euro restored politics to Europe and it is incumbent upon us to pave the way so that politics in Europe can be institutionalised and globalisation, which is progressing blindly, without any historical or political plan, can be politicised at a later date, through a unified Europe,
For Greece and the other members of EMU, the problem of sustainability is crucial.
The problem of whether or not they will be able to act together on economic policy, as if they had already achieved political unification, is a political problem par excellence.
It is a problem of development choices and changes and, of course, it is a problem of public finance management.
Greece has a tax reform problem.
A large part of the economy pays no taxes and the basic taxes which exist in other Member States do not exist in Greece.
The average Greek taxpayer pays more than other Europeans but total tax revenues in Greece are much lower as a percentage of GDP.
This structural change is pending, while our government is confining itself mainly to privatisation.
Other important structural changes are also pending, such as the need to strengthen regional authorities and their financial independence, reorganise cooperatives in all sectors from the bottom up and liberalise and strengthen the social economy and the third sector.
These are the areas which need to be strengthened immediately if sustainability is to have a future.
Mr President, the European Parliament report on Greece' s adoption of the single currency on 1 January 2001 is remarkable, more by virtue of the political will it expresses to enlarge the euro zone than by its concern for technical exactitude.
It is, however, true that Greece has made considerable efforts in order to meet the Maastricht criteria and has achieved good progress, except in a few areas, such as public debt, but on that subject there are some countries within the euro zone that are doing no better.
These minor failings, which would have had little impact if the euro had been strong, are now liable, against the background of the euro' s depreciation, where the slightest ambiguity serves to detract from the image of the single currency, to have a much more negative effect, for psychological reasons.
Nonetheless, the European institutions did not feel that they should postpone Greece' s accession so as not to give the impression that they had anything to fear and, from that point of view, the position seems perfectly logical, albeit somewhat risky.
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group almost agrees with their conclusions, but as a result of a very different logical argument.
Our initial impulse, obviously, would be to refrain from participating in a debate which a good number of us think is nothing to do with us.
But, on the other hand, we think that extending the euro zone may, in the end, provide the stimulus for beneficial reforms.
The fact is, the more the euro zone is extended, the harder it will be for the single currency to represent nations which are very different, and the more it will be recognised that it would be much simpler to make the system more flexible by having the euro develop into simply a common currency, overlapping with the national currencies with a degree of flexibility but not replacing them.
This solution, of progress towards a shared currency, would probably attract the support of the countries within the European Union which, until now, have remained outside the euro zone, creating a shared point of reference for everyone, and putting an end to the current schism, which is disastrous for the credibility of Europe as a whole.
- (EL) Mr President, the Council' s legislative proposal on the adoption by Greece of the single currency on 1 January 2001 is a positive proposal which responds to the objectives of the European Union to strengthen social and economic cohesion through Economic and Monetary Union.
The New Democracy team within the European People' s Party has always vigorously supported the policies needed so that Greece, which was outside the first round of Member States, could honour the obligations needed in order to join the euro zone.
The truth is that Greece now meets the convergence criteria, with the exception of the public debt criterion.
However, this also applied in the case of Italy and Belgium and Greece should not suffer adverse discrimination in the present case.
In fact, economic development and convergence policies started in Greece at the beginning of the 1990s, as both the Commissioner and the representative of the European Central Bank stressed during the meeting of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, and they concern various governments and various political powers.
However, they are due mainly to the efforts of the Greek people as a whole.
Policies in Greece need to focus today on further structural changes, while maintaining an anti-inflationary line, with the aim of achieving a real social market economy in conditions of healthy competition, so that Greece can keep comfortably to the Dublin Stability and Development Pact.
EMU will be a real success once it succeeds in uniting all the Member States, far more Member States such as Sweden, where convergence is proceeding exceptionally well.
I hope that soon the verdict of the Swedish people will take the completion of the euro zone one step further.
For the time being, we call on the European Parliament to vote in favour of Greece' s accession to the euro zone and we assure you that, as far as we, the main opposition are concerned, we shall use our policies to support the efforts being made to apply the rules of the Stability Pact and to honour joint European obligations within the framework of a unified country without borders.
Mr President, Greece meets the convergence criteria according to the European Commission' s verdict, which is based on a very nominalistic interpretation.
Every self-respecting economist knows that Greece, despite the impressive achievements of the past couple of years, does not yet have inflation and government debt sufficiently under control or in order.
The Greek government has major financial interests in an extensive number of government enterprises which are mostly loss making.
In 2001, the derogation for the liberalisation of various sectors will lapse, at which point the large hidden government debt - half the size of the current one - will become public.
Why did the Commission not take these skeletons in the cupboard into consideration during the assessment?
On 17 January last, the Greek drachma was revalued by 2.5%, mainly to push down inflationary trends.
At the moment, the short-term interest rate in Greece is about 600 basic points above the European Central Bank' s level.
Participation from 1 January 2001 means that the short-term interest rate must come down by the end of this year at the latest.
As a result, the credit facility will expand considerably and Greece will be unable to meet the inflation criterion.
Why does the Commission turn a blind eye to this?
In the interests of the Greek citizens and a more flexible development of the Greek economy, we are forced to decline our support for this Commission proposal.
- (EL) Mr President, I wish to thank the rapporteur for his serious and objective approach to Greece' s candidacy.
I wish to thank him because he dealt with us just as strictly as all the Member States which preceded us in forming the single currency.
This is the biggest compliment which he could give a country which, for a while, gave the impression that its economy was on the slippery slope towards general disintegration.
The world has many examples of where such a slippery slope can lead; however, there are relatively few examples of a country which has found the strength not only to stop but to reverse the decline and manage to satisfy the extremely stringent stability criteria of today' s world.
This success is particularly significant because it was built on the basis of an economy which was not rich and not particularly strong.
We do not need you to remind us that the Greek economy is weak.
We know it is.
For a nation to build monetary stability on such a basis requires greater effort and sacrifice than in a richer economy.
The fact that the Greek people agreed to make these sacrifices is proof positive of their determination to break away once and for all, by their own efforts and taking advantage, of course, of the support of the European Union, from the fate of economic backwardness.
And we shall make the same effort in the future, not because you are strict and we have to, but because it is in our interests to do so.
This effort is dictated by our wish to have a better standard of living, to run a modern economy and to prosper with the rest of Europe.
We are here not because we wanted to conceal our weaknesses, but because we wanted to fight and we fought and we won.
As far as we are concerned, we are a small country, but we are fighters and our accession to the single currency is a vote of confidence in this huge European venture; it is a sign of the fact that we support the European endeavour and we hope that other, far richer countries will see this and follow our example.
No one should rejoice prematurely at the present vicissitudes of the single currency.
In joining, we have shown our trust in Europe, in monetary union, in the prospect of economic unification and in the success of our common economic fate.
That is the meaning of Greece' s accession, that is the meaning of its acceptance.
Europe has become stronger today, not weaker, as the result of Greece' s accession.
Mr President, the Commission' s and the ECB' s convergence report deals not only with the Greek, but also with the Swedish, convergence programme.
So too does Mr Goebbels' report, even if the part about Sweden is limited.
The Swedish economy is doing well - very well.
Mr Goebbels also points this out.
In common with Mr Karas and Mrs Randzio-Plath, he also issues a reminder that the EU would be that much stronger if all the Member States were to participate in EMU.
This is a timely reminder of something which is self-evidently the case.
If one is going to join the EU, one should not do so by halves.
Even if the economies of Great Britain, Denmark and Sweden are going well, it must be clearly pointed out, as it was by Commissioner Solbes Mira in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, that, if the spirit of the Treaty is to be complied with, no Member State can, in the long term, place itself outside so strategic an area of cooperation as the common currency.
This could have been brought out more clearly in the report.
The euro has provided greater stability.
This has benefited companies, especially small companies.
Price competition has increased, and there has been greater transparency.
The euro is not weak.
Instead, it is the dollar which is extremely strong.
Allow me to remind those countries outside the euro zone that there is a danger of their influence declining further.
Last week, we learned that France' s prime minister wants to see a Euro 11 - soon a Euro 12 - with more influence and power when it comes to economic and financial policy.
At present, the economy is on the way up in Europe, but the clouds are gathering - in the United States and in Europe.
You do not buy an umbrella once it has begun to rain.
Instead, you buy an umbrella when the sun is shining so that you are prepared for when the rain comes.
The euro provides Europe with economic stability and competitiveness.
There are very strong economic and moral reasons why Sweden should join EMU.
Sweden should also have an obligation to help increase Europe' s economic competitiveness.
I should therefore have liked to have seen my home country, Sweden, being able to join with Greece today.
- (EL) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, our reservations about Greece' s accession to EMU are not a matter of principle; they are based on actual facts, as regards both EMU in general and the Greek economy.
As far as EMU in general is concerned, we are in favour of real economic and monetary union.
Unfortunately, this union is only monetary, not economic.
It is MU, not EMU.
We know that EMU was created prematurely for political reasons which date back to the events of 1989 and 1990, which is why the child, the euro, has been delivered early and is languishing in an incubator.
This is the opinion expressed by the Nobel prize-winning economists Friedman, Tobin and Modigliani.
The creation of EMU was not preceded by an agreement on the economic policy which the Member States had to follow.
Only now are the Commission and Council trying to outline common policies for certain economic problems such as unemployment and competitiveness.
But the road is long and full of adventures, as the poet says.
The Goebbels report tells us that Parliament' s reply cannot but be a political one and assures us that Greece' s accession to the euro zone does not involve any political risk.
However, the report adds that there are economic risks and that they are greater in the case of Greece than in the case of other countries belonging to the euro zone.
We agree.
There is no danger to the economies of the other 14 Member States.
Of course, I have trouble understanding how anyone can distinguish so easily between political and economic risks, but we shall let that pass.
As far as Greece is concerned, our reservations concern the economic risks mentioned in the report.
The sole aim of the economic policy pursued by Greece over recent years has been to satisfy the convergence criteria.
Efforts have focused on improving indicators, not real economic quantities.
The competitiveness of the economy has not improved and unemployment continues to rise.
The structural changes needed have not been carried out and privatisation has been presented as the new panacea for development and prosperity.
Wage differentials have been sacrificed to indicators and are increasing, and, as a result, the figures are doing well while the people are suffering, however.
In all honesty, the Goebbels report says that, as regards convergence, all EU governments are required to produce results but are free to choose the means of achieving it.
It is therefore the Greek government' s choice of means which we object to.
The means chosen were neither economically suitable nor socially just.
The rich got richer and the poor got poorer.
In joining EMU, we are jumping in at the deep end and hoping for the best.
Mr President, firstly my congratulations to Mr Goebbels on a very professional report and an excellent presentation.
Some government finances are indispensable prerequisites for economic stability and economic progress.
Securing budgetary discipline strengthens price stability and creates conditions which are conducive to creating much needed employment within the territories of the Union.
The Stability and Growth Pact States provide the 15 Member States of the Union with a comprehensive surveillance procedure to monitor their budgetary policies.
The Stability and Growth Pact calls for Member States to reach, in the medium term, a budgetary position close to balance or in surplus.
It must also identify the adjustment pacts adopted to reduce the general government debt ratios.
The Commission and Parliament monitor submissions made by each Member State of the Union to ensure compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact.
We must also remember that there are wider provisions for closer coordination of economic policies in general between the Member States of the Union.
The principle of the Stability and Growth Pact is also a logical progression from the criteria laid down in Maastricht for the Member States to comply with economic conditions for participation within the new European single currency.
The one comment I would like to make about the state of the single European currency is: Why do so many Member States want to join such a regime?
It is clear that Greece will shortly join the existing 11 Member States who are participating in the economic and monetary union, and I wish to congratulate Greece on its economic recovery and wish it well in the future.
I welcome Greece into the euro zone.
It is also clear that Sweden and Denmark will accede to the single European currency regime over the next couple of years.
It is known that the vast majority of countries from eastern and central Europe want to sign up to the process of economic and monetary union in as short a time as possible, but I believe that the European Central Bank has to outline a clear strategy as to how it intends to bolster the value of the new euro.
The 290 million citizens within the existing 11 EMU countries have the right to know what the European Central Bank intends to do to maintain and enhance the value of the euro now and into the future.
We shall adjourn the debate on Mr Goebbels' s report, which will resume at 3 p.m. today, as we are now going to start the voting, which will run from 11.30 a.m. to noon.
It will be adjourned for a formal sitting and will resume immediately after the formal sitting.
I therefore urge the Members not to leave the Chamber at the end of the formal sitting.
Agenda
As regards the report by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a Council framework decision on combating fraud and counterfeiting of non-cash means of payment, currently scheduled for Thursday 18 May, the rapporteur, Mr Gerhard Schmid, has just noted that the text which is to be submitted to the Council on 29 May is substantially different from the text submitted to Parliament, on which the report in question was based.
This means that Parliament must be consulted afresh.
In order to avoid debating the subject twice over, the rapporteur wishes to wait until the Council' s recommendation has been updated in order to draw up a new text.
The Socialist Group has therefore asked that this matter be referred to committee and that the item be removed from the agenda for next Thursday.
(Parliament gave its assent) I must inform you that due to the late submission of the report by Mrs Buitenweg, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the equal treatment of persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin, this report was not available in French, Spanish or Swedish for the meetings of the political groups last night.
I therefore propose that we keep the debate on the report on the agenda as it currently stands, as the first item on Thursday 18 May, but that we defer the vote on the report until the next part-session.
Are there any objections?
Madam President, it would be much more coherent and in keeping with our Rules of Procedure if we voted, as long as we hold the debate, on Thursday evening or Friday morning.
Mr Barón Crespo, the problem is that the text is still not available in French, Spanish and Swedish, thus presenting a problem in terms of our Rules of Procedure.
That is why the Bureau proposed this solution.
Madam President, I respect what the Presidency has said, but I have different information: that this morning all the versions are available.
I accept the President' s words, but I must point out that there is some inconsistency here.
Mr Barón Crespo, I quite understand your objection.
I am informed by our services that the other reason for making this proposal was related to the limited time the groups have to table amendments.
Having said that, following your request, I suggest that we put to the House the sense of the proposal which I have just made.
Perhaps Mrs Buitenweg can give us her opinion, as rapporteur?
Madam President, I would very much regret it if my report were to be taken off the agenda and if the vote were not to take place this week.
We have an agreement with all political groups in this Parliament that we would accelerate proceedings for this directive.
This is necessary to put through this directive swiftly and within the time in which the Portuguese Presidency, which has shown exceptional commitment in this respect, is in office.
The Council will be convening before our next plenary sitting.
This means that if we do not adopt a resolution here, the Council will be unable to adopt its position either, and everything will be shelved long term.
I would like to point out that the group which has the most problems and seizes upon administrative issues as an excuse to postpone dealing with these, is also the group which voted against this report in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.
I therefore do not rule out other motives which might be at play here.
This has a bearing on the speed at which anti-discrimination can be translated into legislation in Europe and at which people can therefore be protected from racial or ethnic discrimination, and I do not appreciate the fact that Parliament is arguing in favour of postponing this protection.
Madam President, the way in which the Buitenweg report is being handled is completely unacceptable, and this has far less to do with the report itself than the actual procedure we are adopting.
In fact there is an arrangement within the European Parliament that when reports are only voted on for the first time during a committee meeting here in Strasbourg, they do not then feature on the agenda in that same part-session.
That is the usual arrangement.
Now a decision was obviously taken last Thursday, in the Conference of Presidents - at which I was represented as I could not be there in person - to deviate from this rule, but only to do so if all translations were present and correct by 7.00 p.m. yesterday evening, as I understand it.
The translations were not all present and correct by yesterday evening, and it is impossible to table amendments for certain languages if the report is not available in these languages.
Hence I would strongly recommend that we do not continue the discussion here now, but that the Groups consult with each other this afternoon on how they wish to proceed with the report, and that we then reach a decision first thing tomorrow morning.
One thing I would stress, however, is that it will not be acceptable in future, to discuss reports here and, if applicable, vote on them, if a) if the reports have only been decided on in committee that same week, and b) the translations are not available either.
This does not do justice to the dignity of Parliament and I object to a procedure of this kind.
Ladies and gentlemen, I appreciate the importance of this discussion, but I propose entering the debate on the agenda for tomorrow, as the Bureau wished.
I suggest that the Conference of Presidents or, at any event, the groups, should come to some agreement on the procedure to be adopted regarding voting after the debate, and that our final decision on the timing of the vote should be postponed until tomorrow.
May I take it that the various group presidents and Members of Parliament agree in principle, as I am afraid that if I give the floor to every Member who requests it we shall be starting the whole debate up again?
Mr President, as you know, I am the co-rapporteur with Mrs Buitenweg on this important directive on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.
I hope that you will rule that the vote, as per our agenda agreed on Monday, will go ahead and I have two points to make to our colleagues in the PPE in that respect.
The first is this: since this directive was first proposed, the whole furore across the European Union because of events in Austria and elsewhere, where the extreme right has come forward, has caused us, as a Parliament, with the widest possible across-party support, to work with the Council and the Commission to agree an accelerated timetable to enable this directive to go through to provide the strongest possible response to the racist and extremist threats that undermine our combined values.
That deal with the Council and with the Portuguese Presidency said that we would agree in this Parliament this week prior to the Council of Ministers' meeting in June.
If we fail to meet that commitment, what does that say to the racists?
And my second point: we talk about the dignity of Parliament.
What about the dignity of black and ethnic minority people subject to racial harassment, victimisation and discrimination?
Ladies and gentlemen, I should like to make things quite clear.
The debate is indeed going to take place as scheduled on the agenda and, like everyone in the House, I appreciate its importance.
Nonetheless, I suggest that you accept my proposal, which is this: that the debate should take place as scheduled on the agenda and, tomorrow, the sovereign Assembly, after consulting the groups, shall decide whether or not to vote on this report during the present part-session.
I think it would not be right to vote on it immediately.
Madam President, I do not see why the Conference of Presidents should make the decision.
Surely it is up to all of us here at the plenary sitting to decide whether or not the vote should take place during this part-session, not the Conference of Presidents?
We wish to decide right here, either today or tomorrow, whether the vote on this directive and this report should take place this week.
We do not wish to leave the decision to the Conference of Presidents.
Mr Cohn-Bendit, I think you have not been listening to my suggestions carefully enough.
I did not suggest that the decision was referred to the Conference of Presidents, which does not have the authority to decide.
I suggested reconciling points of view within the groups and then tomorrow, in the House, discussing the timeliness of voting this week.
It goes without saying that only the plenary assembly has the right to make this decision.
I should now like to put an end to any further speeches on the subject, as I am afraid that discussing the matter ad infinitum is not going to lead to a clear decision.
I shall just give the floor to Mrs Ludford, whose group has not yet had an opportunity to comment.
Madam President, I just wish to emphasise on behalf of the Liberal Group the desirability of debating and voting this report this week.
Despite the short timetable for the consideration of this matter, it has been dealt with very fully in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs and there has been every opportunity for amendments to be tabled.
It is regrettable that there have been administrative delays in producing all the language versions.
However, I feel that there is a touch of opportunism in the PPE Group' s objections to a vote this week.
After all, if it were technically impossible, the services would never have proposed that it be voted on tomorrow.
Therefore, we should debate and vote on it tomorrow; otherwise there is a danger of obstruction by one group.
Ladies and gentlemen, I put it to you that we decide as follows: we shall carry on the debate as scheduled on the agenda and tomorrow, the House will consider whether the vote should be retained as scheduled, after consultation with the various groups.
Vote
Mrs Muscardini, I suppose you wanted to speak on the next item, but, quite frankly, I would urge you not to take the floor.
I cannot deprive you of your freedom of speech, however, but I do appeal to your sense of responsibility.
Madam President, my responsibility is that I have worked in this Parliament for 11 years and I have seen it deteriorate with every passing day.
I will not go back to the previous debate although I had requested the floor in order to speak on the previous matter.
I am afraid that this is not the first time that the Presidency has ignored this area of the Chamber and so I am going to speak on the House' s agenda.
Would the Presidency please organise the Secretariat and herself in such a way as to accord all Members the same right to speak on the matters over which they wish to take the floor.
It is deplorable to talk of democracy and human rights and then not give Members the right to read the texts in their own language or to speak in the Chamber.
Joint motion for a resolution
on the appointment of senior Commission officials
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Simplified procedure
Common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the front underrun protection of motor vehicles and amending Council Directive 70/156/EEC (5378/1/2000 - C5-0179/2000 - 1999/0007(COD)) (Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market)
(The President declared the common position approved)
- Proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 70/220/EEC concerning measures to be taken against air pollution by emissions from motor vehicles (COM(2000)42 - C5-0091/2000 - 2000/0040(COD)) (Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy)
(Parliament adopted the Commission proposal)
Report without debate (A5-0120/2000) by Mrs Jackson, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion, on behalf of the Community, of the new Convention for the Protection of the Rhine (COM(2000)61 - C5-0168/2000 - 2000/0037(CNS))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0128/2000) by Mrs González Álvarez, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing a scheme to monitor the average specific emissions of CO2 from new passenger cars (C5-0105/2000) - 1998/0202(COD))
(Parliament adopted the joint text)
Report (A5-0129/2000) by Mrs Smet, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 93/104/EC concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time to cover sectors and activities excluded from that directive (C5-0183/2000 - 1998/0318(COD))
(Parliament adopted the joint text)
(The sitting was adjourned at 11.55 a.m. for the formal sitting and resumed at 12.30 p.m.)
Report (A5-0117/2000) by Mrs Roth-Behrendt, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down rules for the prevention and control of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (COM(1998) 623 - C4-0025/1999 - 1998/0323(COD))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0113/2000) by Mr Savary, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system (COM(1999) 617 - C5-0301/1999 - 1999/0252(COD))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0112/2000) by Mr Savary, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation and effects of Directive 96/48/EC concerning the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system (COM(1999)414 - C5-0207/1999 - 1999/2165(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- González Álvarez report (A5-0128/2000)
Madam President, I voted for the González Álvarez measure on the regulation on the monitoring of carbon dioxide emissions from new passenger cars.
Why am I in favour of this measure?
It goes without saying that I support the monitoring of new passenger cars when they are first placed on the market, but my vote in favour of the motion also contains a call to make greater efforts in the monitoring of second-hand cars, for, in actual fact, I would argue that new cars are never to be found on the road due to the fact that the very act of driving them along a road ages them by definition.
It is, above all, 'old' cars, the cars which have been in use for a number of years, which cause atmospheric pollution.
I call for monitoring of these 'old' cars, to ensure that they are always in a state of good health and to prevent them from harming the earth' s atmosphere.
I therefore support the use and preservation of pensioner cars as well.
- (FR) The González Álvarez report deals with reducing CO2 emissions, a necessary goal, particularly with the fight against global warming at stake.
An objective like this would require Europe to provide itself with effective resources in order to limit such emissions, either by binding standards, as is the case for other pollutants, or by incentives, with checks and penalties.
Furthermore, the increase in the number of vehicles plays a major part in the increase in CO2 emissions.
This aspect of the problem must be tackled as well, by implementing a transport development policy involving rail and waterway transport, combined transport, and public service which is capable of offering an effective alternative to the private car.
According to the explanatory statement, the Commission is still at the stage of a 'monitoring scheme' , i.e. collating statistics but without undertaking effective checks, and, apparently, excluding light commercial vehicles (vans) and heavy commercial vehicles (trucks).
It is better than nothing, but not much!
Despite its limitations, we nonetheless voted in favour of the González Álvarez report.
Smet report (A5-0129/2000)
Madam President, I voted for the report on the conciliation process concerning the organisation of working time, first and foremost in support of the article on doctors in training.
It is, in effect, appropriate for them to be able to rest in-between operations, particularly during their training period, also in consideration of the fact that, during the rest of their careers, it is above all - not exclusively, but for the most part - the elderly who will fall victim to their scalpels.
The doctors will need to have learnt their trade well, free from considerations of working time.
Above all, however, my vote for the motion is an invitation to consider reducing not just the working time in a worker' s day but the time he spends working over his entire lifetime.
It would, in fact, be appropriate for a person not to have to work for 80 years if he is going to live to be 90 years of age, but to work for a period of 30 years if he is going to live to be 60 or 70.
Madam President, I voted for the amendment of the directive on working times because this directive has been extended to include certain categories which had not been covered.
I refer, in particular, to categories of the transport sector.
Furthermore, I hope that the approval of this directive will prompt a decision, at last, to approve the regulations on flight times and working times for pilots and cabin crew.
This is not solely a social matter of worker protection - although it does include this factor - but it is also a question of flight safety.
.
(EL) It is a fact that man' s strength and capabilities are limited.
Working times may be harmful to the physical and the mental health of both individuals and families, which is why working times need to be organised so that the safety and health of workers are not put at risk.
However, 7 million workers in the EU, in transport and fisheries and doctors in training are exempted from Directive 104/93/ÅC on the organisation of working time.
This intolerable situation and the abuse of workers in the above specialist sectors as regards their working times is of a nature and is taking on dimensions which are such that rules must be imposed without delay, given that workers such as doctors in training in Great Britain work up to 72 hours a week.
Extending the directive is essential, but it is not enough.
The provisions proposed will be unable to protect the safety and health of workers effectively, given that there are still numerous exemptions and long transitional periods for implementing the directive.
We must also bear in mind that the original directive did not stipulate the length of a working day (it stipulated a working week of 48 hours - an implied violation of the measure).
- (NL) My Group eventually accepted the compromise reached by the Conciliation Committee to apply the working time directive to the excluded sectors.
It is now crucial that these sectors can, at long last, look forward to a regulation so that they too come under the scope of the directive.
We struggle greatly with the long transitional periods for the junior doctors sector.
After the directive enters into force, the Member States have a total of nine years before they are obliged to have transposed the directive into national legislation.
Under certain conditions, this period can be extended by another two or three years.
Needless to say, we feel for the many Member States which struggle with inadequate staffing levels in their health sector.
However, the Member States have known for a long time that they will need to adapt to the working times directive in the long run.
It looks very much like this serious problem has been shelved, as a result of which, in our opinion, the arguments used to support the long transitional periods do not so much signify powerlessness as unwillingness.
In the light of the above, when this directive and the ensuing national legislation is implemented, close monitoring will be required to ensure that the weekly working hours for junior doctors meet the statutory standards.
- (FR) I can only recommend that this text be adopted, which is the product of a long and difficult conciliation process between the Council, the Commission and Parliament.
This favourable vote is of capital importance as it concerns the health and safety of some 7 million workers in Europe.
Workers in the transport sector and offshore workers, sea fishermen and doctors in training will at last be entitled to benefit from European working hours regulations.
As a French member of the Parliament' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, at second reading, I supported Parliament' s position which, in particular, provided for a four-year transition period for doctors in training, with a maximum working week of 54 hours, over a four month reference period.
The conciliation process produced an agreement whereby doctors in training will be covered by the directive, as far as its scope of application - a maximum 48-hour working week over a four-month reference period - is concerned, after a period of nine years.
The nine-year period is to be subdivided as follows: a four-year transposition period and a five-year transition period.
In the first three years of the transition period, the number of weekly working hours shall not exceed 58, or 56 during the last two years.
For some States, however, this sort of nine-year period will not be sufficient to carry out the necessary adjustments.
These States may therefore be permitted an additional period of two years.
The Commission will make a statement on the notification of the relevant Member State, after consulting employers and workers at European level, as well as representatives of the Member States.
The notification, the opinion of the Commission and, if this opinion is not acted upon, the Member State' s justification, shall be published in the OJ and sent to the European Parliament.
If there are specific problems, then the two-year period may be extended for a further year, but the Member State must incorporate the procedure in full.
The maximum number of weekly working hours may not then exceed 52.
.
(PT) I have voted against this report because, as a doctor by profession, I think that the excessive working hours that it proposes for junior doctors are unacceptable.
- (FR) The text before you, after years of negotiations seeking to define the maximum limits for weekly working hours, is symbolic in more ways than one of the ambiguities and inadequacies of European social policy.
Firstly, as regards the very principle of a European social policy, the Treaty of Maastricht restricts this to minimum social standards, and only on condition that they do not "hold back small- and medium-sized undertakings" .
These restrictions are no longer acceptable today.
That, then, is one urgent question to be raised for the forthcoming revision of the Treaty.
Ambiguities and inadequacies are, however, just as evident in the proposal before us.
Are we sufficiently aware that, in 1994, when the Member States came to an agreement on the maximum 48-hour working week, they excluded several million workers, such as transport workers, offshore oil rig workers or junior doctors in training?
Mrs Smet' s proposal extends the general rule of 48 hours to some of these sectors.
It still does not, however, settle the matter of long-distance road haulage workers and puts forward a frankly ridiculous timescale for implementing the directive with regard to junior doctors!
The position of these doctors in training is similar in many countries: working weeks of 70 and 80 hours in conditions that are occasionally disgraceful and sometimes dangerous to patients.
The recent strike by junior doctors in France showed that such a situation was not acceptable, either for the doctors, the patients or the public health service.
But, even though, last November, the European Parliament proposed almost unanimously that the 48-hour rule should come into force within four years, it is now suggested that we alter our position radically.
We should adopt the joint proposal of the ministers and the parliamentary delegation allowing Member States up to twelve years (!) before they apply the 48-hour week directive to doctors in training.
Please think about what this means exactly.
The first doctors in training to benefit from these conditions have just started secondary school!
I do not know of a single other area - the euro, the free movement of persons, goods or capital - where a timescale of this order is tolerated.
In such circumstances, how can we expect the European Union' s social policy to be taken seriously?
Especially as the proposal divides this twelve year period into several distinct periods, each with their own rules for the maximum working week:
until 2004 there will be no change, there will be no restrictions on working hours;
between 2004 and 2007 the maximum working week will be 58 hours;
between 2007 and 2009 it will be 56 hours;
between 2009 and 2012 it will be 52 hours.
In adopting this text we are sending out a worrying message.
This is the first directive on social matters to be adopted since the Lisbon Summit on employment.
I would like to express the hope that the Commission, Parliament and the Council will, at last, take European social policy more seriously.
Social Europe will not make progress, nor will it convince our countries' citizens with proposals such as this.
Roth-Berendt report (A5-0117/2000)
Madam President, I voted for the Roth-Behrendt report, although, as before, my vote in favour of the motion is also a call for improvement of European legislation in the field of the implementation of the precautionary principle.
It is, of course, right for us to consider our health as human beings and to slaughter the huge number of animals at risk; it is right for us to adopt this measure and thereby establish rules to bring farmers and stock breeders into line, but we also need to keep our feet firmly on the ground.
What I mean is, right now, I can imagine farmers running along behind their cows - Daisy or Buttercup, maybe - and fussing over feeding them hay, fodder and products from their fields, whereas they may well not have had time to have their animal' s health checked.
So let us combine practical action with a desire for improvement.
- (FR) I should like to express my satisfaction with the content of this report.
Let me remind you that in presenting this proposal for a regulation, the Commission is fulfilling the undertaking it gave in 1997 to the European Parliament' s Temporary Committee of Inquiry to put forward measures for effectively monitoring transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs).
This proposal seeks to create a standard legal basis for the monitoring and prevention of TSEs, of whatever type, and for all animal-based products.
It incorporates all Community regulations in force in the field of TSEs.
Like the rapporteur, I endorse the general strategy adopted by the European Commission, but I think the text before us needs tightening up in order to guarantee maximum consumer safety.
I have therefore supported the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
These amendments were intended to introduce the possibility of systematically implementing rapid diagnostic tests, and to reintroduce the European Parliament' s request in the context of the follow-up to the recommendations on BSE, i.e. withdrawing the entire herd from the food chain, banning any movement of animals defined as at risk, and advocating the slaughter and destruction of such animals, with the exception of animals intended for scientific research.
The proposal also had to be extended by inviting the Commission to present proposals for the inclusion of some cosmetic products and medicines, and to draw up a procedure for determining the epidemiological status of countries or regions in relation to BSE, i.e. a classification of countries according to contamination levels.
I shall conclude by stressing the fact that the European Parliament must continue to be involved, under the codecision procedure, in fundamental decisions on the prevention of TSEs.
- (PT) It is important that all necessary measures are adopted in order to monitor, prevent and fight all transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
These measures are part of the strategy for fighting these diseases that has been developed following the BSE crisis, including rapid diagnostic tests, in order to protect public health and regain consumer confidence.
It is equally important for the Commission and the Member States to adopt the measures necessary to guarantee that studies, research and practical action are developed, so as to enable these diseases to be eradicated quickly.
It is also crucial, however, that we do not forget the rights of livestock breeders, particularly those of small farmers and of those in family-based farming, who are in a difficult situation and should therefore be given the necessary support - particularly in Portugal, where the issue of aid is particularly crucial - especially if the ban is extended once again.
- (FR) The problem under discussion this morning was first identified a long time ago.
It is all very laudable to attempt to prevent the risks of BSE at Community level today, but it was almost 15 years ago that our researchers clearly established that one of the causes of mad cow disease was the consumption of cattle fodder containing animal-based meal made from ingredients taken from the carcasses of sheep suffering from ovine scrapie.
This is why, when we contributed towards setting up the Parliament' s Temporary Committee of Inquiry into BSE, we pointed out most forcefully that any regulatory instrument should necessarily cover all transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
Why has it been necessary to wait so long to effect the necessary changes in the regulations?
Why is there this time lag between scientific discoveries and Community proposals?
Fortunately, as far as the protection of the citizens is concerned, reactions at national level and in a number of Member States were rather more rapid and effective, compared with the incredible slowness and the usual paradoxes of Community bureaucracy.
Let me remind you that some countries, in effect, in order to ensure consumer food safety, have had to deliberately contravene Community regulations.
It is a perfectly good idea to make the use of rapid diagnostic tests more widespread.
They will be a significant component of BSE monitoring at Community level.
Let us not, however, treat them like a universal panacea.
These tests can only detect the affected prion protein above a certain level.
They are therefore no substitute for, in particular, the withdrawal of specific high-risk materials.
Above all, it would be an outrage if Member States which have set up a screening programme based on tests far stricter than the Community programme were to be penalised, in terms of classification with regard to BSE-related risks, in comparison with States which have confined themselves to the minimum Community programme.
Community regulations should never represent a brake on, or obstacle to, the action of Member States that wish to offer their citizens more stringent protection.
It has been clear since the start of the BSE crisis that the most appropriate and effective level of protection for our citizens is directly linked to the vigilance of the national authorities, with Community procedures, when they finally come to be drawn up, being able, of course, to play a useful complementary role.
Savary report (A5-0113/2000)
Madam President, I should briefly like to pay tribute to the work done by our fellow Member, Mr Savary, who has once again shown himself to be a staunch defender of the railways and of public services.
Next I should like to tell the people who voted in favour of this report that I, of course, agreed with saying that it is no longer possible to accept the share of rail transport increasingly losing out to road transport, and that nor is it possible to accept the technical, and even regulatory, obstacles from a bygone age that stand in the way of the much-needed freedom of movement throughout the whole of Europe?
All the same, for future reference, I wish to state today that making this observation and supporting this determination to make progress must not lead to untrammelled liberalisation and privatisation, as this puts our safety at risk, and we can see many examples of this today in some countries of Europe, and it is destructive as far as our public service is concerned.
This is not the purpose of today' s report but, in view of debates we will have in future, I wished to state this publicly.
Madam President, although we are in favour of completely harmonising European rail networks and making them compatible, since this is a necessity, and although we are in favour of developing this type of public transport, both on major international routes as well as on regional and local networks, we abstained from the vote on this report, since nowhere did it mention the need to operate rail networks as a public service, i.e. as a system designed and put into practice in order to respond to the needs of users and not to be a source of profit for private companies.
Madam President, I voted for the measure contained within the Savary report, on the trans-European conventional rail system.
How could I do otherwise?
This is a clearly a matter in which the European Union must intervene on account of the subsidiarity principle.
Long-distance transport can only be regulated at European level.
Nevertheless, there was room for improvement in this measure, but I hope that this will be achieved over the next few years.
We should use this as a springboard to create, at last, a European department of transport links, but, first and foremost, we should make it easier for pensioners and the elderly to travel between the European capitals.
Pensioners love to travel and could have the right to a free travel card for journeys between their capital city or their own town and the capital cities of the other 14 European States.
We must give our support to the interoperability of European railways as a means of revitalising and developing the sector at international level, in order better to meet users' needs, and also as an instrument for protecting the environment.
Nevertheless, we do not feel that adequate solutions to the problems arising for those working in the sector as a result of this process have been provided in the texts before us.
We are also aware, and are therefore bound to express our concern about this, that the proposals currently being discussed are part of a package of measures designed to liberalise the sector, and that the experiments that have already been carried out in this area have certainly led to a deterioration in safety and social conditions for workers.
Savary report (A5-0112/2000)
Madam President, I voted for the second Savary report, which differs from the previous report in that it refers to a trans-European high-speed rail system.
My point, this time, is that there is also room for improvement in this high-speed European transport system, in that it should be designed for use by ordinary citizens as well as businessmen who want to travel from Madrid to Copenhagen or somewhere even further away in as short a time as possible: businessmen can always go by plane.
High-speed links must, first and foremost, be designed for tourism, leisure and the enjoyment of all European citizens, especially the elderly, who would be avid travellers if conditions were more luxurious and rail travel a more pleasurable experience.
- I voted against the report on the trans-European high-speed system (A5-0112/2000).
It is most enlightening to compare the two reports presented by our colleague, Mr Savary, even if these documents have different legal bases.
The high-speed sector and the conventional rail system respond to quite different philosophies.
The former report received unanimous support in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.
Only half of the Members of the very same committee voted for the latter.
This fact is, in itself, expressive enough.
On the high-speed rail system report the Environment Committee, astonishingly, did not deliver any opinion, even if the environmental aspects are not mentioned in it at all.
It seems that most people in this House do not really care about the need to rebalance the different modes of transport in favour of the railways, to reach a significant rise in the volume of goods and passengers that nowadays overwhelmingly use the roads.
- (FR) First of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work on the Commission' s report on the implementation and effects of Directive 96/48/EC concerning the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system.
Creating the technical conditions for the interoperability of the European railway networks involves harmonising, between the various networks, the many different systems and components involved in rail transport.
The objective is a threefold one: to gradually create the conditions for the uninterrupted movement of trains on the 15 national networks - the free movement objective; to eliminate current high costs and delays in order to improve the competitiveness and reliability of the railways vis-à-vis their competitors - the sustainable mobility objective; and to create the conditions for a single European market in railway rolling stock by harmonising the elements that make up the railways - the economic and technological objective.
The objective of the directive before us today was to publish the technical specifications for interoperability (TSIs) for six sub-systems - Maintenance, Infrastructure, Energy, Rolling Stock, Operation and Control-Command - beginning the work of standardising components in collaboration with CEN, Cenelec and ETSI, and establishing in each Member State a list of notified bodies instructed to assess the conformity of the components produced by the relevant industries.
This report, drawn up pursuant to Directive 96/48/CE, gives an initial assessment of the progress made.
It must be noted that four years after the directive was adopted, not one single technical specification for interoperability (TSI) has been drawn up even though interoperability is deemed to be fundamental to the mobility of persons and the effectiveness of trans-European rail systems.
The majority of Member States have not, to date, transposed the provisions of this directive into their national legislation.
We are a long way from debating the priority to be given to rail!
It would, however, be unfair to say that no progress has been made.
For one thing, a tripartite body, the EARI (European Association for Railway Interoperability), has been set up and has undertaken the work of identifying and specifying existing technologies, components and procedures, which should culminate in two TSIs in the near future.
Moreover, the latest high-speed network investment projects, designed along the lines of Thalys, have, for the first time, made efforts to achieve convergence and technical coherence.
Even so, these achievements are still inadequate in terms of the issues at stake.
National disparities are a considerable obstacle to the development of rail transport in Europe, in spite of the many advantages of this means of transport in terms of sustainable development, pollution and safety.
The figures speak for themselves: in 1970, the railways had a 21% share of the goods transport market; today they have only 8.5%.
The trend is the same for passengers, where the market share has dropped from 10% in 1970 to 6%.
Where freight is concerned, the railways could quite easily disappear altogether from large areas of the goods transport market.
There is no doubt that the closure of large parts of the European network would lead to significant job losses.
It is therefore essential to give a fresh boost to interoperability.
(The sitting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
Adoption of single currency by Greece (continuation)
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report (A5­0135/2000) by Mr Goebbels, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Social Affairs, on the proposal for a Council decision pursuant to Article 122(2) of the EC Treaty for the adoption of the single currency by Greece on 1.1.2001.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is, of course, always particularly nerve-racking when one has occasion to make a speech in the European Parliament before such a packed house.
That said, it might also help one to overcome stage fright.
What is decisive though, is not the quantity but the quality of the people in the audience.
(Laughter, Applause)
We are continuing the debate on the accession of Greece to the euro zone and, of course, we must have noticed that the tone of this debate has been influenced by the exchange rate weakness of the euro and enlargement, and we have kept in mind the fact that any decision we take now may set a precedent for future candidate countries.
I feel we should take account of this throughout the debate.
At the same time though, we must stick to the facts.
The fact of the matter is that the European Commission and the ECB have presented us with reports.
Both reports state - the one from the European Central Bank does so with a few more reservations perhaps - that Greece has fulfilled the criteria of the Treaty of Maastricht.
If one looks a little more closely at the facts and figures, then it is possible to discern positive and negative aspects.
On the plus side, one cannot help but notice that inflation - which was still running at 20.4% in 1990, when Greece started the consolidation process - fell to 2% in March of the year 2000.
That is undoubtedly a most impressive achievement.
The second important criterion is the public deficit.
It was still at 7.6% in 1996 and fell to 1.5% in 1999.
That too is a most laudable achievement on the part of Greek economic policy.
However, there are also concerns to be registered here.
First, there is the fact that the criteria relating to the inflation rate were only fulfilled very late in the day, in the course of the last few months, and that the lowering of excise duty must have had something to do with this.
Then there is the question of total debt, which is still in excess of 100%, and is only inching towards the prescribed 60%.
We have some weighing up to do here.
I feel we should also take account of the fact that in the wake of the European Central Bank' s statement, the markets have, in principle, anticipated Greece' s accession to monetary union, and so if we were to reject this statement, it would not benefit the euro exchange rate in the least, but would, on the other hand, do considerable damage to the Greek economy.
I believe we should bear this in mind when forming an objective assessment of the situation.
Hence, we are in favour of Greece joining the euro zone, but with some reservations.
The majority of my Group will vote in favour, however, as we have included several amendments in the Pomés Ruiz report that highlight our concerns.
Firstly, it is made quite clear that the Maastricht criteria must be applied in full to all future candidate countries, and no more precedents are to be established in this respect.
Secondly, there must be sustainability as far as the rate of inflation is concerned.
I believe that if Greece were to step up its implementation of internal market directives, which actually enhance competition, then this would help to achieve this goal.
Thirdly, the proceeds from privatisation should be used to reduce debt.
These are the conditions under which the majority of my Group will vote in favour of Greece joining the euro zone.
Mr President, allow me first of all to congratulate Greece on its extraordinary economic progress.
The Commission has now concluded that Greece fulfils all the convergence criteria.
I am convinced that Parliament will take the same view.
It is quite an achievement to meet the convergence requirements and, at the same time, as Greece is doing now, to achieve increases in growth and employment.
Europe, especially the remaining convergence countries - Sweden and Greece - are now showing that it is fully possible to fulfil the stability requirements of the convergence process and still maintain a dynamic economy with growth and falling unemployment.
Against that background, I have no reservations about recommending that Greece join the euro zone as from 2001.
Sweden, too, fulfils the basic economic requirements.
The Swedish economy is now one of Europe' s strongest, with low inflation, high growth and a balance of payments surplus.
However, Sweden still does not fulfil all of the more formal requirements.
It has not joined the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) and Swedish legislation concerning the Bank of Sweden still does not completely fulfil the requirements of the Treaty.
However, the Swedish Parliament has instituted a number of changes to the legislation concerning monetary policy in order to facilitate Sweden joining the euro.
The remaining changes will be made when Sweden actually applies to join the euro, partly by applying to join the ERM.
I am very well aware of the implications of the Treaty.
But in a Euro-sceptic country like Sweden, which still feels itself to be a new Member State, there is a democratic imperative for a change as major as that of joining the euro to be preceded by a careful democratic process.
At the Committee hearing, Commissioner Solbes declared that it is the individual country which applies to enter the ERM.
Where Sweden' s entry is concerned, it is therefore my and, as I understand it, the Commission' s judgement that to want full status in EMU by entering the ERM is to adopt a political position.
Commissioner Solbes said in the Committee that he respects the Swedish government' s desire to allow the people to decide the question in a referendum.
We are therefore also grateful for the phrases in Mr Goebbels' report in which he welcomes this democratic process.
I, who am working hard in favour of Swedish 'euro membership' , am convinced that, in a few years' time, we shall also make the same decision for Sweden as we are now making in the case of Greece, i.e. to welcome and approve Sweden as a fully-fledged member of the Economic and Monetary Union and of the single currency.
I look forward to that day.
Mr President, I would like to make a brief comment concerning Sweden.
Sweden joined the European Union without an opt-out, certainly not in respect of monetary union.
Only on points such as legislation, which is in Sweden' s remit, does the country not meet the criteria.
There is talk of a referendum coming up.
I would like to know when exactly that will be as I am sure there is not a date for this yet.
How long will it be before the Commission does its duty and reminds Sweden' s Social Democratic government of its signature under a very important contract?
The Swedish government sets an extremely bad example for the candidate countries which are, at this moment, waiting to join.
Mr President, I would now like to move on to Greece.
I have a problem with that country.
The Greeks have produced a fantastic achievement.
I only wonder how long the effects of that achievement will last.
But I am acutely aware that by punishing Greece for achieving something positive, we will let the actual guilty party off the hook.
Greece probably does not meet the criteria any more or less than other countries did.
The euro zone should be able to carry a relatively small economy such as the Greek one quite easily.
At the moment, however, this sends out the wrong psychological message to the markets and citizens who, to use an appropriate metaphor, look upon the euro descending Mount Olympus with sadness in their eyes.
This is why Parliament, on behalf of the citizen, has to send out a signal to the Union' s large Member States.
But the Central Bank, for example, is not concerned with the euro' s external value.
The true culprits are the governments of Germany, France, Belgium and especially Italy.
These countries, however, are making a mess of their own responsibilities vis-à-vis the currency and vis-à-vis the European citizen, let alone their own citizens.
They do not introduce the required structural reform within their own markets.
Governments are far too accommodating when agreements are not met, under the motto: you meet the agreements today, I might meet them tomorrow.
Why is Italy not called to task when it makes a shambles of its good intentions?
The large Member States and Belgium are trifling with the interests of all European citizens.
It is said time and again that the European citizens are not adversely affected as long as they stay in Europe.
But surely, Mr President, we should not make that decision for them?
In the Netherlands, many farmers are emigrating to North America.
A weak euro lets them down badly.
Businesses within the European Union have become 25% cheaper for the United States to buy.
I think it is time for some changes.
I will be abstaining from the votes today.
Mr President, there can be no doubt that Greece has been at great pains to fulfil the convergence criteria.
This is definitely deserving of recognition, but as the rapporteur, Mr Goebbels, said, Greece does not completely make the grade.
The question of sustainability has reared its head again.
Mrs Randzio-Plath has once again stressed the importance of sustainability in the context of compliance with the convergence criteria.
When we look around in Europe, we see that wherever socialist governments are in office, or have just come to power, there are problems to do with sustainability.
This affects the large countries such as Germany, France and Italy as well.
As Guardian of the Treaties, the Commission cannot just ignore this, and behave as if everything was fine.
The decision we have to make today is significant because there are other Member States waiting to join the euro zone, and so we must be sure to impose the criteria on Greece.
Greece joined the European Monetary System two years ago and revalued the Drachma early this year.
It has largely fulfilled requirements in this respect.
Secondly, it succeeded in getting the rate of inflation down to the required level not so long ago.
Whether this lasts remains to be seen.
I would have preferred it if Greece' s entry into the euro zone could have been deferred for a year, to 1 January 2002.
As has already been pointed out, Greece does not, by any stretch of the imagination, fulfil the criteria laid down by the Treaty of Maastricht pertaining to the interest-rate margin.
It could only reduce the public debt by a small amount: only by 6 percentage points over eight years, in contrast to Italy and Belgium, which were able to reduce their debts by a far higher amount.
I really very much doubt whether we can talk in terms of sustainability in this respect.
Privatisation of state enterprise has made little headway.
As before, no more than 49% of state assets can be sold, which means that it is nothing more than an exercise in private provision of capital.
It certainly is not privatisation in the real sense.
The decision as to whether Greece should be admitted to the euro zone ought not to be taken lightly.
There is a significant minority in the European Parliament that would like to see Greece join, but believes that it is still too early, and the course of action we take now will play a part in determining whether the euro is stable or not, internally and externally, in the long term.
Allow me to say a final word about the comparisons that have been drawn with the Deutschmark in 1985.
There is no comparison whatsoever.
We did not even have the Single European Act in 1985.
The internal market is a reality now.
One cannot compare apples with pears, my friend, and so join us in pushing for strict adherence to the convergence criteria.
Mr President, I am wholly and unequivocally in favour of Greece' s adoption of the single European currency, the euro.
As Mr Goebbels stated in his report, the European Parliament' s task is not to assess practical adherence to the Maastricht criteria, for that has already been done, item by item, by the Commission and the bodies whose task it is to monitor these indicators and keep us informed.
The European Parliament must express a political opinion; it must speak from the heart and not on the basis of figures; it must listen to its soul instead of numbers.
What sort of European Union is it in which one of the 15 States, which wishes to accede to the most committed and most important level of European cohesion, is still left standing outside the door?
When, as the report maintains, we consider that all the Maastricht criteria are fulfilled and that, in addition, this country is called Greece - an enchanting name in itself - we cannot fail to realise that this cannot continue and be moved to remedy the situation.
And I refer, in particular, to the Greek pensioners.
You may wonder why, as representative of the Italian Pensioners' Party, I am interested in Greek pensioners.
But Mr President, if we have to ask Greece to reduce its State deficit - and, unfortunately, we know that, nowadays, this is only achieved by reducing pensions - instead of avoiding wastage - which, as the previous speaker said, in socialist governments, especially, is due to poor budgetary allocations - we must not make the pensioners and elderly citizens of Greece pay the price for its accession to the European currency.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the progress Greece has made in its endeavours to fulfil the convergence criteria is indeed impressive.
It bears witness to this country' s desire to become a member of euroland, sparing no effort along the way.
I am in favour of treating all countries equally when it comes to forming an assessment of the criteria.
In other words, whilst I approve of Greece joining the euro zone overall, I have definite reservations when it comes to the results we are considering at present.
The inflation criterion and the debt situation certainly give cause for concern.
Greece has only been able to achieve the reference value for the permissible inflation rate in the last few months.
No stone was left unturned in order to attain this objective, which begs the question as to whether the currency stability that has now been achieved can be secured in the long term or, put another way: how do matters actually stand on the sustainability front?
Another worrying aspect is the total debt situation, which, being in excess of 100% of GNP, as compared with the reference value of 60%, is far too high.
We must also take into account the fact that the current free-fall of the euro is not exactly favouring a sustained reduction in Greece' s state debt, and the anticipated medium-term rise in the level of interest rates is unlikely to help matters either.
Let us be clear about one thing where this decision is concerned: the financial markets immediately draw their own conclusions about the forthcoming enlargement eastwards.
Therefore, the standard we set for all the euro aspirants amongst the countries of Central and Eastern Europe must not be so much as a fraction higher than the standard we are currently setting for Greece.
And so we should be careful not to be over-generous in our interpretation of these results.
They constitute - and I would emphasise this again - a hard-won snapshot of the situation and qualify Greece for membership by right.
In short, a 'yes' vote must be qualified with an equally clear 'however' .
Mr President, the euro was born two years ago.
For me, as a Europhile, it was a great day when monetary union was brought to a successful conclusion, exactly as planned and with as many as 11 Member States.
For me, as a Swede, it was disappointing that Swedish Social Democracy had not been able to deliver a result then and there.
Now, two years have gone by - without any response or progress on Sweden' s part.
We are, unfortunately, the country without an EMU strategy.
For my part, I can only congratulate Greece as the twelfth country to adopt the euro.
Now that our discussions are focusing upon Greece and we are carefully picking over the Greek economy, all EU countries ought to join Greece in also adopting the euro.
Many people are to be heard explaining the fall in value of the euro with reference to the fact that the United States' s economy is stronger than Europe' s.
That is indisputable.
It is amazing, however, that more is not being done by Europe to reverse this trend.
For me, the reason for this is clear.
There is a lack of confidence in the European governments.
It is time to implement the structural changes which are often talked about but which are still not being carried out.
With lower taxes and a more flexible labour market, Europe can enter the new economy.
There needs to be more rationalisation of the budget, more exposure to competition, more deregulation and a more rapid phasing-out of monopolies.
If the governments of Europe give priority to this work, we shall immediately find confidence in the euro increasing.
But many of the EU' s social democratic-led governments are visibly unable to take action.
There is a lack of leadership.
It is not the President of the ECB who can 'talk up' the euro.
Instead, it is the Member States which can make the EU and the euro competitive.
Mr President, the debate has certainly shown the PPE-DE Group that we do not make things easy for ourselves, and that, at the end of the day, although the assessments are similar, different conclusions may be reached.
However, I would like to begin by congratulating the Greek government on the outstanding results it has achieved in the course of the last year as regards public debt and inflation.
But it is the current situation that we need to consider.
It is certainly true that by the very nature of its national economy, Greece is not destined to be the driving force, the big market within the euro zone.
Turning now to the question of inflation: Mr Goebbels, I hope - I do not know if I understood you correctly this morning - that the low inflation rate you referred to is here to stay.
We will have a struggle on our hands.
However, this is the first accession to the euro zone.
Unlike the beginning, when Italy and Belgium also failed to make the reference values, we must now take care, in the light of enlargement eastwards, not to create new reference values, and allow this to become a never ending story.
But that is precisely the problem it seems we are going to have to face.
The important thing is to reach a decision today that will boost political confidence in the euro.
In other words, we need to ensure that, in future, the markets believe that these are economic objectives and criteria and not political decisions.
The CSU (Christian Social Union) is proposing to vote against the motion today, which does not mean that it is saying 'no' to Greece and to the euro, rather it disagrees with the timing and hopes to be able to admit Greece next year.
The ECB itself raised the issue of 'sustainability' .
It is precisely this view - i.e. deferral of the decision for a year, so as to allow the local economy to stabilise - that could send out a signal, both to the Member States of the euro zone and to the financial markets.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Goebbels for his report and also the various participants in this debate.
Today we are studying the report on convergence, which deals with the Swedish and Greek problems.
With regard to Sweden, the situation has hardly changed since 1998.
The economic situation is positive, but the legislative adaptation of its Central Bank is not being carried out and it is not a member of the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the EMS.
With regard to Greece, the situation is radically different.
Greece did not fulfil the convergence criteria in 1998 but now it does.
By that I mean that it fulfils them in the strictest sense, using exactly the same criteria as in 1998.
Greece has clearly made a great effort and I therefore have nothing to add to the positive results highlighted by Mr Goebbels in his report.
I would like to talk about some of the points which have been mentioned today, given the concern about the Greek model.
I understand that concern because Greece offers a precedent not only for the new candidate countries but also for the current Member States who, in the future, may join the single currency.
In this respect, it is quite clear that the way we deal with Greece will be crucial but I want to insist that Greece has been treated in the same way as all the other countries when their situation was considered back in 1998.
There have basically been two issues of concern: debt and inflation.
Are they sustainable?
Is this inflation situation sustainable, or durable, as you call it?
In the case of Greece, debt stands at more than 100% of GDP, practically the same as in Belgium or Italy.
I do not think it is reasonable to compare the current situation in Greece with that prevailing in Italy or Belgium.
We must not forget that Belgium and Italy have benefited from the fall in debt resulting from the reduction in interest rates, which is due, in particular, to the approximation of the interest rates of their Central Banks with those of the European Central Bank.
In comparative terms, the Greek situation is similar to the Italian or Belgian situation at the time of their accession to the single currency.
The second point of concern is inflation.
I understand this concern on the basis of two arguments: firstly, it is true that the level of inflation necessary to comply with the criteria was achieved relatively recently; secondly, there will also be a reduction in the interest rates and this will have a positive effect on speeding up the reduction in deficit and debt, but which may generate tensions in the market.
With regard to the first point, concerning whether Greece has achieved this inflation rate in a manner which is unsustainable, I must make a few comments.
Greece has been complying with the inflation criteria for some months and the situation is improving considerably.
This morning I had the opportunity to discuss the Greek figures which were issued a few days ago by the Greek national statistical service.
The Eurostat figures were also published this morning.
At the moment, the harmonised CPI, in the case of Greece, stands at 2.1%, a drop of 0.7% on the March figure; this is a better situation, for example, than certain countries of the monetary union, such as Belgium, Spain, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg and Finland.
In comparative terms, therefore, Greece' s current situation is quite sound.
If we abide by the strict criterion of the last 12 months, we will see that inflation currently stands at 2%.
This is clearly better than the situation in Spain and Ireland, and practically the same as Italy, Luxembourg or the Netherlands.
Therefore, in terms of figures, I believe that we should not worry about the Greek situation.
However, the Commission also shares the concern which certain MEPs have highlighted.
We have therefore insisted on two points in discussing both the broad guidelines for economic policies and the convergence report.
Greece has to do two things, and the Greek Government is prepared to do them and has committed itself to doing them: Firstly, it must continue with its liberalisation policies and structural reforms which will improve the inflation situation; secondly, Greece must continue with its policy of reducing the deficit, but in a context of combining policies, a 'policy mix' , which will allow it, in the event that an increase in demand, resulting from a reduction in interest rates, may create tension in terms of inflation, to reconsider its tax policy so that it will not have negative effects on the process of integration into Monetary Union.
I am convinced that all of that will happen, and the Greek Government has committed itself to ensuring that it does.
I therefore believe that the entry of Greece into the euro will help rather than hinder it.
The euro has shown that it is still an attractive currency which some countries want to join.
I hope that the path being taken by Greece will be followed by other Member States in the next few years.
This is the end of a process.
We must wait for its culmination with the decisions in June, but I am convinced that, by welcoming Greece into the euro when the time is right, we will generate more confidence in the face of any other type of arguments against the future progress of the single currency.
Mr President, I have asked the Commissioner when he will do his duty as far as Sweden is concerned and remind the Social Democratic government of a signature which was placed here by Sweden.
When will the Commission enforce the Treaty?
The Commission always respects the Treaty.
It is obliged to comply with it.
Please do not forget that it is a fact that Sweden is not participating because its Central Bank has not adapted to the European requirements, a decision which falls to the Swedish authorities.
Secondly, we should not forget either that participation in the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the EMS is a voluntary decision.
You may ask whether this is contrary to the spirit of the Treaty of Maastricht, but it is clearly not a point which we can debate at the moment.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Solbes Mira.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.
Transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings
The next item is the report (A5-0109/2000) by Mrs Randzio-Plath, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on a proposal for a Commission directive amending Directive 80/723/EEC on the transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings (SEC(1999) 404 - C5-0102/2000 - 2000/2065(COS)).
Mr President, the directive sets out to identify and prevent subsidies that distort competition.
To this end, it proposes to require public undertakings, and private undertakings that perform public tasks, to carry out separate accounting procedures, recording separately the reserved and the competitive spheres of the business.
The legal basis for the directive is Article 86(3), and the Commission is therefore authorised to issue the directive itself.
In fact this is now out of step with the spirit of the time, and with what we understand by European legislation, and must be changed.
But today' s debate is to be welcomed with open arms because it exemplifies the new form of transparency in the Commission' s legislative work in areas where it has supervisory powers, and also bears witness to the interest Commissioner Monti and his offices take in the opinion of the European Parliament.
The businesses which the directive covers have special or exclusive rights or provide services of general economic interest.
As such, the possibility exists that cross-subsidies are provided, and also that complaints about cross-subsidies will ensue.
Thousands of businesses will be affected.
It seems debatable as to whether they will actually consider the burden the directive imposes to be commensurate with its aims.
The majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has wholeheartedly endorsed this measure because there is a need for more transparency within the internal market.
The whole committee would agree with this, even if the rapporteur represented the minority view in some areas.
It is doubtful as to whether the measure really seems suited to following up suspicions concerning competition-distorting subsidies, particularly as it fails to provide any harmonised internal accounting procedures at European level.
I am formulating these doubts so as to afford the Commission the opportunity to dispel some of them in a concrete and constructive manner at the revision stage.
I have already mentioned that the Commission is expecting complaints about cross-subsidies, and has actually already dealt with complaints in the past.
However, it has also been apparent in the past that the Commission has always made provision for sector-specific regulations, which cover a variety of regulatory areas.
Unfortunately, it did not continue down this path.
Of course, one could say that it would be easier if we now had a uniform regulation for the remaining areas, and indeed that was the view taken by the majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
However, I also believe that any directive should be assessed according to its efficiency, careful targeting, precision and subtlety, so as to enable the Commission to carry out its supervisory function to optimum effect.
There was a further problem with the discussions on this directive in that the Commission failed to emphasise that, under Article 295 of the EC Treaty, it is entirely the Member States' responsibility to determine what services are of general economic interest and how they should be provided.
I ask myself whether the Commission' s ulterior motive, in failing to emphasise this in the transparency directive, is to tamper with this sovereign definition by slow degrees, thereby undermining the principle of subsidiarity.
It is for the Member States to decide whether supplying television transmitters constitutes a public task and, as such, whether or not every single transmission is included.
It is not appropriate for the EU to intervene here.
In this respect, there should be another reference in the text of the directive to the Amsterdam Protocol, because this established that it is the responsibility of the Member States to establish the financial and organisational structures for public service broadcasting corporations and their different activities.
Aid for fulfilment of public tasks is expressly permitted, and this was the position adopted by the majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
However, broadcasting corporations may not receive state aid where they operate outside their public remit.
And so the Commission must, as a matter of principle, clarify that under no circumstances will it cast doubt on the meaning of 'services of general economic interest' per se.
It must make it clear that the draft directive does not constitute a further attack on the system of public undertakings.
Needless to say, the competition rules must be adhered to by all.
Indeed it is important and right for the competition rules to be applied effectively and fairly and for cross-subsidies that go against the purpose of aid to be prevented.
However, competition rules are not an end in themselves but the means to an end of undisrupted operation of a social market economy in the internal market.
Mr President, Article 86 of the Treaty captures the very essence of the resolution.
Paragraph 1 stipulates that in the case of public undertakings and undertakings to which Member States grant special or exclusive rights, Member States shall neither enact nor maintain in force any measure contrary to the rules contained in this Treaty.
Paragraph 2 adds, in summary, that undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest shall be subject to the rules contained in this Treaty.
It is up to the Commission to monitor the observation of this Article and to provide fitting directives or decisions to the Member States.
The amendment to the directive to which this resolution pertains must enable the Commission to carry out this task more effectively, which is certainly necessary given the ever growing liberalisation of recent years.
Public undertakings and former public undertakings increasingly embrace the commercial world where they, partly with government funding, engage in competition with private undertakings, i.e. their own citizens.
Let it be clear, then, that the much desired level playing field no longer exists.
The present situation promotes money wasting, distorts international trade and, as such, forms a threat to the internal market.
It is surely only logical and reasonable that public undertakings, at the time when they enter into the market, should abide by the same rules as private undertakings.
As a means of guaranteeing a level playing field, the Commission has decided that undertakings with a net turnover in excess of EUR 40 million should keep separate accounts which should illustrate the different activities, the costs and profits pertaining to each of the activities, the method according to which costs and profit are accounted for and the way in which the net profits generated by each activity are used.
These are the considerations with regard to the proposal.
In short, what is the origin of investments in the commercial field?
Initially, the Commission proposal met with a great deal of resistance from EMAC and the Commission.
In actual fact, there was only a handful of PPE-DE Members and the Liberal Group who were in favour of the planned transparency.
This caused me concern.
We, as MEPs, are elected to exercise democratic control over the executive, in this case the Commission.
The Commission is, in turn, responsible for observing Article 86.
We thus have the duty to ensure that the Commission carries out the assigned task properly but, at the same time, some of us would prevent it from doing exactly that.
I wonder how we must come across in a situation like this.
We make it abundantly clear that we strive for fair competition and utilisation of our internal market but, when the chips are down, we are once again looking solely after our own interests.
In the report on the adoption of the single currency by Greece, I blame the governments for not doing what needs to be done.
Those against this directive are thus giving the governments a helping hand.
As Parliament, we cannot do anything else but to ensure that the markets operate clearly and transparently and that we do not give preferential treatment to certain undertakings and not others.
This directive may seem tedious, but is, in reality, the acid test.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to make three points regarding this directive, and the consultation, on which I should like to congratulate our rapporteur.
I think she has managed to come up with a reasonable balance within our committee in what almost became, on occasions, an ideological debate.
In your proposal, Commissioner, you quite rightly exclude a number of sectors, and we can only be pleased at this.
Secondly, as our rapporteur pointed out, I should like to draw attention to the fact that the jurisdiction of Member States in this field must not be disregarded.
At the present time, there is no definition of services of general economic interest at European Union level.
We must therefore bring subsidiarity into play, and we are well aware that in such areas, national sensibilities may be expressed in diverse ways.
I can therefore only urge you, Commissioner, to show as much drive and determination in making full use of all the terms of the Treaty, particularly those which, following the Treaty of Amsterdam, grant you new scope for action, especially with a view to defining the ability to provide services of general economic interest.
I would urge Mrs Peijs to read again the latest version of the Treaty with regard to what she considers to be the last word on the law on competition within the European Union.
My third observation, Commissioner, is on public broadcasting services.
Once again, I cannot ignore what we incorporated into our Treaty when we amended it in Amsterdam.
This sector is very clearly covered by specific conditions.
This shows the determination of the Member States to treat this sector as a sector in its own right falling outside the rules of competition which exist in other areas.
I therefore feel that the proposals on transparency that you are putting forward cannot be applied to that sector under the same conditions.
I think it would be rather difficult in such a sector to implement the notion of separate accounting systems making it possible to draw a distinction between competitive activities and public service activities in the broadcasting sector, especially as, I might mention in passing, there is no single harmonised European accounting system.
I just wanted to complain about the quality of sound reproduction.
There is a bad echo in the Chamber, as a result of which we can hardly hear those speaking in their original languages.
Can something be done about this?
We will try to resolve the problem you have raised in your speech, Mrs Maes.
Mr President, the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party welcomes the Commission' s proposal, which will lead to increased public scrutiny of public undertakings and to increased competition.
We want to thank Mrs Randzio-Plath for cooperating so well.
State aid distorts competition and is unfair to both consumers and companies.
In principle, the Treaty prohibits all types of state aid, including cross-subsidies.
The Treaty does not, however, prohibit the existence of public undertakings providing services in the public interest.
Whatever one may think about this, it is for the Member States themselves to define what is meant by services in the public interest.
The Member States should not, however, themselves decide what kinds of aid they will be granting these undertakings.
The Court of First Instance in Luxembourg stated as late as last week that state support for TV and radio companies may only be provided once the Commission has said that this is compatible with the Treaty.
The rules must be applied in the same way to all parties.
All aid which is not used to finance services in the public interest is prohibited and is to be opposed.
State radio stations and TV companies now often provide services which are outside the scope of what we call services in the public interest.
An example is Internet connection.
Those resources which the State has injected into companies to finance their basic activities ought not, of course, to be used to finance the provision of Internet connections.
In that case, competition is distorted, to the disadvantage both of consumers and of private companies.
The Commission' s proposal requires companies to openly account for the resources provided to them as public undertakings and for how these have been used.
Companies must also show what costs they have, where their income comes from and how this is derived from their various activities.
These are very reasonable demands.
Both these obligations are simple means of upholding the rules governing relations between private and public undertakings.
This is important for the purpose of maintaining proper rules in the internal market.
Mr President, Commissioner Monti, on the subject of the proposal before us, I should like to make four remarks or observations on behalf of my Group, but not without first congratulating our fellow Member, Mrs Randzio-Plath.
First of all, I should like to thank Commissioner Monti for having had the courtesy to consult the European Parliament.
A Commission directive has been referred to us, even though, I believe, it is not legally mandatory to consult Parliament, although the subject is clearly a crucial one.
This leads me to reiterate the hope that the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference will propose subjecting all legislation on competition policy to the codecision procedure, thereby enabling us legally to work on a more equal footing.
My second comment concerns the actual purpose of this proposed directive.
It has an extremely specific aim, which is to prevent, subject to monitoring by the Commission, any legitimate public aid to services of general interest being misappropriated to the benefit of activities which are themselves open to competition.
Having said that, the problem is by no means easy to solve, as the previous speaker made clear.
Indeed he states - and I would be curious to know Mr Monti' s response to this - that Internet connection does not, for example, come under the heading of universal service.
I think that this runs quite counter to the objectives of the European Council in Lisbon, and that it is necessary, on the contrary, to have a comprehensive vision of universal service.
One might go so far as to imagine, even if this is a matter for subsidiarity, that the Community as such should at least define the minimum standards of what the universal service may be.
Otherwise we are heading towards a relatively chaotic situation.
Thirdly, I should like to know the Commission' s reaction to Recital No 4 of our report, in which the rapporteur and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs effectively ask the Commission to specify how important it considers services of general interest to be.
I await the Commission' s response on the matter.
Fourthly and finally, there is one amendment, Amendment No 3, which is explicitly intended to exclude the broadcasting sector from the scope of the proposed directive.
I think this amendment is an improvement on the current text.
Paragraph 6 is a masterpiece of diplomatic language but is relatively incomprehensible.
I should therefore like to see the Commission expressing its support for Amendment No 3 as proposed in plenary.
Thank you very much, Mr President.
I would like to join my colleagues in thanking Commissioner Monti for consulting Parliament on this matter and in congratulating our rapporteur for her great job.
The tenor of this report relates to analysing which public undertakings can receive financial aid from the Member State governments operating within the EU.
There are clearly opposing views in this House on this subject matter.
There are those who would like to see undertakings which are only in direct competition with the private sector to be subject to the terms of this directive, whilst others would propose that public undertakings which are clearly of a general interest could fall within the exceptions in this directive.
It can be said that the right reserved to Member States to determine what constitutes service of general interest is preserved, and the one area that I would like to deal with specifically is the question of broadcasting.
I would like to remind this House that the protocol attached to the Treaty of Amsterdam of the EU recognises that the system of public broadcasting within Member States of the EU is directly related to the democratic, social and cultural needs of our society.
We must ensure that with the advance of new technology the public service broadcast ethos is not undermined.
I would argue that it is more essential, now that we have a strong public service broadcasting sector, to ensure the maintenance of that democratic, social and cultural sector.
In conclusion, Mr President, this is why I believe the role of public service broadcasters must be maintained, and while I welcome the fact that the right must be reserved to Member States to determine what constitutes ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, the present draft directive amending Directive 80/723/EEC resolves an important issue to do with competition policy, namely the fact that the government has been obliged to disclose its links with public undertakings.
That is nothing new.
This directive has been in force since 1980 and it is certainly high time that it was revised, because it is out-of-date in many aspects on account of the liberalisation process.
But the question is this: if this fundamental amendment is approved, are the Commission' s proposals heading in the right direction?
I intend to raise several points and would ask the Commissioner to examine and take account of them once again when it comes to producing the final version of the transparency directive: Firstly, the exemption regulation for small- and medium-sized enterprises, which, since 1980, has included those businesses having a turnover of less than EUR 40 million.
Since then, the turnover indices have increased many times over.
It is therefore necessary, and would make good sense, to raise the threshold to EUR 100 million.
Secondly, the recently introduced balance limit for public credit institutions of EUR 800 million, which did not exist before.
These credit institutions were completely excluded hitherto.
EUR 800 million is nothing at all!
In my previous national parliament electoral constituency of 70 000 inhabitants, the savings bank, which only operates on a regional basis, actually had a balance of EUR 1.5 billion!
It would not be right to create a new opportunity for the Commission to step in.
Thirdly: separate accounting.
Hitherto, it was only the Member States who were obliged to report on their financial activities.
Now the undertakings themselves are going to have to produce separate accounts.
Surely this is motivated purely by the fact that the Commission would like another instrument of control.
Fourthly: the definition of services of general economic interest.
These services will only be excluded - just listen to this - if the undertakings are given special or exclusive rights in an open, transparent and non-discriminatory procedure for an appropriate period of time, i.e. after a tender procedure.
What about the social services?
What about the traditionally evolved social activities?
Professor Monti, I do not want to give the Commission carte blanche to be able to interfere in anything and everything.
We trust you not to want to control everything, Professor Monti, but I very much doubt as to whether we can say the same of every last official!
Mr President, I also wish to add my congratulations to Mrs Randzio-Plath for the work on this report, which has been difficult at times.
This directive sets out to identify and prevent subsidies which distort competition.
In order to do this, the directive proposes to require public undertakings and private undertakings that perform public tasks to carry out separate accounting procedures.
I obviously agree with the rapporteur that competition rules must be applied rigorously in order to prevent cross-subsidies that go against the purpose of the aid.
However, in the sphere of public broadcasting it is essential to remember that, in accordance with the Amsterdam Protocol, in the system of public broadcasting in Member States, it is up to each Member State to specify the financial and organisational structure of public service broadcasting.
This has, as I said, been a difficult report; it has been fraught and often very tense in committee and, more specifically, at the committee votes.
However, I believe the final outcome will work and is a practical and correct approach.
Mr President, despite this discussion in Parliament concerning the changes which the Commission would like to make to the directive on the transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings, we will not have much of a say in it because it will be the Commission, and the Commission only, that will make decisions without further involving the European Parliament or the Council, much to our regret.
In our opinion, on the basis of its autonomous powers concerning competition policy, the Commission approaches some sectors from a purely economic angle without taking into consideration other social aspects.
For example, in the dossier on financing public broadcasting, the Commission still overlooks the cultural aspects and the aspect of media-pluralism, to our mind.
Admittedly, an exception is made but then this exception accommodates further exceptions.
For example, it is very difficult for public broadcasting to survive in an increasingly commercialised environment.
I am against the commercialisation of culture.
In my opinion, culture is above these market laws.
The Commission has thus overstepped the mark.
With this amendment to the directive, it is trying to change the Treaty of Amsterdam, namely the public broadcasting protocol which was attached to it.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the IGC should apply the normal legislative procedure for codecision by the Council and Parliament to general competition policy legislation.
I can already tell you that I will be here once again when you produce a directive on film.
Mr President, I congratulate the European Parliament on the major work accomplished during the debate on the Randzio-Plath report.
I would particularly like to thank Parliament for the support it has shown for the Commission' s initiative and I welcome its approval of the steps to increase transparency in the use of public resources and thereby guarantee fair competition.
You welcomed the Commission' s consultation of Parliament, despite the fact that it was not obliged to do this under its institutional statutes as Mr Jonckheer and other speakers recalled.
Moreover, the way the debate went reassures me that it was useful for the Commission and in the best interests of the initiative for Parliament to be consulted.
As it stands, the directive on transparency gives the Commission the authority to carry out inquiries into financial relations between Member States and their public undertakings.
In short, the draft amendment to the directive is intended to ensure the introduction of separate accounting procedures for specific types of firms.
The firms affected by this measure are those which, on the one hand, provide services of general economic interest in exchange for various different types of compensation, which may be special dues or payments, and, on the other, also perform normal general activities, thereby operating in competition with other firms.
Clearly, the profits generated by the continuation of reserved activities or by compensation provided for reasons of general interest or public service are not intended to finance competitive activities, and must therefore not give rise to internal subsidies.
However, in recent years, the Commission has had to examine a growing number of claims related precisely to such internal compensation.
As Mrs Peijs mentioned, in the course of its inquiries, the Commission has had to examine these cases of internal compensation and it was frequently unable to obtain sufficient information regarding the costs and profits generated by the various activities.
Therefore, the Commission now proposes to introduce a system of separate accounts for these types of companies which will allow them to perform their role as surety for competition properly.
I would also like to stress that the obligation to keep separate accounts also benefits the Member States, in that it provides them with the necessary information in order to avoid granting state aid which does not comply with the Treaty and to notify the Commission of the aid envisaged.
The directive requires that companies which provide general services and which, at the same time, operate outside that public service mission, keep separate accounts.
This requirement applies to both private and public companies.
The directive does not apply to companies which only provide general services and do not carry on any other activity, nor does it require the separation of different activities which all come under the heading of general services.
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, the directive is intended to make the areas around the line between services of general interest and other activities transparent with the minimum of disruption.
I would like to emphasise the fact that the directive makes no changes either, of course, to the provisions of the Treaty on the awarding of general services, or to the awarding of the management of these services to specific companies.
The directive lays down the principles for the introduction of greater transparency, although, in observance of the subsidiarity principle, it leaves the Member States free to adopt appropriate national measures.
I would now like to turn to some of the comments made.
Mr Jonckheer wondered whether Internet access was to be included in the universal service.
On this point, I can only say that the last Telecommunications Council did hold a debate on this matter.
As regards the doubts expressed by the rapporteur, Mrs Randzio-Plath, I would briefly like to summarise them.
On the subject of the definition of general services, I would stress once again that the directive does not make any changes, it does not reduce the current competences of the Member States - Mrs Berès and Mr Langen - regarding the definition of public interest.
This also applies to the public broadcasting sector, in respect of which the Amsterdam Protocol confirmed the competence of the Member States in the definition of the admission of public service.
Mrs Berès, Mr Jonckheer, Mr Crowley, Mr Skinner and Mrs Maes remarked that it might be possible to exclude broadcasting.
I have to say that this sector could well be among the fields where the directive is most frequently applied, where this directive on transparency is of most service, for, even taking the Amsterdam Protocol into account, of course, this nevertheless leaves the Commission with the task of verifying that aid granted for the provision of public services is not excessive in respect of the costs.
A requirement for verification therefore remains, and this directive should be useful for this purpose.
The size of company is irrelevant, and I am now addressing Mr Langen et al: the EUR 40 million threshold excludes small- and medium-sized businesses.
If we were to raise this threshold we would be excluding companies where, due to their size, we cannot suppose that the aid does not affect trade between Member States.
In any case, in order to give an idea of the size, only 0.2% of all non-farming enterprises in the Community are above this threshold.
Finally, I would like to say - and it appears that this has been perfectly well understood by the Members of Parliament - that this directive is not in the slightest an attack on public companies.
Quite the opposite, to be honest, I see it as a great show of support for public companies.
This is because it provides clarity and therefore does not expose public services to the attacks which would otherwise have been levelled at them.
As Mr Olle Schmidt stressed, this transparency is essential not only for a proper application of competition policy but, indeed, if I may say so, it is also crucial for there to be a proper relationship between the authorities and the taxpayers, the citizens.
I therefore feel that, although, as Mrs Peijs stressed, this directive may appear extremely tedious, it actually allows us to get to the heart of the issue, not only of competition but also of civil coexistence and economic democracy.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Monti.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.
Poor countries' debt
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions:
B5-0221/2000 by Mr Mantovani and others, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats (PPE-DE), to the Council, on poor countries' debt;
B5-0222/2000 by Mr Mantovani and others, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats (PPE-DE), to the Commission, on poor countries' debt;
B5-0224/2000 by Mr Miranda and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, to the Council, on poor countries' debt;
B5-0311/2000 by Mr Miranda and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, to the Commission, on poor countries' debt;
B5-0312/2000 by Mr Coûteaux, on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group, to the Council, on poor countries' debt;
B5-0313/2000 by Mr Rod and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, to the Council, on cancelling poor countries' debt;
B5-0314/2000 by Mr Rod and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, to the Commission, on cancelling poor countries' debt.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Tajani, Mr van Velzen and Mr Poettering for their valuable, substantial contributions to this debate.
I also welcome the mandate conferred on me by the European People' s Party to present such a major topic as the poor countries' debt, which is stifling the economy of the world' s poorest developing countries.
The scale of this issue is global, and it involves all the civilised, democratic countries which are helplessly standing by, watching the constant growth of the debt of poor countries, which now have to set aside an average of 40% of their annual budget to finance it.
Every year, the debt increases by approximately 12%, and it has risen from USD 110 billion in the 80s to its present value of USD 350 billion.
Parliament has attempted to deal with the issue on more than one occasion, but it has never appeared to find satisfactory solutions.
This year, on account of it being a Jubilee Year, the Holy See and other quarters are calling for the substantial reduction, if not total cancellation, of the international debt in such a way as to facilitate the integration of the most indebted countries into the world production and commercial trade circuit.
The UN Secretary-General also fervently appealed, on 3 April last, to the donor countries and international financial institutions to cancel all the official debts of the highly indebted poor countries from their accounts as a millennium gesture.
A similar appeal was made by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, but the time for appeals has passed.
It is facts that are important now.
If we analyse the situation, we realise that, on the one hand, we are talking about an almost irrecoverable debt and, on the other, that in return for cancelling that debt, we can demand greater respect for human rights, greater democracy and social actions benefiting poor communities - improving conditions for children, the elderly and the disabled.
In addition, we would be stemming migration flows, which, quite apart from being a problem for the migrants' countries of origin, are, above all, a problem for the host countries.
Therefore, I would ask whether the Council is aware of all the initiatives which have hitherto been adopted by each individual country of the Union to reduce or cancel the debt of highly indebted poor countries, and whether it would be possible for a résumé to be produced showing the practical actions which have been undertaken by these countries and the commitments made, to prove that these initiatives are not just mere political vote-winning manoeuvres, as they all too often appear to be.
Finally, considering that there is a clear need for a common foreign policy displaying Europe as a coherent system capable of undertaking united initiatives, does the Commission not feel that it would be appropriate to create a structure to study this issue, which would work together with the local Churches, NGOs and civil society and act upon the conclusions reached?
This would, I feel, be a different way of interpreting the meaning of the millennium, this time in the name of solidarity between communities.
Mr President, resolving the problem of the external debt of less developed countries is undoubtedly an essential factor in the stability, security and development of these countries, in eradicating poverty and in stemming the migratory flows that affect and weaken them.
We are all aware of the situation.
These countries' resources - and even resources that they do not have - are used up to service their debts; for some of these countries, interest and capital repayments account for 40% of their budget.
In spite of this, the debt continues to grow exponentially, and there is consequently an ever-widening gap between these countries and the industrialised countries, which often behave like unscrupulous moneylenders.
The imposition of unsuitable structural adjustment programmes by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund and inadequate cooperation and development aid actions by the industrialised countries, which fall considerably short of the 0.7% of GDP recommended by the United Nations, both contribute to this gap.
There is an erroneous, trade-based concept that has also made matters worse.
This concept suggests that, under the auspices of the WTO, the market can regulate and resolve everything, whereas the opposite is true: economic globalisation has greatly contributed to accentuating disparities, increasing injustice and holding back development.
It is obvious that this situation must, therefore, be resolved by adopting a worldwide project and by a new world order that puts the development of these countries at the top of its priorities.
This must be based on the idea that everyone, and I mean everyone, including the rich countries, will benefit from this development.
A project of this kind can only succeed through debt relief, which cannot be reduced to a process that is merely full of good intentions, as recommended by the G7 countries, whose contribution represents no more than 1% of Third World debt and which is today limited in practice to partial debt relief for just three or four countries.
The European Union and its Member States can, and must, speak up on this issue, abandoning their limited outlooks, which are full of conditions, which often accompany shamefaced announcements about debt cancellation, and end the aid cuts that have been taking place and which are proposed for the future.
Instead, they must put forward a broad and resolute plan that will make a decisive contribution to ending a situation of this kind and help to put the development of such important parts of the world into perspective.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, initiatives in favour of cancelling all or part of the third world debt are proliferating in the year 2000.
On this subject, the Cairo Summit did not, any more than other summits, come up with any even remotely clear conclusion.
This step is, however, a matter of simple common sense, and one is tempted to ask the Council whether they intend one day to refer the matter to their common sense.
The whole thing verges on the ridiculous.
Not only do the countries of the south not have the financial resources to pay back their debts but, on top of that, the international economic order, which has foisted a demented concept of liberalism on the world, is preventing the majority of our partners in the south - I am thinking in particular of those in Northern Africa and sub-Saharan Africa - acceding to the conditions for development that is even remotely sustainable.
Such conditions are continually demolished by the blind application of free trade, accompanied by the obsessive, ideological privatisation of the exploitation of most of their wealth.
The rich countries, foolishly falling in line with the imperialist rules of the IMF and the World Bank, were nonetheless the first to realise that this cannot damage economic take-off since their own development did not fail on occasion to resort to the rules of protectionism, ensuring, moreover, a privileged place for the state and for public intervention in all its forms.
Peace between nations can only be achieved if there is balance.
Political and economic balance are, on the other hand, devastating to a world which is increasingly unipolar.
As we well know, despite the head-in-the-sand policy practised by rich countries with no thought for the future which takes the world down some highly dangerous roads, and while this House gets bogged down in details and side issues, it is high time that we were able to look at the world as a whole.
Instead of leaving our only reasonable policy, i.e. the Lomé agreements, high and dry, we ought to be forming genuine economic and, more importantly, political partnerships with the Mediterranean and African countries.
But, for that, Europe would have to have an authority legitimate and clear-sighted enough to get out of the trap of all-out liberalism and, of course, it has no such authority worthy of the name.
Mr President, hearing the other speakers, I note that we all agree on the facts.
The harsh and tragic figures are there for all to see.
The 50 poorest countries spend twice what they receive in aid in order to pay off their debt.
An average of 40% of the budget of poor countries is dedicated to debt payments.
Not only does that undermine their economic development, not only does that significantly reduce their ability to provide basic social services, such as health or education, but it creates a sort of slavery which benefits Western societies.
In fact two thirds of the debt is generated by interest on earlier loans, loans taken out to pay for the things we sold them, which multinationals sold them.
This is highly reminiscent of the exploitation of agricultural workers in some countries who are forced to buy from the boss' s shop at inflated prices and who are then forced to work for the rest of their lives for scant wages in order to pay off their debts to this shop.
What action are we taking to prevent this?
The G7 countries announced amid much publicity a debt reduction programme, but conditions are such that it cannot be applied.
This initiative remains subject to macroeconomic reform programmes under the aegis of the IMF or the World Bank, which run counter to the objectives of eradicating poverty, due to their restrictive effect on the ability to spend on social services and job creation.
Some major countries have announced that they are going to cancel debts, but this is selective, linked to the interests of certain parties, and is achieved to the detriment of development budgets.
The indebted countries were expecting a strong message from the Conference between the European Union and Africa held in Cairo recently.
They were given plenty of fine words, but no practical action.
What initiatives do the Commission and the Council propose to take at European or international level in order to further relieve or cancel the burden of debt in order to aid the poorest countries?
How does the Commission plan to ensure that the appropriations made available by cancelling the debt are properly invested in eradicating poverty and in sustainable development?
Finally, what is the Commission' s reaction to the requests presented by some civil society organisations in the countries of the south for improvements in monitoring the macroeconomic adaptation plan, by organising conferences on national development, in order to give public opinion in these countries an opportunity to define national priorities and projects?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, with regard to poor countries' debt, I would like to stress that the issue of partial debt relief and debt cancellation is a matter for Member States.
This being so, the European Union as such is merely a marginal creditor.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that the European Union has not shrunk from participating in all the initiatives to provide debt relief for the poorest countries.
I would remind you that in 1996, the IMF/World Bank interim and development committees approved, at their respective annual meetings, an initiative on the debt of highly indebted poor countries, the HIPC initiative.
The Community and the Member States then committed themselves to take part in this initiative by providing exceptional aid to the ACP countries on the basis of the commitment given by the international financial community to reduce the indebtedness of these countries to a sustainable level, on condition that the countries concerned would implement economic reform programmes.
In July 1998, the Council approved a decision on exceptional aid for the highly indebted ACP countries and earmarked an initial sum of EUR 40 million from the interest accumulated on European Development Fund funds.
In June 1999, at the G7 summit, the Heads of State and Government agreed to extend the HIPC initiative in order to provide more substantial and speedy debt relief.
This approach was further backed by the Bretton Woods institutions at their annual meetings in September 1999.
Within the Community, at their session last December, the Council of ACP-EU Ministers decided that unallocated programmable EDF resources could be used as subsidies.
This would be done in order to meet the outstanding debt and debt servicing commitments towards the Community of the first ACP countries to qualify for such a scheme under the HIPC initiative, with a total amount of EUR 320 million.
These resources could also be used, up to a maximum of EUR 680 million, as a contribution to the HIPC Trust Fund managed by the World Bank, with a view to overall financing of this initiative.
It is envisaged that, at the EDF Committee meeting this July, the European Commission will submit proposals for the implementation of this decision.
The European Union has also guaranteed EUR 250 million of additional constitutional funds for structural adjustment, to make it easier for eligible countries to access debt cancellation measures.
Furthermore, it is worth adding that, following the resolutions I have just mentioned, and also as a result of the decisions taken at the recent Cairo Summit, various Member States have stated that they are already willing to unilaterally add their own measures for the reduction, conversion or complete cancellation of huge amounts owed by developing countries, particularly by the highly indebted poor countries.
The European Union believes that improvements to this initiative must be based on integrated programmes which link debt relief more closely to the objectives of sustainable development and the reduction of poverty.
Despite these efforts by the European Union, the current problem is not so much one of increasing debt cancellation, but of ensuring that the new, enhanced HIPC initiative is effectively implemented by all donors.
In order for this whole initiative not to collapse at the outset, it is crucial for the United States to bear its share of multilateral debt relief.
We therefore hope that all donor countries will continue to make efforts to jointly implement the decisions that have been taken so that the greatest possible number of eligible countries can benefit.
Parliament will be kept informed about these developments on a regular basis, and in particular about the progress of the decision to participate in the HIPC initiative.
With regard to your questions about monitoring the use of funds released under these initiatives, I think that the only thing we can do is to encourage the beneficiary countries to make the best use of these facilities, as we cannot guarantee, as some seem to think, that the monies provided for debt cancellation will be invested in the social sphere, and especially in health and education.
I think that this rationale and this kind of intervention, no matter how well intentioned they may be, can be viewed, depending on how one chooses to interpret them, as a form of neo-colonial intervention.
This is not and can never be the purpose of intervention in the internal management, and particularly the budgetary management, of these countries, either on the part of the European Union or of the Member States.
As to total debt cancellation, which some honourable Members have also suggested, it is worth remembering that the experts in this field would come up with various arguments against this option.
In particular, it is highly unlikely that private banks would provide loans to these countries if they are expecting that these debts will be totally written off by public creditors.
Furthermore, it is worth bearing in mind that in political terms, creating an expectation that debts will automatically be cancelled on a regular basis will inevitably reduce the credit institutions' willingness to provide money.
The Commission's contribution to debt relief can be seen in the HIPC initiative.
This was launched in September 1996 with the aim of helping to relieve the debt burden of the poorest countries that make adjustment efforts in a concerted way.
It represents a coordinated effort by all donors including, in particular, multilateral creditors.
It was the first time ever that the multilateral aspect had been addressed directly.
In 1999, on the occasion of the G7 Cologne Summit, ministers agreed to an expanded and more flexible initiative that will provide faster, deeper and broader debt relief.
As a result of the proposed changes, the costs of this HIPC II Initiative are expected to increase significantly to some USD 27.4 billion from a previous estimated level of some USD 13 billion of HIPC I. In fact, the original estimate of the cost of HIPC I was around USD 8 billion only.
For the record, the Commission has already made a large contribution to HIPC I. The Council adopted, on 6 July 1998, a decision on the Community' s participation in the HIPC Initiative with regard to its claims, special loans and risk capital managed by the European Investment Bank for eligible ACP countries.
As mentioned before, the Community, as a creditor, is only a small player in this discussion.
Fortunately, we are mainly a provider of direct grant assistance and not loans.
We set aside EUR 40 million of interest accumulated on EDF funds which should cover the cost for the first six country cases.
Community assistance for Uganda and Guyana was delivered in mid-1998 and early 2000, amounting to EUR 4.59 million and EUR 6.44 million respectively.
The Community has since decided to considerably enhance support for the HIPC II Initiative.
At the annual meeting in Washington in September 1999, it was announced that the Community' s contribution would be in the order of EUR 1 billion.
The Commission subsequently submitted draft proposals for decisions to the Joint EU/ACP Council and the EU Council which were adopted by the General Affairs Council on 6 December and by the Joint EU/ACP Council on 8 December.
It has to be borne in mind that the ACP countries' agreement is required because it is EDF money that is being reallocated so their consent is needed as part of these decisions.
At present, the Commission is in the process of finalising discussions with its Member States, the European Investment Bank, the World Bank and the African Development Bank about the main principles of the actual implementation of the Community support for the HIPC II Initiative, both as a donor and as a creditor.
In June, it will present the relevant financing proposals.
The Community' s global contribution to the HIPC Trust Fund in its capacity as a donor will amount to EUR 680 million for qualifying ACP countries.
EUR 670 million will be earmarked for the African Development Bank in order to cover its financing gap in the HIPC Initiative and EUR 10 million for the only non-African HIPC ACP country, Guyana.
The EUR 680 million Community contribution originating from the EDF will be channelled to the HIPC Trust Fund in 3 tranches taking into consideration effective financing needs as well as support from other donors.
According to the information available, needs for the first tranche this year will be in the order of the magnitude of EUR 250 million.
The first EC tranche will be paid in July.
Besides these contributions to be financed from uncommitted EDF funds, a EUR 54 million contribution to the HIPC Trust Fund will also be made towards non-ACP HIPCs drawing on resources from the budgetary lines for Latin America and Asia.
We want, in other words, to make sure that the EU participation in HIPC is global and in accordance with the figures in HIPC.
Finally, it must be stressed that the ACP/EU Council decision to reinforce the EC Structural Adjustment Facility by EUR 250 million will partly be used to provide interim relief to eligible HIPC countries belonging to the ACP.
It is important to stress that the Community contribution to debt relief should not be seen as a substitute for contributions from bilateral donors.
These are still needed in order to fully finance the initiative announced at the G7 Summit in Cologne.
The expectation created a year ago was that the G7 countries would come up with additional resources.
As regards other contributions to the HIPC Trust Fund, it may be worth noting that the draft budget by the US administration suggests a US contribution of USD 600 million which follows on from pledges made earlier and which corresponds to the share of HIPC calculated by the World Bank for the US.
This draft budget needs to be passed in Congress and this is definitely facing some difficulties.
In fact, it seems very doubtful that the US will deliver its share as planned.
The funds released by the Commission for the HIPC Initiative are subject to the same principles as other funds originating from the European Development Fund and the Commission is carefully involving the EDF Committee, that is Member States, at all stages.
Article 366(b) of the Lomé Convention in its present form imposes strict conditions on the possible use of EDF money.
Politically speaking, it would not make sense to stop EDF financed projects in Article 366(b) countries and to provide them with EC quasi direct non-earmarked budget support, for example through HIPC debt relief mechanisms.
It is the responsibility of the Commission to ensure that EDF money does not facilitate a coup d'état or provide additional budgetary room for manoeuvre to enable dictators to oppress their people.
It is the very purpose of Article 366(b) in its present form to make things more complicated for countries breaching elementary human rights and good governance principles.
This view has also been clearly expressed by the European Court of Auditors when commenting on these issues.
Our hands are somewhat tied in this discussion on how we can accomplish these things in practice.
In the discussions, which led last year to the agreement on enhancing the HIPC Initiative, there was a strong consensus in the donor community that poverty reduction needs to be re-emphasised as a main focus of development efforts.
The concept of the poverty reduction strategy papers was launched to provide a framework for mainstreaming poverty reduction in government and donor policies.
It will require a country-specific approach to assessing a country' s position in development, poverty strategies and institutional capacity.
The Commission has expressed its strong support for this radically new approach initiated by the World Bank and the IMF.
Country ownership is paramount for the development of these ideas and governments will have responsibility for both the design process and the final product.
The Commission attaches particular importance to an open participatory process involving civil society, parliaments and all relevant international institutions and donors.
Policies that address issues of social justice and equity are as central as economic policy to growth and poverty reduction.
The Community is maintaining and stepping up its commitment to support macroeconomic reforms, social sectors, regional integration and sound economic management.
This is all needed in order to make sure that fighting poverty remains the central theme when we are actually improving the situation of these poor countries through the enhanced HIPC Initiative.
I think that it is quite good that the Commission and the EU in general clearly stand out as the single most important contributor towards making this initiative actually work.
Mr President, when one hears of the horrendous debt that has built up in many African states, the first reaction is one of deep sympathy.
However, I have had the privilege of visiting many of these countries in the past year and I have to say that, in many cases, one' s sympathy turns to anger when one sees the abject poverty that people in these countries live in while their leaders and ministers revel in wealth and prosperity and one begins to question the distribution of aid and debt relief.
Despite all the help given from Europe, individual nation states and institutions, Africa' s external debt is growing by about 12% per annum and some countries are repaying more in interest than they are receiving in aid.
That cannot be allowed to continue, but neither can the historic reasons for causing it to happen.
I will be criticised by some honourable Members for saying it, but conditionality must be built into not only development aid but also debt relief.
I have always maintained that good governance was more important than pure democracy if you are going to stamp out corrupt practices, and if we cannot wipe these practices out we are only pouring good money after bad.
We must therefore be in a position to monitor the effect of debt relief and make sure that all of it is spent on civil society to give better health, education and employment prospects to the people who are being denied it.
There is a secondary effect of bad governance and that is the lack of external investment into these countries which denies them the chance of improved prosperity, better employment prospects and a higher standard of living.
The fight against fraud and corruption should be made a condition for allocating debt relief and development aid - not my words, Mr President, but the words of President Obasanjo of Nigeria in Abuja at the opening of the 13th session of the ACP-EU Assembly.
If only that could be echoed by every other president in Africa, the resistance to giving debt relief would diminish and some real progress could be made in alleviating the misery and poverty of millions of people.
Mr President, while we are talking, in Sierra Leone the latest episode in a ten-year long tragedy is taking place.
This civil war has been responsible for 50 000 deaths, 2 million refugees and the brutal mutilation of 40 000 men and women of all ages in a systematic campaign of terror.
Most of Africa is affected by similar tragedies, including the tragedy affecting the Sahrawi people, with which we came face to face this morning just outside here.
The other side to globalisation is poverty, the indebtedness of the poorer developing countries and the extension of those conflicts which reduce potential for development whilst exacerbating other conflicts and causing fresh poverty.
This is why the recent EU-Africa Summit held in Cairo was so important.
It reopened global dialogue with the countries of the African continent and, for the first time, associated the development aid policy with the upholding of democratic principles, rights and the fight against corruption.
A long-term strategy is essential, and cancelling the debt is the starting point for such a strategy.
As the resolution tabled by the European Socialist Party states, it is therefore important to increase the percentage of resources set aside by industrialised countries for the poorest countries, but, at the same time, the quality of our undertaking is also crucial.
The resolution puts forward two major options: new sustainability criteria and greater flexibility for the more indebted countries, and the bilateral cancellation of the debts of the least developed ACP countries.
These are initial, tangible recommendations, although, in future, we must avoid the repetition of the spiral of debt, with no checks on the choices made.
Indeed, we are aware that it is not sufficient to cancel the debt if the other mechanisms determining all the policies remain unchanged.
Cancellation of the debt must be conditional upon the use to which the resources thereby released are put.
These resources must be invested in schools, hospitals and the human development of communities, not wasted, as still often occurs today, due to corruption or, what is worse, used to boost the arms trade and support ruinous wars.
The global economy must be accompanied by a global policy; growth must go hand in hand with the upholding of human and civil rights and the consolidation of democracy.
In order to avoid the spiral of debt, we therefore need to supplement the means for action: there must be greater cooperation, increased trade exchange, an increase in initiatives to prevent conflicts and more coherent opposition to corrupt, indebted governments which visit upon their citizens the hardship caused by crises and poor development.
Our commitment to cancelling the debt is a precondition for the introduction of all the policies for reducing poverty.
Resolution of the debt issue must be accompanied by actions promoting local development.
In order to succeed, we need to harmonise national policies and supplement them with greater opening up of the markets.
The recent EU-ACP agreements follow this rationale and provide assistance for the 31 least developed countries over a period of time which should end in 2005.
In this context, it is essential to involve the private sector in order to boost trade exchange and, in addition to transferring resources, to create the necessary conditions for the growth of an internal market for developing countries, and provide incentives as well as laying down conditions.
Mr President, there is no point flogging a dead horse.
This is why the disastrous vicious circle of loans, debts and new loans must be broken.
The immense repayment costs prevent any form of development.
There is hardly any money left for education, health care or for building well-functioning government machinery.
Debt relief is therefore a matter of extreme urgency.
This should be facilitated in a joint effort involving all creditors, the Union, the States, especially the United States, international institutions and banks.
However, a very broad strategy will not get us much further.
The debt cancellation programmes must be tailored to the specific circumstances of each individual country.
It is essential in this respect to tackle not just the social problems, but also to lay a firm foundation for sustainable economic development.
If this fails to materialise, then foreign investments will not be forthcoming either.
A prerequisite for relieving debts is sound financial housekeeping within the governments concerned.
We should not be naïve about this.
We can no longer write out blank cheques.
In the past, billions never reached the intended causes.
A great deal of money got into the hands of corrupt regimes which allowed Swiss banks to benefit from the large-scale theft of development aid.
When will the civilised world finally realise that countries which maintain banking secrecy are accessory to huge crimes at the expense of the poorest population groups.
The IMF and the World Bank started an initiative back in 1996 to relieve the debts of the poorest countries.
Last summer, the conditions were amended, with good reason.
Aid was made conditional upon tangible results.
It would be wonderful if the European Union and the Member States were to take a generous stance if the conditions were met.
Let us do everything possible to help the poorest countries fight poverty.
This can work if the victim is involved in his own rescue.
Mr President, I think we all agree how completely absurd it is that many of the world' s poorest countries sometimes pay more in interest and for debt management than they receive in aid.
There are at least two questions which I think must be answered.
The first is: how can the EU and the G7 nations, together with other Western countries, comply with their commitments so that these do not merely become empty promises?
In spite of what the Council and the Commission have said, it is, of course, a fact that, notwithstanding the praiseworthy initiative that has been taken, the G7 countries have not so far, unfortunately, taken measures to comply with that initiative.
All that has happened so far is that the debts of a mere three developing countries have been written off to the tune of 0.25 per cent.
That is naturally not enough.
Even those EU countries which have said that they wish to write off the debts have not appropriated funds in their budgets for this purpose.
On occasions, the funds concerned have been taken from the areas of cooperation and development.
The most important question of all is: how can it be ensured that the resources are properly used in developing countries?
The Council responded by saying that it was not in favour of that kind of control.
However, the EU, the IMF and the World Bank have, of course, established criteria in other contexts, so why should we not be able to establish criteria to ensure that, for the people, the result of debt cancellation really will be...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, there are 800 million Africans today and there will be twice as many in 25 years' time, and obviously they are not the only ones to be living in developing countries.
Many people in Africa are sinking into poverty and increasing numbers of them are immigrating to European countries, which are in the throes of a demographic depression.
It must be remembered that this poverty coincides with the botched decolonisation of the 1960s which plunged many of these countries into poverty and ethnic conflict, related also to the establishment of dictatorships which were corrupt and, more often than not, it must be acknowledged, Socialist.
What we would like to say is that cancelling poor countries' debt is no doubt a laudable intention and we are in favour of staggering payments, but we would like to see the root of the trouble being tackled with the same seriousness.
We may note, for example, that until the 1990s, the African states which were still linked to France by means of economic, monetary and military cooperation agreements represented a haven of stability and relative prosperity.
The same is true of the states which have maintained links with western powers by means of economic agreements of this type.
We think this is a more serious solution to the problems of the third world than the outrageous recommendation which the UN made on 4 January to the effect that, in order to offset its falling birth rate, Europe should prepare to accept 159 million immigrants from African countries over the next 25 years.
Turning Europe into a third-world country is not, we feel, the way to help the third world achieve a genuine degree of economic development.
The real solution is in Africa in the form of a development policy which enables Africans to live in their own countries, which raises the question of the alleged benefits of free trade.
Our opinion is that there are no real benefits or, if there are, then only for countries at a comparable economic and social level, and that it is only when protected by secure frontiers and customs rights that these countries will gradually progress from the cottage industry phase to that of industrialisation.
Mr President, this year is 2000 AD, a jubilee year.
It is a year in which, based on the concept of the biblical Holy Year, we need to think seriously about relieving the debt of the poorest of the poor.
In the Holy Year, each fiftieth year, debts were cancelled, slaves released and the land was left fallow in Israel.
Such a year created the opportunity to start the future with a clean slate.
In analogy with this biblical reference, the year 2000 should become a Holy Year for the world' s poorest of the poor.
We therefore welcome national and international initiatives to reduce debts with open arms.
However, I cannot refrain from making a number of critical remarks in respect of the proud announcements made by a number of G7 countries over the past few years.
These rich countries boast about the fact that they no longer make a fuss about the gigantic amounts which these poor countries owe them.
Experiences with the HIPC initiative dating back to 1996, however, have shown that debt reduction has not always had an altogether positive effect on the development of the poor.
In the best-case scenarios, 100% debt relief only yields an actual 40% reduction in the debt.
The reason for this is firstly that the conditions tied in with the debt relief are such that only few countries qualify.
Moreover, room for debt relief is often found in national and international budgets for development policy.
As such, it is not a matter of making available additional financial resources but more a matter of shifting funds.
Poor countries may spend less on repaying their debts, but they also have to cope with a drop in foreign aid.
If we really want to take the fight against world poverty seriously, debt reduction should be accompanied by an active policy to combat poverty.
In this respect, it is desirable to deploy local governments and NGOs.
These minor observations, however, do not detract from the fact that concessions made must be met and new initiatives have to be launched.
A careful and generous stance is a welcome bonus in this respect.
The Commission, Member States and international donors must make every effort to turn the year of Our Lord 2000 into a Holy Year in the true sense of the word.
Mr President, fine words have been spoken about cancelling the enormous debts of a large number of developing countries to mark the millennium, as Mr Van Dam mentioned a moment ago.
These speeches were given at the G7 meeting, at the European Summit in Lisbon and at the recent Euro-African Summit in Cairo.
The question we are left with today is: what will come of this?
We have heard a few examples from the HIPC-I and HIPC-II programmes and I understand that 1 billion is tied up in this second programme.
The total debt burden of all developing countries comes to 350 billion.
This means that, in comparison, this 1 billion is really peanuts.
Many of those countries pay 25% to 40% of their national budget on interest and repayment into banks in Western Europe, the United States and Japan.
The harsh reality is that the billions which are paid to repay debts far exceed the development aid.
That is a disastrous situation because we often ask ourselves why our development aid does not work.
Well, here is one of the most important reasons.
If a sum of money comes in and subsequently a sum has to be repaid which is three or four times the original amount, then those countries will not make any headway, of course.
One question which remains is: should you cancel debts unconditionally?
I do not share the view of Mr Miranda or other MEPs who think one should.
In my opinion, conditions should very much be part of the deal.
The countries involved should be the poorest ones, to start with.
They should have a democratic government and a pluriform parliament which keeps the government in check.
The country must fight corruption actively.
The countries concerned should not be at war or participate in wars, and an agreed proportion of the budget must really be spent on social schemes for the poorest citizens, and must be invested in education, health care and social security.
I do not agree with Mr Da Costa who said a moment ago that this might be somewhat neo-colonial.
It was even agreed in Copenhagen, at the Social Summit for developing countries which was held there a while ago, that a proportion was to be spent on those costs.
Mr President, we should really call for something to be done about this.
We should simply spend 10% of the total development budget on cancelling these debts.
If we do nothing, the countries will remain trapped in a downward spiral.
Mr President, I have listened with interest to both the Council and the Commission.
The Socialist Group considers that the debt which blights the development of the world' s poorest countries cannot be dealt with in isolation, as a purely financial problem, but it must be dealt with within the framework of a broad and coherent strategy which, through the eradication of poverty, leads to development.
To this end, firstly, the cancellation of debt must not involve the removal of other sources of finance, but cancellation must be one more measure in a coherent development policy.
Secondly, the funds made available through the cancellation of debt must be used for human development funds, particularly for investment in health and education.
I do not agree with the Council when it says that this may mean a new form of colonisation.
I do not believe that to be the case.
In order to be effective, in development terms, the cancellation of debt also requires, as we request in the resolution, a global strategy implemented in unison in and by the international financial institutions.
The European Union, as a major contributor of development aid, must coordinate its action in this regard and make the elimination of poverty the common objective of its Member States, one aspect of this being the cancellation of debt in the poorest countries.
This is therefore an example of the need for coherence and coordination between Community policies.
The common foreign and security policy, which we too often treat as just a security policy, must address this issue as well as commercial and development policies.
The highly-indebted poor countries, who are the beneficiaries of this debt cancellation strategy that has already been adopted by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, must commit themselves to suitable macroeconomic policies, to social development objectives, to increase the credibility of the state, which is the only way to attract foreign investment, and to strengthen their institutional capacity.
By uniting the actions of debtors and creditors in a global strategy aimed at the elimination of poverty, it is possible that we will achieve objective 15 of the Copenhagen Summit on social development, which is an objective which we fully identify with.
We therefore strongly urge all Member States and the Commission to support the international financial institutions' HIPC initiative for highly indebted poor countries.
Mr President, it is commendable that the international community is apparently serious about reducing debt.
Unfortunately, this inspired policy comes too late, far too late.
As early as the late eighties, UNICEF stated that the rich obtained the loans in the Third World and the poor were saddled with the debts, and UNICEF was right.
According to Oxfam, there are 19 000 children who die daily in the developing countries as a result of the debt burden and as an indirect result, admittedly, of the IMF programmes which require certain countries to cut down their health care expenditure by one third.
Is it not mind-boggling that countries sometimes have to spend up to 40% of their budget on paying off debts, which have often been accumulated by irresponsible and avaricious dictators, with the unspoken collaboration of the World Bank and private western banks?
Let us learn from past experience.
I am in favour of debt reduction but not on a level repayment or unconditional basis.
It should feature as part of an integrated and multi-lateral strategy.
It must be accompanied by proper management requirements.
These requirements must be followed by hard guarantees from the countries involved: guarantees that the funding made available by cancelling debts is used to fight poverty; guarantees that the funding will no longer be used to finance arms deals and other military activities.
Mr Da Costa, that is not neo-colonialism in my book.
It is making sure that the funds of the European taxpayer are not misused to fund wars - crazy wars - in Africa.
Conditionality requires courage and - you will have to forgive me - more courage than the Member States and the Commission have displayed so far.
Mr President, as others have said, many promises have been made on debt relief but in fact very few have been delivered.
After all the headlines that we heard at Cologne last year, less than $13 billion of the $100 billion promised has actually been cancelled and as the Commission and the Council have told us, contributions to the HIPC Trust Fund are still way below target.
As the Commissioner rightly says, the burden deserves to be shared.
The fact is that despite a $1 trillion budget surplus over 10 years, President Clinton is not able to squeeze $210 million for HIPC out of Congress.
That is an appalling fact for us to take on board.
It is also the case that we are still waiting for the World Bank and the IMF to come up with something similar to the European Union.
All G7 countries have promised some form of 100% debt cancellation, but many of them are very slow and disinclined to do it in the way that we would like.
Also, to qualify for debt relief, each country has to complete a long and often contradictory 'HIPC' process, and only 5 countries have so far managed to go through the hoops that they are being asked to go through.
So far, the United Kingdom is the only country that has offered 100% debt cancellation.
France, Germany and Japan only include pre-cut-off debts and so ignore a significant portion of debt.
Japan, incidentally, ties its debt relief to responsibility to buy Japanese exports.
On Mozambique, for instance, it is very significant that the IMF, the World Bank and the Paris Club only postponed payments from Mozambique and then actually lent more money.
So, what I would say, finally, is that we in this Parliament urge all the creditors to stop delaying and to start working really hard towards fulfilling full debt cancellation for the poorest countries.
Of course, I agree with all my colleagues, the poorest countries who fulfil the criteria of delivering debt relief to those countries that show a commitment to social sector and human development support.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I think that it has become quite clear today that the situation referred to in the question is of great concern and has attracted the Council' s attention.
This is essentially an issue on which there is a degree of agreement, particularly within the European Union.
The Portuguese Presidency of the European Union has furthermore taken care to include this issue in its working programme and has ensured that it was a key part of the agenda of the Cairo Euro-African summit.
This issue must, however, be considered calmly and carefully, without any histrionics, given the serious situation that the populations of the highly indebted countries find themselves in.
The fundamental issue of debt is not the central issue for these countries - the main issue is their development, and this is the key point behind all this.
We must all be aware that what is currently at stake is the global debate on general development policy and, in particular, on the role of the European Union and its Member States in defining this policy at world level.
This is the crucial issue: debt is a symptom but underdevelopment is the disease.
There are indeed problems of inequality and of the uneven distribution of wealth in these countries, but these problems must be overcome through political solutions.
I spoke just now about the temptation or tendency to adopt a neo-colonial approach, but I was by no means implying that some aid conditions - a subject which is in fact influenced by the current philosophy behind ACP-EU cooperation - are not perfectly legitimate and acceptable.
What we must not forget is that there is a code of conduct for the internal management of resource allocation, and in particular for resources released for these countries as debt relief.
We must be reasonably careful to find a way to respect the right of these countries' governments to manage these funds.
We must understand that we have to endeavour to ensure that political conditionality and the strengthening of democracy in these countries are the key factors underpinning our action.
Working towards good governance and working towards strengthening democratic structures and political participation are vital factors in creating free societies which provide for better management of internal resources and more appropriate management of wealth distribution and, in particular, which do not encourage corruption and the siphoning-off of funds.
It is our opinion that these issues are fundamentally linked to development.
As I said, the issue of debt is a symptom of a much more global issue, namely development.
I think that the European Union and the Member States have demonstrated that they are mindful of the problems in this field and that they have concrete measures to propose in order to address them.
Mr President, I wish to begin by commenting on the necessity of conditionality.
I agree with a number of the contributions here.
I would also say that what we are facing here is not a tighter regime of conditionality than what Member States are actually pursuing in their bilateral development cooperation, as nowadays it is necessary to ensure that the use of resources corresponds to the goals that are set.
If we look at the substance, it is also the link to focusing better on social aspects in the HIPC countries - that is the key to what they have to do.
There is also evidence of this being taken up by the World Bank and the IMF, with those institutions coming on board in terms of giving priority to these aspects.
In a way, one could say that we are witnessing a move from the Washington consensus to the Copenhagen consensus.
The good part of this is that the IMF, with the poverty reduction strategy papers, is aligning itself with the goals the World Bank set a few years ago.
All this shows that the fight against poverty is at the centre of this effort.
So the combination of keeping the focus on perhaps narrowly defined HIPC countries and looking at the social consequences inside those countries is quite reasonable.
I turn to the matter of whether too few countries are part of the initiative.
It would be wrong to think that we could simply broaden its scope and welcome all developing countries to it.
There would be a number of adverse effects if we did so.
Firstly, the cost of the HIPC initiative would increase dramatically because the wealthier these countries are, or the less poor, the bigger the debt they have acquired.
So it must be borne in mind that this has to do with helping the poorest countries to determine those areas in which they can manage the remaining debt.
The idea was never to cancel all debt from the Third World countries because that was totally impracticable.
We are at a level of 0.22% or 0.23% for official development assistance, far from the 0.7% target that in principle everybody has agreed to and which only a limited number of countries have actually reached.
The 350bn would not be a manageable figure, and also the value for the poorest countries would be watered down if it were shared amongst the less poor middle-income countries.
I would say to Mrs Schörling that almost all money for HIPC is found from the existing development budgets.
This is also the case for the billion of EDF money we are reallocating.
The nice thing about it is that the ACP countries accepted it, and this is a reallocation that moves money from the relatively better-off to the poorest countries in the ACP group.
So we are doing something very concrete by improving the poverty focus of our general activity in this reallocation.
That part of it is highly welcome.
The good thing is that we had the money so we were able to do something of real value as the only donor around, except for a few elite donors who are trying to shame the rest by moving forward and setting a good example - the usual gang.
Otherwise, the European Union is the only one able to do something of real value.
Finally, I welcome very much the way this debate has gone.
Parliament's interest is an important asset for the European Union.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
I have received five motions for resolutions, pursuant to Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.
Situation in Zimbabwe
The next item is the statements by the Commission and the Council on the situation in Zimbabwe.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the present pre-election campaign period in Zimbabwe continues to be marked by a climate of intimidation towards the opposition and a lack of respect for the law and for citizens' rights, sometimes with tragic consequences.
The situation has been growing worse despite considerable international efforts, particularly by the European Union, to persuade President Mugabe to order the so-called 'veterans' to leave the farmers' properties that they have invaded immediately, so as to guarantee the safety of all citizens, and in particular foreign nationals resident in Zimbabwe.
The European Union is deeply concerned at the situation in Zimbabwe and the Council has published two Presidency statements, on 13 March and on 7 May, in which it expressed its grave concern at the situation.
All of the European Union' s candidate countries, as well as the countries of the European Economic Area, have given their backing to these statements.
Various meetings have also been held with the government of Zimbabwe, at the Council' s initiative.
As for the fundamental issue behind the current crisis - land - the European Union has continued to state its willingness to help Zimbabwe to implement a redistribution of farmland which is compatible with respect for property rights and, in particular, with the principles and conclusions of the Donors Conference on Land Reform and Resettlement in Zimbabwe, held in Harare in 1998.
With regard to the forthcoming parliamentary elections in Zimbabwe, which have been set for 24 and 25 June, it is more vital than ever for them to be held in a free, fair and transparent way and within the deadline that has been set.
International observers should be present at these elections so that they can observe how the elections proceed and vouch for the final result of the vote and for the legitimacy that the elections need, and guarantee that the result is accepted by the international community.
To this end, the European Union is prepared to send a mission of election observers, but must, of course, warn the Zimbabwean authorities of the need for satisfactory guarantees that the observers will be safe and that they will have freedom of access to all relevant premises.
The Troika of European Union Heads of Mission in Harare will personally convey this message to the Zimbabwean authorities.
The Commission representatives will travel there on Friday 19 May to prepare for the mission of election observers in order to verify that the appropriate conditions have been met.
Next Monday, the General Affairs Council will consider the Commission representatives' report on their visit.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, let me remind you that Zimbabwe is a partner of the European Union under the Lomé Convention, and that Zimbabwe must respect the principles enshrined in that convention, which form the basis of the European Union's cooperation policy.
The European Union will continue to follow developments in that country in the light of these principles and will not fail to draw the necessary conclusions in the event that these principles are not adhered to.
The Commission is concerned about the evolving situation in Zimbabwe.
Zimbabwe, for decades a stable country, is now going through an increasingly severe economic and political crisis.
Parliamentary elections have now been announced by the government for 24 and 25 June.
This is a good sign.
The pursuance of illegal farm occupations, continued violence, death, injuring and intimidation of the opposition are being interpreted as part of the ruling party' s electoral campaign.
Recent weeks have witnessed a series of international initiatives to facilitate the holding of free and fair elections.
The General Affairs Council of 10 April urged the government of Zimbabwe to create the conditions to hold free and fair elections.
The Commission continues to urge the government of Zimbabwe to hold elections, free of intimidation.
I had a very direct conversation with President Mugabe at the EU-Africa Summit.
I followed this up with a letter to him this week.
Following the EU Member States' agreement in the Azores on 6 and 7 May, the Commission this week has a mission in Zimbabwe to look at necessary arrangements for an EU observer team and to coordinate with other election observation initiatives by SADC, the Commonwealth and the US.
The Commission has already provided EUR 220 000 for the training of 1 440 Zimbabwean election observers and has made available another EUR 6 million to support initiatives from civil society, including on good governance and democratisation.
The Commission electoral assessment mission now in Zimbabwe is discussing with Member States arrangements to deal with the logistical and operational aspects of this exercise, in particular, funding, freedom of movement and security of service.
EU observers are not being sent to legitimise an electoral process so far marked by intimidation and violence.
However, international observers could play an important role in deterring violence and building confidence, especially in the rural areas.
A preliminary EU proposal currently being developed would see the deployment of 150 observers, 100 of whom would be deployed in the first week of June to observe the electoral campaign and the rest to augment the EU' s observation of the vote and the count.
Consultations with the government, coordination with other international observer missions, such as the Commonwealth, US and Norway, and with local observation initiatives are on-going.
Acknowledging the long experience of the European Parliament in election observation, we invite representatives to participate.
With respect to development cooperation, the Commission is maintaining its European Development Fund poverty alleviation aid directed through the social sectors of health, education and rural development and, in particular, to combat the HIV/Aids epidemic.
These poverty alleviation programmes facilitate the pursuance of dialogue with civil society and provide an appropriate political signal.
The international community, while condemning certain governmental actions, still supports the people of Zimbabwe.
Given the government' s poor macroeconomic performance, the EU, like the IMF and the World Bank, has already frozen structural adjustment support.
On the question of the possible suspension of Zimbabwe's privileges under the Lomé Convention, there could be grounds for suspension if the Commission considers, after consulting thoroughly with Member States, that this would not be counterproductive at this stage before the elections.
We fear it would be manipulated and interpreted as a collective reaction orchestrated by what are polemically called 'former colonial powers' against Zimbabwe and its government.
In the worst scenario, if respect for the rule of law further deteriorates or if the elections were to be flawed, the Commission would have to consider whether Zimbabwe merits the privileges accorded under the Lomé Convention.
Suspension of these privileges would be economically crippling for Zimbabwe and would aggravate the crisis.
But so far I believe we have followed the right course.
Mr President, I suppose I can start on a note of slight optimism in that President Mugabe has now named the days for the election as 24 and 25 June.
But on the down side, he is increasing all the army and civil servants' pay as a straight bribe.
I sincerely hope that Members of this Parliament will have the chance to act as observers, as these elections must be seen to have been free, fair and transparent in the atmosphere of fear that President Mugabe has created.
Only last month we passed a resolution in this Chamber condemning violence, calling for the return to full democracy and for free and fair elections to be held.
Some of these demands have now hopefully been implemented, but not before another white farmer had been murdered.
We all accept that there must be a redistribution of the best land in Zimbabwe, but this must be done through round table negotiations, and not with the violent acts we have seen over the last few months.
President Mugabe has now set up a committee of white farmers and Mugabe supporters, hopefully to reach a sensible agreement on land redistribution.
President Mugabe should never forget the economic damage that will be done to Zimbabwe' s economy if land redistribution simply means the land goes back to subsistence farming in small blocks.
There are few people in the rabble we have seen invading farms who could afford the employees, the machinery, seeds and fertilisers to farm these units to give a potential export output.
I have seen some of the farms that were reclaimed some years ago by Mr Mugabe and most of the fertile productive land has reverted to bush and the buildings and farmhouses are now crumbling ruins.
What a waste in a country dependent on agricultural exports!
Over the last few years, there has been a move to persuade political leaders in African regions to carry more responsibility for conflict prevention.
It was, therefore, gratifying to hear Nelson Mandela criticising the policies of the Zimbabwe president who is destroying his country.
I am sorry that President Mbeki, his successor, who is probably the most powerful leader in Africa, has not in public condemned the violence in Zimbabwe.
We in Parliament are right to call on the Commission to review its development cooperation with Zimbabwe if transparent elections are not held or if the opposition wins and the violence continues.
The use of Article 366 should be considered.
The World Bank has now cut funding because of debt arrears and Zimbabwe, as a country, is in liquidation.
We can but live and hope that a peaceful conclusion can be reached in Zimbabwe as it is the people themselves who are suffering most in this unstable situation the country finds itself in.
I have to say at the outset that I am extremely encouraged by the fact that the Commission has worked out such a very clear strategy for dealing with these very critical weeks before the election takes place.
I particularly welcome the fact that we are training domestic observers - I think that is very important and will offset the likelihood of Mugabe criticising us for coming in in a neo-colonialist way to interfere in his election.
I also welcome the fact that we will be supporting civil society' s objectives in these next few weeks.
I very much hope, Commissioner, that we will disseminate this kind of information in Zimbabwe because those people trying to mount an opposition campaign will be heartened by the kind of information that we have had from you today and I think that would be important.
One of the things I want to talk about briefly is the role of the state-controlled media in the run-up before the election.
The Commissioner did not mention this, but it would be sensible to do so because TV, radio and state-owned newspapers in Zimbabwe are acting now as if they were the agents of Zanu-PF.
All reporting of opposition parties is negative, with the MDC a particular target.
I would really like to know what we can do from the European Union to try to ensure that the opposition groups - and there are 26 parties standing in the election - have some access to the media.
State-controlled media, Commissioner, is refusing to take paid advertising even from the main NGOs who are just working to support the electoral process and democracy in Zimbabwe, or from any opposition parties.
Only three independent newspapers are carrying any kind of adverts from parties other than Zanu-PF so that only the claims of the government are being read or seen by the people and that has to be a contradiction if we are talking about providing democracy.
The fact is that the independent press does not have the print capacity to deal with demand.
People in Zimbabwe are afraid.
The deaths and injuries in the rural areas and increasingly in the towns are deeply worrying.
Zanu-PF has the government resources, and the MDC supporters are too afraid to donate money.
I even read in the British press that Kabila and Qadhafi are giving money now to Mugabe' s campaign, which is a bit frightening.
It is deeply worrying that the opposition are fighting their campaign on Zanu-PF grounds.
They have no control over the electoral roll, they have no control over the polling stations that will be run by government civil servants.
This is wrong because the role of these government civil servants in the last referendum was very dubious indeed.
The people understand that and are aware of it.
There is evidence also of this Fifth Brigade being involved in pre-election crackdowns.
The Fifth Brigade were responsible for the brutality that Mugabe perpetuated in Matabeleland in the 80s.
That also is something that worries me and I would like the EU to look into it.
Finally, President, let us be sure that we work as a European Union to create the conditions which will allow the people of Zimbabwe to express their choices in this election in June and express their choices in secret and without fear.
Mr President, why have so many African freedom fighters who we admired so much ended up as power-crazed potentates?
Why have so few former colonies turned into constitutional states?
Where anarchy and lawlessness rule, the law of the most brutal party applies.
In Zimbabwe, this takes the form of Mr Mugabe.
Where this country used to be a model for the Third World of how things should be done, it has now degenerated into its own opposite.
It is ruled by a dictator who deems his own power and privileges more important than the lack of stability of his country and the suffering of his own people.
Land reform is necessary, of course.
The possession of land in Zimbabwe still reflects the old colonial relations and this will, needless to say, cause tension.
But for years, Mr Mugabe himself had the opportunity to carry out this land reform, even with foreign help.
The question is therefore: what mala fide reasons are behind Mr Mugabe' s doing nothing initially and then, just before the elections, getting his cronies to cause havoc in the farms of the white people?
According to the Zimbabwean election monitors, the incessant violence renders free and fair elections impossible.
As long as this is the case, the election date has to be postponed.
A situation whereby Mr Mugabe legitimises his position through violence and intimidation must be avoided at all costs.
It would be a positive step if MEPs acted as observers during these elections and included Mugabe' s pre-electoral machinery in their assessment.
If the elections are not conducted fairly, European aid will need to be postponed.
But the cooperation according to Lomé cannot continue if Mugabe also renders elections impossible.
A further deterioration of the situation in Zimbabwe could have far-reaching effects on the African continent in general, and on South Africa in particular.
The Zimbabwean population deserves a far better government than it has at the moment.
It is high time that the European Union spoke very clear language.
Our patience with African leaders whose heroic deeds only take the form of abuse of power is running out.
Mr President, I too would like to start by welcoming the Commission' s strategy for the run-up to the election that has just been set out by the Commissioner and, in particular, the training of the Zimbabwean election monitors.
The black people of Zimbabwe are still suffering under the legacy of colonialism.
Cecil Rhodes, one of Britain's most successful colonists, said the purpose of colonialism was: "To find new lands in which we can easily obtain raw materials and at the same time exploit the cheap labour that is available from the natives of the colonies" .
The legacy of this barbarically successful strategy can be seen in the chaos that is happening in Zimbabwe today.
Today, just 4 000 white farmers still own over 70% of the arable land while more than seven million black Zimbabweans scratch a living from overcrowded communal areas.
We condemn the violence but we also see that black Zimbabweans have a compelling case.
This makes President Mugabe' s refusal to proceed with the lawful land redistribution programme even more deplorable.
It is a fearsomely difficult problem when Mugabe will not negotiate.
But I call on the UK Government to do all they can to persuade Zimbabwe to set up an independent arbitration board fully representative of the landless people and, once it is set up, perhaps with the assistance of the Commonwealth, to resume financial aid as soon as possible.
The British Government must recognise the moral debt owed for crimes of slavery and colonialism and continue to do all in its power to support a peaceful and progressive settlement to the land issues in Zimbabwe.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I shall begin by disagreeing with the previous speaker.
There have undoubtedly been problems in the past, but the problems of colonialism were resolved with independence.
The image portrayed here by Mrs Lucas is a distorted one, which is bound to encourage the continuation of Mr Mugabe' s despotic rule and lead to greater suffering for the Zimbabwean people, which is really what is at stake.
In the previous debate I drew attention to what I felt was a significant point here: one of the main protagonists in this crisis, the leader of the 'veterans' , Mr Mugabe' s armed supporters, chose to change his surname to 'Hitler' , and that says it all.
We must not be under any illusions about what is really happening here.
The facts speak for themselves.
Although we supported it, and although it was a step in the right direction, I rather feel that the April resolution that has already been mentioned was rather anodyne given the obvious seriousness of the situation.
We should not forget this.
The European Parliament recommended that the date of the elections should be set as quickly as possible, but certainly for no later than 1 June.
They have now been announced, but for 24 and 25 June.
We shall see what happens between now and then.
We subsequently called upon the Zimbabwean authorities to respect human rights, including minority rights, as well as international electoral law.
We know that none of this is being done.
What we are witnessing is a country being held hostage, and we ourselves are finding it difficult to define a fair position given the dramatic nature of the situation, because the appeals for help that are reaching us from Zimbabwe, from the MDC and from the democratic forces, say that it is a bad thing that the elections are being held, because they will probably be unfair, such is the scale of intimidation; yet not holding them would be worse.
We are therefore witnessing a country being held hostage before our very eyes and before the eyes of the whole world, which seems to be paralysed and incapable of coming up with any more incisive action.
We must also make our position very clear.
It is not just whites who are in danger.
We have already been reminded here, and rightly so, of the atrocities committed in the past in Matabeleland and...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, the story of Zimbabwe is one of hope turning to despair - hope that in 1980 Zimbabwe could have realised its full potential and become a leading country in Africa; despair now because the father of the nation has reduced his creation from being one of the richest and most educated of African countries to being one of the poorest.
It is a truly remarkable achievement and a case study of mismanagement in recent history.
I am sure Mr Mugabe' s place in history books is now secured for all the wrong reasons.
Today the country is suffering from 50% unemployment and 60% inflation; he is spending USD 1 million a day on a foreign adventure in the Congo; the foreign exchange reserves have gone and the World Bank has suspended funding on projects.
I was astonished to hear the speech just given by my colleague from the Greens.
Yet out of despair comes resolution, determination and hope.
The country is one of the most educated in Africa and the European Union should be proud of its role in helping to set up that educational support structure in the past 20 years.
It has a functioning civic institution and culture.
Elections are due and voter rolls are being prepared but those voter rolls must be verified before the election.
The opposition parties want more transparency.
Twenty people have been killed and more than 1 200 farms illegally occupied.
Mr Mugabe has lost control of the country, presiding over lawlessness and corruption.
On 24 June elections are going to be held.
Yesterday, the Commonwealth Secretary-General said that it is still possible to have free elections.
The future of the country lies with the young people of Zimbabwe.
They demand the elections.
They must be given a chance.
It is their future.
One thing we must do is to change the culture that is prevalent in Africa today that the winner takes all.
We must stop this winner-takes-all culture that every African country has, and I mean every country.
We must be seen to have free and fair elections and to demonstrate that they have been fair and free.
Mr President, the view shared by virtually all speakers is that the only ray of hope at the moment in Zimbabwe' s anarchy is the fact that elections will be held soon.
I agree with all speakers who said that we need to ensure that those elections are held as fairly as possible, which will not be easy.
I found the words of Commissioner Nielson encouraging when he said that, as early as the beginning of July, observers will be sent to Zimbabwe.
I think that this is vital because those who are not kindly disposed towards the Mugabe regime, those in opposition, will clearly need protection.
I would therefore like to back up the Commission in this opinion.
Observers need to be sent to Zimbabwe at the earliest opportunity, today if possible, rather than tomorrow.
Another worrying development is the reaction of the neighbouring countries.
From Europe, we have fought for years to establish racial equality, equal opportunities, democracy, etc. in Southern Africa.
At the moment, there is a deadly silence in the neighbouring countries which, in my opinion, is a very ominous development.
I therefore hold the view that, if the elections in Zimbabwe were not fair, for whatever reason, the Commission should continue with the course it set a moment ago.
If there are clear signs of large-scale fraud and Mugabe remains in power illegally, then, according to the provisions of the Lomé Convention, aid must be halted.
If the Commission were not to do this, the illegal dispossessions of land could spread to the rest of Southern Africa and this would be a disaster, not only for the area concerned, but also for the rest of Africa.
We must avoid this at all costs.
Mr President, I want to address the President of free Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe, personally, together with his government and socialist-oriented party, Zanu-PF.
Hatred, President Mugabe, is not something upon which a society can be built.
Threats can never create confidence and social harmony.
Lawlessness can never create security and human solidarity.
Violence and murder can never be reconciled with the Christian view of human beings which I know that you, President Mugabe, have grown up with and embraced.
The churches of Zimbabwe, the Lutheran World Federation and the World Council of Churches appeal to your conscience.
My home country of Sweden has supported Zimbabwe very persistently and in very concrete ways, both in developing its economy and in its struggle to be a free and democratic country founded upon the equal, unique and inviolable value of human life, irrespective of the colour of a person' s skin.
Since independence in 1980, Sweden has provided a total of SEK 2 billion in aid, corresponding to USD 220 million.
Twenty years ago, the Church of Sweden' s youth movement, which I myself was active in, embarked upon a special venture which we called 'Be a Friend of Zimbabwe' .
Enthusiastic young people from our two countries met.
We believed in you, President Mugabe, and in your country' s future because you wanted to uphold the Christian view of human beings in Zimbabwe.
We want to believe in you again, even though a lot of bad things have happened.
Put away hatred.
Do it for the sake of your own reputation, both now and in the future.
Do it for the sake of Zimbabwe' s citizens, and do it for the sake of Africa.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would just like to say a few words about the importance of this debate and, in particular, about the fact that it is quite appropriate that this House has once again expressed its concern about such a topical issue which has caused so much concern in the European Union.
We believe that the action taken by the European Union on this matter and the attention it has paid to it are still very much an issue, and I can guarantee, on behalf of the Council - and, of course, also on behalf of the Commission, which has already adopted a very precise course of action for the forthcoming elections - that this matter will continue to feature on our agenda.
Furthermore, the Council will certainly consider the possibility of deploying the consultation mechanisms laid down in the Lomé Convention if the situation following the elections is less encouraging than we might hope.
As you will be aware, this issue was examined at the informal meeting of Foreign Ministers held at the beginning of May.
We shall be watching this issue closely in the General Affairs Council and we will, of course, pay considerable attention to the way the election campaign and the elections proceed.
We hope that the Zimbabwean authorities realise that the way these elections are run will, of course, have a bearing on the credibility of the government itself in the eyes of the international community.
As Mr Ribeiro e Castro said, we feel that it is extremely important to monitor developments in this matter between now and the elections.
We know that so far more than 20 people have been killed as a result of the violent situation over the last few weeks and we are also aware - and this is a very important point, bearing in mind what has been said about the effects of the situation on southern Africa - that an unstable situation in Zimbabwe could have the effect of dragging other parts of southern African into this affair, and that is an issue that should be of concern to us all.
First in answer to Mrs Kinnock - we are indeed in close contact with civil society.
Civil society represents a hope of achieving a civilised society.
But there is some way to go right now.
We are also in direct contact with the opposition.
We make a point of getting in contact with all players in a very visible and clear way.
We are urging the Mugabe government to accept that pluralism must be there to stay, and this is also the point of sending in the observers.
I hope we can solve the problems of funding of the observer mission.
I have to tell Parliament that this once again demonstrates the inadequacy of our system.
We cannot just push a button somewhere in our system and the funds appear.
It is highly complicated to find the money for this in time.
This is the kind of system we have.
Yesterday' s discussion about the external relations reform is even today relevant.
At least we have excellent coordination on the ground in Zimbabwe with the Member States, which is very helpful.
Let me finally explain to you what we are doing on the ground even in this situation.
We are deciding on a EUR 19 million grant for very targeted poverty alleviation in Zimbabwe via a microproject scheme, part of which will be used to support resettlement of the poorest people on legally acquired land.
This will demonstrate in practice how land should be redistributed - in marked contrast to what is going on in Zimbabwe right now.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
I have received six motions for resolutions, pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow, Thursday, at 12 noon.
Question Time (Council)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0220/2000).
We will examine questions to the Council.
I would like to remind you that we are 20 minutes behind schedule.
It is not possible to extend work beyond 7.00 p.m. because the representative of the Council has an official meeting at 7.05 p.m. with the Parliamentary contact group to discuss the statute of the MEPs.