# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
United Nations
Financial report and audited financial statements
for the 12-month period
from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004
Report of the Board of Auditors
Volume II United Nations peacekeeping operations
General Assembly
Official Records Fifty-ninth Session Supplement No. 5 (A/59/5)
General Assembly Official Records Fifty-ninth Session Supplement No. 5 (A/59/5)
United Nations • New York, 2005
Financial report and audited financial statements
for the 12-month period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004
Report of the Board of Auditors
Volume II United Nations peacekeeping operations
A/59/5 (Vol. II)
Note
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
[14 February 2005]
Contents
Abbreviations
Mr. Shauket A. Fakie Chairman United Nations Board of Auditors New York
Letters of transmittal
29 September 2004
Dear Mr. Chairman,
In accordance with financial regulation 6.5, I have the honour to submit the accounts of the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the 12-month period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004, which I hereby approve.
The financial statements have been completed and certified as correct by the Controller.
Copies of these financial statements are also being transmitted to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) Kofi A.
Annan
8 February 2005
The President of the General Assembly of the United Nations
New York
Sir,
I have the honour to transmit to you the financial statements of the United Nations Peacekeeping Operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2004, which were submitted by the Secretary-General.
These statements have been examined by the Board of Auditors.
In addition, I have the honour to present the report of the Board of Auditors with respect to the above accounts, including an audit opinion thereon.
(Signed) Guillermo N. Carague Chairman Philippine Commission on Audit and Chairman United Nations Board of Auditors
Chapter I
Financial report on the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004
Introduction
The Secretary-General has the honour to submit his financial report on the accounts of the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004.
The financial report describes the governance and oversight mechanisms in place with respect to peacekeeping operations and provides highlights of the financial results for the period ended 30 June 2004.
Governance
There are a number of mechanisms which govern peacekeeping operations.
Those of most relevance to financial operations, such as those related to mandates, budgeting and performance reporting, internal and external audit and standards of conduct, are described below.
Mandates
Each peacekeeping mission is established by the Security Council with a specific mandate and defined objectives, which form the basis for the preparation of budget proposals by the Secretary-General.
b.
Budgets
A results-based budgeting model is used to link required resources with expected accomplishments in a logical framework.
The budget proposals for each mission are reviewed by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and its report, together with the Administration's proposals, is then considered by the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly.
Based upon recommendations by the Fifth Committee, the Assembly adopts a budget for each mission and appropriates the related funds.
Expenditures within the amount of funds appropriated are authorized by the Administration through the issuance of allotments.
Actual expenditures incurred are continuously recorded and monitored against allotments.
c. Performance reporting
After the end of the financial period, a performance report is prepared for each mission.
The report explains the reasons for variances in spending relative to the appropriation and provides information on the degree to which overall objectives were met in the context of the results-based budgeting framework.
The reports are considered by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee and form an important part of the governance mechanisms to ensure the appropriate utilization of resources.
Related financial reports are also prepared by the Administration for consideration by the General Assembly.
During the year ended 30 June 2004, reports on closed missions and the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund were prepared.
In addition to financial reports, substantive reports on the missions' activities are provided to the Security Council or the General Assembly, as required, on a regular basis.
d.
Internal audit
The Office of Internal Oversight Services initiates, carries out and reports on any action which it considers necessary to fulfil its responsibilities with regard to monitoring, internal audit, inspection, evaluation and investigations, exercising operational independence under the authority of the Secretary-General.
Internal audit reports on peacekeeping missions are issued periodically.
In addition, the Office has resident auditors in many peacekeeping missions.
The Administration reviews all findings of the Office and takes action, as appropriate.
A report summarizing Office of Internal Oversight Services findings and recommendations and actions taken by the Administration is submitted annually to the General Assembly.
e. External audit
As required by the Financial Regulations, the financial statements of the United Nations peacekeeping operations are audited by an independent Board of Auditors appointed by the General Assembly.
Its findings, recommendations and overall opinion on the financial statements are reviewed by the Fifth Committee and the General Assembly, forming another important pillar in the system of governance and oversight at the United Nations.
f.
Standards of conduct
All United Nations staff members are required to comply with established standards of conduct for international civil servants.
The Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/2002/13 of 1 November 2002 describes these standards of conduct.
It also describes the duties, obligations and privileges of staff members and provides a commentary, which is designed to explain the individual provisions and help staff members understand each provision.
C. Financial overview
Table I.1 gives a financial overview of peacekeeping operations.
Table I.1 Financial highlights
a Restated to exclude MINUCI.
b Reflects the reclassification of UNMIBH from an active to a closed mission in the current period.
United Nations peacekeeping operations expanded significantly in the current period, with four new peacekeeping missions being established: the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI), the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
As a result, assessments, unpaid assessments and expenditures of active missions have all increased, and liquidity has correspondingly decreased.
Liquidity in the closed missions has also declined because of the return of credits to Member States.
Assessments
There was an overall increase of 16 per cent in total assessments, from $2,519.2 million to $2,927.4 million, in the current period, which is mainly attributable to the assessments for the four new missions.
In addition, while a moderate rise in United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) assessments reflected an increase in the Mission's authorized troop strengths, assessments for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) and United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) declined, reflecting scaled-down operations at those missions.
Figure I.1 shows the trend in the assessments for peacekeeping operations for the current and four preceding financial periods.
Figure I.1
E. Unpaid assessments
Total unpaid assessments as at 30 June 2004 amounted to $1,520.7 million, compared with $1,077.6 million as at 30 June 2003.
Unpaid assessments for active missions rose by $501.7 million, or 109 per cent, due mainly to the four new peacekeeping missions, which accounted for $439.5 million, or 88 per cent, of the total increase.
In addition, the unpaid assessment for UNMIK also increased by $47 million.
There was no significant change in unpaid assessments for closed missions.
Table I.2 shows the amounts of unpaid assessed contributions for each of the United Nations peacekeeping operations as at the end of the current period and the four preceding financial periods.
Table I.2 Unpaid assessed contributions (Millions of United States dollars)
a The classification of missions as active or closed is as at 30 June 2004, and missions are reclassified for prior years accordingly.
Expenditures
Expenditures rose by 17 per cent, to a total of $2,933.8 million in the current period, from the $2,499.8 million reported a year ago.
The overall increase in expenditures is mainly attributable to the operations of the four new peacekeeping missions and MONUC, and is offset by the decline in expenditure levels at UNIFIL, UNAMSIL, UNMIK, UNMISET and UNMEE.
Figure I.2 shows the trend in total expenditures for all peacekeeping operations for the period ended 30 June 2004 and the four preceding financial periods.
Figure I.2 Expenditures for United Nations peacekeeping operationsa (Millions of United States dollars)
a Expenditures for fiscal periods 2000 to 2003 were reclassified to conform to the current presentation.
G. Liquidity: available cash versus liabilities
Active missions
Table I.3 summarizes the cash available for each of the active peacekeeping missions and provides a comparison against its total liabilities.
Table I.3 Available cash versus liabilities as at 30 June 2004: active missions
(Millions of United States dollars)
a Comprises the sum of cash and term deposits and the cash pool.
b Represents total liabilities.
Table I.3 shows that the liquidity of active missions was negatively affected by the start-up of the four new missions during 2004, which financed their initial operations with loans from the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund.
The liquidity positions of MONUC and UNMIK also deteriorated from those of the previous year, mainly because of the return of credits to Member States and the delayed receipt of assessments, respectively.
The United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) continued to experience shortfalls and required loans from closed missions to meet its immediate cash expenditures.
The cash position of each mission determines the feasibility and timing of its payments to reimburse troop-contributing countries.
In principle, the Administration pays for troops and contingent-owned equipment on a quarterly cycle, after retaining sufficient cash for the settlement of operating expenses that are immediately payable.
The timing of payments for contingent-owned equipment is also dependent upon the receipt of claims from troop-contributing countries, and their subsequent certification.
Table I.4 shows the last month for which payments for troops and contingent-owned equipment had been made by 30 June 2004.
Table I.4 Status of troop and contingent-owned equipment payments: active missions as at 30 June 2004
a Final payment.
Closed missions
Table I.5 summarizes cash available and total liabilities for all closed missions.
Table I.5 Available cash versus liabilities as at 30 June 2004: closed missions
(Millions of United States dollars)
a Comprises the sum of cash and term deposits and the cash pool.
b Represents total liabilities.
c Excludes deferred credits of $127.4 million representing expenditures reimbursable by Member States.
As can be seen from table I.5, the liquidity position of closed missions with cash surpluses has deteriorated, as amounts totalling $84 million were credited to Member States in accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/288 of 8 April 2004.
The liquidity position of closed missions with cash deficits has not changed significantly from that of the previous period.
Closed missions with cash surpluses continue to be the only available source of lending to active peacekeeping missions, the Tribunals and the regular budget of the United Nations.
Such loans amounting to $178 million were made during the year ended 30 June 2004, of which $141 million had been repaid by 30 June 2004 and $37 million remained outstanding.
Details of these loans are shown in Table I.6.
Table I.6 Loans from closed missions (Millions of United States dollars)
H. Peacekeeping Reserve Fund
During the current period, $33.3 million was transferred from the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund to partially meet the requirements of the support account for peacekeeping operations, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 57/317 of 18 June 2003.
As a result, total reserves and fund balances as at 30 June 2004 was reduced to $163.8 million, comprising a reserve of $150 million and a cumulative surplus of $13.8 million.
The Peacekeeping Reserve Fund was also utilized during the period ended 30 June 2004 to finance the initial operations of the four new missions.
Loans totalling $112.2 million were made, of which $76.2 million was repaid by 30 June 2004 and $36 million remained outstanding.
The loans and repayments are shown in table I.7 below.
Table 1.7 Loans from the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund during the period ended 30 June 2004 (Millions of United States dollars)
As at 30 June 2004, the reserves and fund balance of $163.8 million were represented by a cash balance of $115 million, outstanding loans to new missions of $36 million (see table 7) and loans made in 1998 and 1999 of $12.8 million to the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA).
Support account for peacekeeping operations
Total expenditures increased by $14.1 million, from $97.1 million to $111.2 million, for the current period.
The increase was due mainly to the full-year impact of the additional posts that were authorized in the previous period.
J. United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
The United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, manages surplus assets from closed and/or downsized missions and maintains mission start-up kits and strategic deployment stocks.
The General Assembly had approved funding of $141.5 million to meet the requirements of strategic deployment stocks, of which $88.9 million was spent by the end of the last financial period and the remaining $52.6 million was spent in the current period.
During the fiscal year ended 30 June 2004, strategic deployment stocks with an estimated value of $80.9 million were shipped to various peacekeeping missions, including the four new missions.
By 30 June 2004, replenishments of strategic deployment stocks amounting to $58.9 million had taken place.
Annex
Supplementary information
The present annex includes supplementary information that the Secretary- General is required to report.
Write-off of losses of cash and receivables
In accordance with financial rule 106.8, losses of cash and receivables amounting to $588,572 were written off during the period ended 30 June 2004.
A summary statement of losses was provided to the Board of Auditors in compliance with financial rule 106.8.
Write-off of losses of property
In accordance with financial rule 106.9, property losses amounting to $5,210,559 were written off during the period ended 30 June 2004.
The losses are based on the original cost of the properties and include write-offs arising from shortfalls, theft, damage and accidents.
The write-offs bring the recorded balances of properties to the same levels as those shown in the property records for the actual quantities on hand.
A summary statement showing the values of non-expendable equipment and property write-offs was provided to the Board in accordance with financial rule 106.9.
Chapter II Report of the Board of Auditors
Introduction
The Board of Auditors has audited the financial statements and reviewed the operations of the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 74 (I) of 7 December 1946, 47/211 of 23 December 1992 and 49/233 A of 23 December 1994.
The audit was conducted in conformity with article VII of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and the annex thereto, as well as the common auditing standards of the Panel of External Auditors of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency and the International Standards on Auditing.
Those standards require that the Board plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance as to whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.
The audit was conducted primarily to enable the Board to form an opinion as to whether the expenditures recorded in the financial statements for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 had been incurred for the purposes approved by the governing bodies, whether income and expenditure had been properly classified and recorded in accordance with the Financial Regulations and Rules and whether the financial statements of the United Nations peacekeeping operations presented fairly their financial position as at 30 June 2004 and the results of operations and cash flows for the period then ended, in accordance with the United Nations peacekeeping operations accounting policies set out in note 2 to the financial statements.
The audit included a general review of financial systems and internal controls and a test examination of accounting records and other supporting evidence to the extent that the Board considered necessary to form an opinion on the financial statements.
Pursuant to paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 47/211, the Board continued to maintain its expanded audit coverage at Headquarters, at 12 field missions and at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy.
The coverage also included the audit of the accounts of one liquidated mission, 21 completed missions and two field missions that were not visited, as well as the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund and the support account for peacekeeping operations.
The missions audited are listed in annex I to the present chapter.
In addition to the audit of the accounts and financial transactions, the Board carried out reviews of peacekeeping operations under financial regulation 7.5.
The General Assembly also requested the Board to follow up on previous recommendations and to report to it accordingly.
These matters are addressed in paragraphs 9 and 10 below.
The present report addresses specific requests made by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the General Assembly as outlined below:
(a) To look into the issue of the management of rations in peacekeeping operations as a whole (see A/58/759/Add.10, para.
22, and paras.
194-234 below);
(b) To follow up on the issue of periodic and timely management reviews (see A/58/759, para.
33) and on the management review of the staffing and organizational structure of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (see A/58/759/Add.1, para.
14, and paras.
281-289 below);
(c) To continue to follow up on matters such as effective and efficient use of resources; monitoring the quality of implementation of previous recommendations, on the understanding that management would be required to fix responsibility for repeated non-compliance with those recommendations; contingent-owned equipment; inventory management; management of air operations, including the use of executive jets; and procurement practices (see A/58/759).
The Board has addressed these issues in the relevant sections of the present report;
(d) To review the implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations as approved by the General Assembly, to gauge the effects of management reform measures taken since the approval of the report and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session (see General Assembly resolution 57/318 of 18 June 2003 and paras.
77-94 and annex III below).
The Board continued to report the results of audits to the Administration in management letters containing detailed observations and recommendations.
This practice allowed for ongoing dialogue with the Administration.
Thirteen management letters were issued covering the financial period ended 30 June 2004.
The present report covers matters that, in the opinion of the Board, should be brought to the attention of the General Assembly.
The Board's observations and conclusions were discussed with the Administration, whose views have been appropriately reflected in the report.
A summary of the Board's main recommendations is contained in paragraph 11 below.
The detailed findings are discussed in paragraphs 13 to 348.
Previous recommendations not fully implemented
Year ended 30 June 2002 (report A/57/5, vol. II, chap.
In accordance with section A, paragraph 7, of General Assembly resolution 51/225 of 3 April 1997, the Board has reviewed the action taken by the Administration to implement the recommendations made in its report for the period ended 30 June 2002 and confirms that there are no outstanding matters except for those addressed in the present report.
Year ended 30 June 2003 (report A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution 48/216 B of 23 December 1993, the Board also reviewed the measures taken by the Administration to implement the recommendations made in its report for the financial period ended 30 June 2003.
Details of the action taken and the comments of the Board are included in the report and have been summarized in annex II to the present chapter.
Out of a total of 69 recommendations, 26 (38 per cent) were implemented, while 33 (48 per cent) were under implementation and 10 (14 per cent) were not implemented.
Main recommendations
The Board's main recommendations are that the Administration:
(a) Undertake an analysis of the funds monitoring tool system with a view to enhancing the reporting functionality to track monthly redeployments of allotments (para.
51);
(b) Strengthen its internal systems for data collection as well as for the analysis of aviation activities (para.
101);
(c) Perform a risk assessment with a view to developing a plan to perform aviation assessments on a more regular basis (para.
144);
(d) Centrally monitor and account for the replenishment and issuance of all strategic deployment stocks (para.
174);
(e) Expedite the promulgation and implementation of its strategic deployment stocks policies and procedures as a matter of priority (para.
180);
(f) Ensure that missions inform headquarters of all initiatives undertaken with a view to harmonizing processes for monitoring of rations that could be applied systematically across all peacekeeping operations (para.
219);
(g) Promote through the United Nations system inter-agency local benchmarking and, where appropriate, joint sourcing for the procurement of basic services and goods (para.
239);
(h) Establish a time frame for the finalization of the promulgation and implementation of the guidelines on ethical principles for United Nations staff working in the procurement process (para.
251);
(i) Hold the administrative heads of all peacekeeping missions accountable for submitting complete procurement plans to the Procurement Service (formerly Procurement Division) in a timely manner to expedite the compilation of an overall procurement plan (para.
260);
(j) In consultation with the peacekeeping missions, analyse the prequalification requirements for registering prospective local vendors in the context of the difficulties being experienced with respect to local vendors and with a view to considering alternative compensating controls for registering those local vendors where goods and/or services are required urgently (para. 269);
(k) Ensure that peacekeeping missions compile assessments of progress and final performance of vendors and forward them to the Procurement Service in a timely manner in order to prevent situations in which contracts are maintained, extended and/or renewed in the absence of vendor evaluations (para.
277);
(l) Monitor peacekeeping missions to ensure the implementation of standardized procedures and methods for information-gathering in order to compile a portfolio of evidence to substantiate the actual accomplishments recorded on performance reports (para.
294);
(m) In consultation with the Administrations of other United Nations entities, institutionalize the reporting of disciplinary and judicial action taken or to be taken against military and civilian personnel for serious misconduct and for crime, including reporting on the status and nature of such actions (para.
The Board's other recommendations appear in paragraphs 32, 39, 42, 45, 48, 59, 65, 68, 71, 73, 81, 86, 89, 91, 104, 110, 113, 116, 119, 122, 136, 139, 149, 152, 157, 159, 165, 167, 170, 180, 182, 185, 188, 190, 193, 200, 203, 207, 211, 214, 222, 224, 228, 233, 244, 248, 253, 258, 263, 265, 272, 274, 280, 283, 289, 296, 299, 301, 305, 309, 311, 314, 316, 322, 325, 334, 338 and 343.
Financial issues
Financial overview
Table II.1 reflects some of the key indicators relevant to United Nations peacekeeping operations as at 30 June 2002, 2003 and 2004.
While the financial situation had remained relatively constant in the two previous financial periods, ended 30 June 2002 and 2003, it deteriorated noticeably for the year ended 30 June 2004.
The reasons for this are analysed below.
Table II.1 Ratios of key financial indicators
a A low indicator depicts a healthy financial position.
b A high indicator depicts a healthy financial position.
c A low indicator is a reflection that insufficient cash is available to settle debts.
d A low indicator is a positive reflection that debts owed to Member States are being settled.
e A low indicator is a positive reflection that obligations are being liquidated.
Income and expenditure
Total income for the year ended 30 June 2004 amounted to $3 billion (2002/03: $2.7 billion), while total expenditure amounted to $2.9 billion (2002/03: $2.5 billion).
Unliquidated obligations for the year ended 30 June 2004 amounted to $1.04 billion (2002/03: $880.4 million), an increase of 18 per cent from the previous financial year.
Approximately $780 million (75 per cent) of the unliquidated obligations as at 30 June 2004 relates to current-year obligations, while the balance of $260 million represented prior-year obligations.
The increase in expenditure of approximately 16 per cent is partly attributable to the four new missions that started during the 2003/04 period: the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI), the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB).
The total appropriation for peacekeeping operations has increased steadily over the past few years as indicated in the figure.
The impact of the new missions on the income and expenditure of peacekeeping operations is set out in table II.2.
The new missions account for 26 per cent and 24 per cent of the total income and expenditure, respectively, for the 2003/04 period.
Figure Trend in appropriation for peacekeeping operations
(Billions of United States dollars)
a 2004/05 appropriations are based on amounts as at 30 July 2004.
Table II.2 Income and expenditure of new missions for the period 2003/04
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Assessed contributions outstanding and cash levels
Assessed contributions outstanding for the year ended 30 June 2004 amounted to $1.52 billion (2002/03: $1.08 billion), representing an increase of 41 per cent from the previous financial year.
This significant increase in outstanding contributions has resulted in a deterioration in the amount of cash available ($1.54 billion) to settle liabilities ($2.01 billion).
The fluctuations in the financial position of the United Nations peacekeeping operations were partly attributable to the commencement of UNMIL, UNOCI, MINUSTAH and ONUB.
The impact that the new missions have on outstanding assessed contributions and cash levels are indicated in table II.3.
Table II.3 Assessed contributions outstanding and cash balances for new missions as at 30 June 2004
(Thousands of United States dollars)
The amount of $1.149 billion outstanding for assessed contributions from Member States as per the status-of-contributions report (ST/ADM/SER.B/631) differed by $372 million from the amount of $1.521 billion disclosed in the financial statements as at 30 June 2004.
As stated in note 4 to the financial statements and as was the case in prior years, this is because the contributions report was printed too early in July to reflect any assessments or applications of credits returned to Member States that were approved by the General Assembly in late June.
The reconciling items between the outstanding assessed contributions of Member States as per the financial statements and the status-of-contributions report were valid.
An amount of $611.2 million of the total $1.149 billion outstanding (53 per cent) had been outstanding for over one year, of which $165.5 million related to active peacekeeping missions, while the balance of $445.7 million related to completed missions.
The ageing of unpaid assessments, with their uncertainty of recoverability, affects the Organization's ability to meet its financial obligations, especially since the United Nations did not make a provision for the possible non-collection of amounts owed by Member States.
Non-payment of assessed contributions by Member States had a negative impact on cash flow during the 2003/04 financial period, resulting in two active missions, the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) borrowing $102 million from closed missions (the United Nations Peace Forces (UNPF), the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) and the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)).
The amount of cash flow arising from operating activities is a key indicator of the extent to which the Organization can maintain its operating capability.
An overview of the cash flow statement (statement III) indicated a decrease of 68 per cent in the net cash flows from operating activities, from $214 million in the 2002/03 period to $68 million in the financial period under review.
The outstanding balances of these loans totalled $37 million as at 30 June 2004 ($28 million and $9 million owed by UNMIK and MINURSO, respectively).
United Nations system accounting standards
The Board assessed the extent to which the financial statements of the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2004 conformed to the United Nations system accounting standards.
The financial statements were consistent with those standards.
Presentation and disclosure of financial statements
The General Assembly, in its resolution 55/220 of 23 December 2000, requested the Secretary-General and executive heads of funds and programmes of the United Nations, in conjunction with the Board of Auditors, to continue to evaluate what financial information should be presented in the financial statements and schedules and what should be presented in the annexes to the statements.
In line with that resolution, the Board has reviewed the general presentation and disclosure of the United Nations peacekeeping operations financial statements for the financial period 2003/04.
The Board is of the view that the financial report and the financial statements should contain sufficient combined information to enable all users to have a good understanding of the operations and performance of the Organization for the financial period concerned.
Users should be able to obtain this understanding without having to put pieces of information together themselves.
The Board is aware that, in some instances, the governance principles discussed below may be applied in documents issued to the General Assembly as part of the Administration's normal reporting process.
These documents include the annual budget documents, annual performance reports and annual reports of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Financial reporting
In accordance with best practices, the following governance issues are normally included in the financial report (chap.
I) that precedes the financial statements:
(a) Governance and other regulatory bodies;
(b) Performance reporting and non-financial information;
(c) Social accounting issues;
(d) Risk management, continuity and internal control.
Governance and other regulatory bodies
In terms of reporting structures, reports on peacekeeping operations are provided to the General Assembly and to the Security Council.
However, the Board found that financial report of the United Nations peacekeeping operations did not contain information about oversight committees or the communication policy.
Performance reporting and non-financial information
The Board found that the United Nations peacekeeping operations financial report did not summarize performance in terms of its organizational objectives and mandate.
While expenditure was presented in financial terms, non-financial information was not included in the preparation of the current and prior reports.
No mention was made of the United Nations peacekeeping operations' key objectives and the alignment of the Organization to the Millennium Development Goals.
Such information, which is over and above the mandatory financial information disclosures, would be of value to the relevant stakeholders.
Reference was, however, made to performance reports that are prepared for each mission, which are considered by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly.
Social accounting issues
Social accounting issues could be useful and consideration should be given to the desirability of incorporating such information into peacekeeping operations' financial reports.
Matters that could be addressed include:
(a) Environmental reporting;
(b) Employee and/or human resources reporting, including an analysis of the composition of staff and the skills of current staff compared with the skills needed and details on future staff requirements (such as the continuity plan and rotation policy);
(c) Health and safety issues.
Risk management, continuity and internal control
The constant identification of risks and continuous development of systems and controls to address those risks is critical to most organizations.
Thus, risk information disclosures are relevant to the needs of users of financial statements.
Disclosures could deal with the measures in place to address financial risks, safeguard assets and financial records and ensure continuity in the event of a disaster.
No such disclosures were included in the current or prior-period financial report.
The Board found that the financial report provided a summary of the financial statements, although no key indicators or ratios were included, such as the current ratio (current assets to current liabilities) or current liabilities as a percentage of total liabilities.
In addition, the financial report did not cover:
(a) Internal measures to manage risks;
(b) Details of any oversight committee reviewing the work of internal audit;
(c) Measures in place to safeguard the integrity of management and financial information.
The provision and disclosure of any such information would be subject, inter alia, to an examination of the benefits of providing information relative to the cost thereof and also of whether such information meets the general qualitative characteristics of relevance, reliability, comparability and understandability, as stated in the United Nations system accounting standards.
The Board recommends that the Administration consider the disclosure of items in the financial report in terms of good governance principles relating to oversight, performance reporting, social accounting issues, risk management, continuity and internal control issues.
In this regard, the Administrations should revert to paragraph 6 of resolution 57/278 A of 20 December 2002, in which the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General and the executive heads of the funds and programmes of the United Nations to examine governance structures, principles and accountability throughout the United Nations system, since better disclosure would be a step towards taking a proactive approach to the review requested by the Assembly.
The Administration informed the Board that in the interest of harmonization across the United Nations common system, better governance disclosures would be considered by the High Level Committee on Management of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination.
Financial position of completed missions
The financial position of completed missions remained a matter of concern since there was a shortfall of cash to cover liabilities for 9 out of the 21 completed missions.
The aggregate net shortfall of available cash to cover liabilities amounted to almost $38 million as at 30 June 2004.
Total outstanding assessments of $544 million for completed missions represent 36 per cent of the total assessed contributions receivable from Member States.
Table II.4 indicates the financial position of completed missions, highlighting the nine missions with shortfalls and the assessed contributions outstanding.
The Administration continued to inform Member States regularly regarding their unpaid assessments but was not in a position to enforce payment.
In the absence of sufficient cash, the Administration was unable to settle liabilities and thus unable to resolve long-outstanding matters relating to closed missions.
The Administration noted that a further report on the consolidation of peacekeeping operations would be submitted to the General Assembly during its fifty-ninth session, as requested in General Assembly resolution 57/319 of 18 June 2003.
The Board is of the view that although the Administration can facilitate the process, the clearance of these long-outstanding amounts would be possible only with the intervention of the Member States concerned.
Table II.4 Key financial data of completed peacekeeping missions
(Thousands of United States dollars)
a Excludes deferred credits of $127.4 million.
b Available cash includes $29,638,000 for UNPF and $14,112,000 for UNMIH under the terms of General Assembly resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002.
Funds monitoring tool
The Board followed up on its previous recommendation on the funds monitoring tool that was developed in the previous year to assist peacekeeping missions with the implementation of the new policy on allotments (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
Accuracy of data
In order for the funds monitoring tool to be effective, it is imperative that the data be accurate.
Although the Administration performed daily and weekly checks to ensure the accuracy of data, discrepancies noted between the funds monitoring tool and the financial statements amounting to $419,000 and $44,000 net for expenditure and appropriations, respectively, were not resolved by October 2004.
The discrepancies emanated from (a) simple data entry errors, (b) time lags between data entry into one of the source systems and its upload into the funds monitoring tool, (c) time lags of data entry in field systems of data already reflected in the Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) and (d) delays in the implementation of field systems in the case of new missions, such as MINUSTAH, and the closure of field systems in the case of the liquidation of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM).
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to rectify differences between the funds monitoring tool and the financial statements in a timely manner.
Utilization of the funds monitoring tool
By October 2004, there were a total of 415 funds monitoring tool users.
Mission staff members were generally positive about the use of the funds monitoring tool for the management reports relating to budgets and the monitoring of budgets and expenditure.
In certain instances, missions noted that the system processing speed was slow.
The funds monitoring tool was not utilized at the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), as the mission was awaiting a confirmation from Headquarters that the system was free of errors before continuing to use it.
The funds monitoring tool had not been fully installed at UNMIL due to the pending upgrading of the Internet connection and the installation of a funds monitoring tool dedicated server.
Nor had it been implemented at ONUB, UNOCI and MINUSTAH by October 2004.
The Board recommends that the Administration expedite the installation and implementation of the funds monitoring tool at the missions in a manner that ensures efficient access and processing.
The Administration noted that steps were being taken to ensure the accuracy of data in the funds monitoring tool and to improve the technology infrastructure to enable full and speedy access to it.
The Peacekeeping Financing Division at Headquarters monitored the utilization of the funds monitoring tool and followed up cases where low usage was noted.
Information technology staff and funds monitoring tool focal points have been made available to support the effective operation of the system.
Furthermore, problems experienced by users of the tool were regularly monitored and their solution facilitated by Headquarters focal points, Communications and Information Technology Service involvement, weekly funds monitoring tool meetings, mission focal points and periodic surveys received from missions.
The Administration also stated that all staff of the ONUB Budget Unit were subsequently trained in the use of the funds monitoring tool and that training of staff in other missions was planned for 2005.
Training
A total of 179 funds monitoring tool users received training on the utilization of the system by 30 June 2004.
The Administration indicated that in 2004 and 2005, phase I training would be offered to new or recently established missions and phase II training would be offered to mission and Headquarters staff who had completed phase I training.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to expedite adequate efforts to train all registered users in the funds monitoring tool in order to optimize the benefits of the system.
Indicators of performance
The Board previously recommended that the Administration establish indicators for peacekeeping operations against which the performance of the missions can be measured in terms of the impact of the revised allotment procedures and the funds monitoring tool (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
No such indicators had been developed by October 2004.
The Administration had initiated discussions on possible indicators for measurement and performance in the funds monitoring tool and was focusing on these issues to encourage wider utilization and autonomous use of the tool in the missions.
Therefore, the Administration was of the view that introducing indicators/benchmarks at this stage would be premature.
The Board remains of the view that the impact of implementing the funds monitoring tool can be measured only on the basis of reasonable indicators.
As a start, these indicators could be developed in the context of the extent to which the funds monitoring tool has been installed.
The Board reiterates its recommendation that the Administration measure the impact of the implementation of the funds monitoring tool on the basis of established indicators.
The Administration informed the Board that it would liaise with the missions to further develop mission-specific and overall benchmarks to monitor and assess mission performance.
The Administration intends, in the follow-up training on the funds monitoring tool, to discuss this initiative with the missions to obtain feedback that would contribute to the establishment of relevant indicators of performance.
Redeployment of allotments
Information in respect of redeployments of allotments could not be easily obtained from the funds monitoring tool, as the information downloaded from it differed from information in IMIS.
A manual reconciliation had to be performed between amounts as per the funds monitoring tool and IMIS.
A reporting facility in the funds monitoring tool that would accurately indicate monthly redeployments would more efficiently assist in the continuous monitoring of the level of redeployments at the mission level.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to undertake an analysis of the funds monitoring tool system with a view to enhancing the reporting functionality to track monthly redeployments of allotments.
Peacekeeping Reserve Fund
The level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund as at 30 June 2004 was $163.8 million (30 June 2003: $194.3 million), approximately $13.8 million higher than the approved level of $150 million.
The Secretary-General recommended in A/58/724 that the excess be applied to meeting the financing of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005.
No decision had been taken by the General Assembly by October 2004 on the Secretary-General's recommendation to transfer the amount, which exceeded the approved level of the Reserve Fund.
The Administration informed the Board that it would recommend the transfer of the excess amount towards the requirements of the support account for the period 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006, as an action to be taken by the Assembly in the context of the Secretary-General's next budget for the support account.
The Peacekeeping Reserve Fund included $12.8 million due from the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA) (outstanding in respect of periods prior to June 1999) and $36 million from three new missions (UNOCI, ONUB and MINUSTAH) at 30 June 2004.
By October 2004, the amounts due from new peacekeeping missions to the Reserve Fund had been reduced to $20 million.
Cash and cash equivalents decreased by $66.5 million (37 per cent), from $181.4 million in the previous year to $114.9 million as at 30 June 2004, which represents 70 per cent of the total Reserve Fund balance of $163.8 million.
Voluntary contributions receivable and unrecorded liabilities: United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
The Board followed up on its recommendation regarding the long-outstanding voluntary contributions receivable and related unrecorded liabilities in respect of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
As stated in footnote (d) to statement IV, voluntary contributions receivable as at 30 June 2004 for UNFICYP amounted to approximately $8 million, which included amounts totalling $4.8 million that have been outstanding in respect of the period prior to 15 June 1993.
Also, similar to the case of the prior year, cumulative obligations in respect of amounts due to Member States amounting to $196.6 million at 30 June 2004 remained unrecorded, as explained in footnote (f) to statement IV.
In accordance with the United Nations system accounting standards (para.
34), a provision may be made as appropriate where the collection of the voluntary contribution so recognized is considered doubtful.
The Administration has elected not to do so.
The Administration requested the Member States concerned to agree to the write-off of their unpaid pledges to the UNFICYP special voluntary contributions account against their unrecorded claims, but minimal response was received in this regard.
The Administration also informed the Board that it would renew its request to all Member States concerned regarding the unpaid pledges and outstanding claims.
Only one Member State had responded positively, agreeing to offset approximately $1.4 million due to the United Nations against an unrecorded liability of the same amount.
The Board reiterates its view that although the Administration can facilitate the process, the clearance of these long-outstanding amounts would be possible only with the intervention of the Member States concerned.
Non-expendable equipment
Overview of movements in non-expendable equipment
The value of non-expendable equipment increased by 9 per cent, from $755.7 million at 30 June 2003 to $821.8 million at 30 June 2004.
During the financial period under review, equipment acquisitions amounted to $221.6 million, consisting of purchases of $136.7 million and transfers to peacekeeping operations of $84.9 million.
Disposals amounted to $154.5 million, consisting of transfers of $97.5 million to non-peacekeeping operations and write-offs amounting to $57 million.
However, the balance of non-expendable equipment excludes strategic deployment stocks at a value of $5 million that had already been shipped to ONUB by 30 June 2004.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations indicated that the financial year-end inventory report detailing non-expendable equipment would be received only in January 2005 since the mission did not have the resources or capacity to prepare it during its start-up phase.
However, the Board is of the view that since these assets had already been received by ONUB as at 30 June 2004, the value of non-expendable equipment as disclosed in the financial statements is understated by that amount.
The non-expendable equipment of the new missions other than UNOB accounted for approximately 12 per cent of the total non-expendable equipment balance: UNMIL, $64.9 million; UNOCI, $23 million; and MINUSTAH, $8 million.
The mission with the largest portion of non-expendable equipment was the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), in which it represented 19 per cent of the total.
In addition, strategic deployment stocks of $57 million represented approximately 7 per cent of the aggregate non-expendable equipment balance at 30 June 2004.
The Board recommends that the Administration include the year-end value of non-expendable equipment of ONUB in the notes to the financial statements.
The Administration informed the Board that due to the staff shortages at ONUB, a regular inventory report could not be produced and reliable figures for non-expendable equipment values were not available.
They will, however, be included in the 30 June 2005 financial statements.
Property written off or pending write-off
Overall, property written off or pending write-off decreased by 35 per cent from the period ended 30 June 2003.
Property valued at approximately $57 million (based on original costs) in respect of 15 missions and the United Nations Logistics Base was written off during the financial period ended 30 June 2004, representing a decrease of 42 per cent from the $99.1 million written off in the previous period.
Included in the $57 million was an amount of $5.2 million representing write-offs attributable to damage, theft, accidents and military activity.
The majority of the items written off by 30 June 2004 had already been pending write-off as at 30 June 2003.
Similarly, equipment pending write-off and disposal as at 30 June 2004 amounted to $35.6 million, representing a decrease of 17 per cent from the prior-year amount of $43.1 million.
Approximately $19.9 million (56 per cent) of the $35.6 million was pending approval, while the balance of $15.7 million (44 per cent) was approved but not yet disposed of.
The Board recommended in its previous report that the Administration remedy the factors causing the delay in the write-off process (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations changed the frequency of submission of inventory reports from quarterly to monthly, effective 1 January 2004.
It also promulgated additional guidelines to facilitate and expedite the entire disposal process, which were circulated to missions in April 2004.
The Board considers that the collective actions by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the various missions to address audit findings have, in general, resulted in notable improvements in the custody and control of non-expendable equipment.
However, the following observations were made during the mission visits with regard to non-expendable equipment:
(a) Differences were noted between the field assets control system/Galileo record of items of non-expendable equipment and the physical verification of the equipment at UNFICYP, UNOCI, UNMIK, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), UNMIL and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF);
(b) Delays were noted in the write-off and/or disposal process at UNFICYP, MONUC and UNDOF;
(c) A local property survey board had not yet been implemented at UNOCI;
(d) At UNMIL, items totalling $393,282 pending write-off and disposal had not been included in the schedule submitted to Headquarters as the items were not recorded on the field assets control system as pending write-off;
(e) At MINURSO, a large number of vehicles and a volume of scrap metal that had been written off were not disposed of in a timely manner, and there was also no plan to dispose of the items in the near future.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to continue its efforts to ensure the proper custody, control and disposal of non-expendable equipment as well as to rectify the deficiencies noted in this regard.
Accounts receivable and accounts payable
As previously reported (A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, paras.
55 and 57), the Board again noted long-outstanding accounts receivable at active missions (United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), MINURSO, UNMISET, United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and UNDOF) and accounts payable (UNMIK, MINURSO and United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)).
Furthermore, the age analysis at MINURSO and UNIFIL was inaccurate.
The Administration reported that UNMIK has since settled its outstanding troop payments for the 2003 period.
The Administration informed the Board that under the current legislative framework, it was not possible to settle amounts due to Member States in missions that have cash deficits.
The Administration had also instructed missions to review accounts receivable regularly to ensure prompt recovery of long-outstanding balances.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations had further implemented a procedure in missions to withhold final staff mission subsistence allowance entitlements to facilitate prompt recovery of staff accounts receivable.
The Finance Management Support Service had furthermore written to the various permanent missions to the United Nations on behalf of peacekeeping missions to recover long-outstanding amounts from troop-contributing countries.
The Board recommends that the Administration continue to take steps to ensure that missions improve the management of long-outstanding accounts receivable and review its systems to ensure the accurate ageing of accounts receivable.
The Board further recommends that the Administration continue its efforts to search for avenues to settle amounts owed to Member States that have remained unpaid for long periods of time, in the context of its review of the feasibility of consolidating the accounts of peacekeeping operations.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that a number of missions had already taken measures to improve the management of outstanding accounts receivable and payable.
The Administration also noted that the consolidation of accounts is dependent on the actions of Member States in settling amounts.
Banks and cash
A bank reconciliation is a fundamental internal control procedure to detect errors, misstatements and fraud.
Although bank reconciliations were, in general, adequately prepared and used, some exceptions were noted, as listed below:
(a) ONUB did not submit bank reconciliations for the local bank accounts to Headquarters.
The Administration informed the Board that follow-up action had been undertaken, to which a response was still awaited from ONUB;
(b) Bank reconciliations were not performed in a timely manner at MINURSO, UNOMIG and UNDOF.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that this was due to late receipts of bank statements but that the banks had subsequently granted the missions access to online statements;
(c) Long-outstanding reconciling items were noted in the bank reconciliations of UNMEE;
(d) There was inadequate segregation of duties regarding the receipting, custody and recording of cash transactions at MINURSO;
(e) There were inadequate access and security arrangements with regard to the cash office and vault at UNIFIL;
(f) No surprise cash counts were performed at UNIFIL;
(g) A dormant bank account at UNMIK remained open;
(h) Formal banking-services agreements were not signed between the United Nations and the bank for UNOCI accounts.
The Board recommends that the Administration ensure that proper bank and cash management processes are in place.
Journals
Although no errors were detected, journals processed through IMIS could be created, modified and approved by the same person.
The Administration considered this a valid set-up in the system since certain staff members were authorized to have create, modify and approve functions.
The Board, however, noted that adequate compensating controls were not in place for detection and to prevent the same person from creating, modifying and approving journals.
Segregation of duties between incompatible functions, such as the initiation and approval of a transaction, is necessary to prevent errors and to enhance internal controls surrounding transaction processing.
Journal transactions can directly affect the credibility of financial information.
The Board recommends that the Administration document and implement adequate compensating controls to ensure that adequate segregation of duties is maintained with regard to journal transactions.
The Administration advised the Board that it had instigated a new report to monitor the proper segregation of duties.
The report would be retained and regularly reviewed and actions taken would be documented.
Write-off of losses of cash, receivables and property
The Administration informed the Board that property losses of $5.2 million (2002/03: $6.7 million) were written off during 2003/04 in accordance with financial rule 106.9.
In addition, losses amounting to $223,294 (2002/03: $341,803) were written off in respect of accounts receivable considered not recoverable, cash losses and personal telephone bills for the period under review in accordance with financial rule 106.8.
In addition, the Administration wrote off $365,278 after the Board's audit, in respect of allowances erroneously overpaid to staff at four missions due to an unclear administrative instruction.
Ex gratia payments
The Administration reported one ex gratia payment amounting to $11,430, which had been made to an ex-staff member for compensation in respect of an illness attributable to the performance of official duties on behalf of the United Nations during the financial period ended 30 June 2004.
C. Management issues
Recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
In its resolution 57/318, the General Assembly requested the Board of Auditors to review the implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations as approved by the General Assembly, to gauge the effects of management reform measures taken since the approval of the report and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session.
In its resolution 58/299 of 18 June 2004, the Assembly noted that the Board of Auditors would act upon resolution 57/318 once it had considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (see A/58/746) and assessed what additional evaluation it might provide.
The report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (see A/55/305-S/2000/809) made 57 explicit recommendations, of which 51 were approved by the Secretary-General (see A/55/502) and endorsed in General Assembly resolution 55/135 of 8 December 2000.
The Board reviewed the implementation of 41 of those approved recommendations that it considered to be within its remit and, to the extent possible, gauged the effects of management reform measures taken since the approval of the report.
Of those 41 recommendations, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations considered that 36 fell under its responsibility.
Areas that were deemed to be outside the Board's review included recommendations relating to peacekeeping doctrine, transitional civil administration and structural adjustments outside of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
It is the Administration's responsibility to measure the impact of any actions taken, including implementing the recommendations of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations.
Therefore, the Board's high-level review focused on validating the status of implementation of the recommendations and the impact thereof, to the extent possible and where this was reported by the Administration.
The results of this review are summarized in annex III to the present report, which reflects that out of the 41 recommendations, 27 (66 per cent) were implemented, 13 (32 per cent) were under implementation and 1 (2 per cent) was not implemented by October 2004.
The Board recognizes that many of the Panel's recommendations were being advanced through several initiatives, sometimes outside of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and within different time frames.
In general, the Board noted that there was no overall project plan to coordinate the implementation of the recommendations of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations.
Consequently, there were also no indicators against which to formally measure the combined impact of implementing these recommendations on peacekeeping operations.
The Administration considered that the report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly (A/55/977) set forth the plan of the Organization for the implementation of the Brahimi recommendations and that since 2002, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations Programme Management Plan, business plans and results-based budgeting frameworks have been developed on the basis of the recommendations.
The Administration relied on the results-based budgeting process to measure detailed individual actions.
Accordingly, it was not possible for the Administration to make an overall conclusion on the impact of the recommendations on peacekeeping operations at this stage, although it did attempt to monitor and document the impact where possible, as reflected in the present report.
The Board recommends that the Administration consider developing a proper project plan to systematically document steps to be taken to implement the recommendations of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, which have not been fully implemented.
This should include clearly defined milestones and indicators to measure the desired impact, within an appropriate time frame, clearly allocating responsibilities and identifying estimated costs, with appropriate references to the results-based budgeting tools and performance reports, with a view to using this as a framework to report periodically on the progress and impact of implementing the Panel's recommendations.
Restructuring
One of the most significant consequences of the Panel's recommendations was the restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The proposed restructuring and the specific functions for which posts were requested were outlined in the budget requests of the Secretary-General (A/55/507/Add.1 and A/C.5/55/46/Add.1).
This resulted in 93 approved additional posts for the Department effective 1 January 2001.
A second request, which was based on a review of the way the United Nations plans, deploys, conducts and supports peacekeeping operations (see A/55/977), as well as an external capacity study of the Department, outlined a restructuring plan and the intended use of the human resources requested.
This request resulted in a further 91 additional posts for the Department effective 1 January 2002.
By 30 June 2004, 539 posts for the Department were funded from the support account; as of September 2004, 11 of these posts were vacant.
As indicated in table II.5, the level of the support account increased by 217 per cent over the last six years, in comparison with an increase of 76 per cent over the same period for total peacekeeping costs.
The support account represented approximately 4 per cent of total peacekeeping costs in 2004 versus 2 per cent in 2000.
Table II.5 Support account movements
(Thousands of United States dollars)
a Does not include amounts in respect of UNMISET, ONUB and MINUSTAH since UNMISET was in the process of downsizing and ONUB and MINUSTAH were started after the appropriation for the support account had already been approved.
The Office of Internal Oversight Services highlighted in its report (see A/58/704) that notwithstanding management reform measures taken, the Administration was still unable to identify, recruit and deploy suitable qualified civilian personnel in substantive and support functions either at the right time or in the numbers required.
An assessment of the impact of restructuring on the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was undertaken by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in the latter part of 2003 and was issued in March 2004.
The report stated that “the Department's strengthening is in midstream and it will need more time for its impact to be realized fully.
Nevertheless, … the reform is on the right track”.
More specifically, the Office of Internal Oversight Services noted that “additional staffing has allowed the Department to enhance its strategic, analytical and operational capacity and to improve its multifaceted support of field operations.
Cooperation with stakeholders has become more consistent and comprehensive” (see A/58/746, summary).
The report also highlighted the need for a further review of the Department's restructuring.
The Board considered the reports in A/58/704 and A/58/746 and, on the basis of its own assessment, concurs in general with these findings of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
To its credit, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has undertaken assessments of its performance and of the impact of a number of reform initiatives related to its support for peacekeeping operations through surveys conducted in 2002 and 2003.
The 2003 survey reported a 24 per cent improvement in overall guidance and support from the previous year.
Satisfaction with political and operational guidance was rated at 87 per cent, an increase from the 80 per cent reported in 2002.
An 83 per cent level of satisfaction was reported for resources and material support, representing an 18 percent increase from the baseline survey.
The results and recommendations from those surveys have contributed to the development of programme and area work plans.
The Department planned to continue conducting similar surveys on a biennial basis.
The Board commends the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for undertaking such self-assessments and encourages the Administration to continue undertaking surveys and to address the results thereof.
The structure of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has undergone significant reorganization since 2001, with the creation of new entities and the strengthening of existing structures.
The Board considers that change management is a critical element of this reorganization effort.
The Director of Change Management position was created in July 2002 to lead the management reform process of the Department and coordinate related cross-cutting initiatives, direct mid- to long-term planning for the Department and serve as the Department's Chief Information Officer.
The Department is of the view that the change management capacity has improved the articulation of its strategic direction and aligned its programme, area and individual work plans with that direction.
The Department reported that progress has been made in inter- and intra-departmental consultation, cooperation, coordination and integration, particularly with regard to planning, training and information management.
Consultation and coordination with Member States has improved in the same areas.
Areas for improvement
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations acknowledges that while change management has contributed to progress in its reform efforts in a number of areas, it has not been able to fulfil its mandate to some degree with regard to integration, leadership of all departmental change management projects, the institutionalization of lessons learned and best practices and delegation of authority.
The Department informed the Board that this was due to the lack of resources but that change management functions and structure were under review.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to consider measures to meet in full the change management objectives since the attainment of those objectives would have a far-reaching impact on peacekeeping operations.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations recognized that more progress was needed in the area of coordination and integration within the Department and with other partners.
It has begun to assess mechanisms for more effective integration with the humanitarian and development entities within the United Nations system.
It was also considering whether more internal restructuring is required for it to play its integrating role more effectively and to better achieve its other strategic and operational objectives.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations agreed with the Board's recommendation to formalize its coordination with other departments and entities in memorandums of understanding or service-level agreements.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations considers the timely recruitment of quality personnel in all categories to be one of its greatest challenges.
The Department recognized that it could improve its processes of identifying, selecting, and recruiting the range of specialists required for operations and planned to make this a priority in 2005/06.
Efforts were being made to improve the conditions of service so as to attract and retain quality personnel.
Another concern was that the rapid deployment target had been achieved by October 2004 for only one mission (UNMIL).
While the provision of capabilities such as qualified troops and police within the specified time frames depends largely on the political will and available capacities of Member States, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations planned to review the United Nations Standby Arrangements System and other resource-generation efforts and processes with a view to optimizing their effectiveness and efficiency.
It also planned to consider new approaches to fill the gaps in operational readiness for critical capabilities.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations recognized that another area for improvement was the development and updating of guidance, policies and standard operating procedures, the lack of which hindered the effective application of delegation of authority in field missions.
Similarly, it recognized the need to be more proactive and systematic in institutionalizing lessons learned from previous experiences.
Air operations
Following the issuance of the previous report of the Board of Auditors (A/58/5, vol. II), the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in its report on the United Nations peacekeeping operations, requested the Board to continue to monitor the progress made by the Department in the management of air operations (see A/58/759, para.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations had a fleet of 152 aircraft during the 2003/04 financial period, which comprised 117 rotary-wing and 35 fixed-wing aircraft.
The total air transportation budget amounted to approximately $350.2 million, of which actual expenditure of $288.4 million was incurred for the 2003/04 financial period.
Summary of conclusions on air operations
Air operations in peacekeeping missions significantly increased as a result of the four new complex missions that started up during the 2003/04 period.
This resulted in increased workload in the Headquarters Air Transport Section to provide the necessary support to all missions without a corresponding increase in staff.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that in order to fulfil its primary role of support for missions in air operations, the resources available in the Air Transport Section had to be realigned, to the detriment of other areas, as noted by the Board.
While recognizing the efforts made by the Administration and the circumstances that prevailed, the Board noted that:
(a) No specific database or programme was utilized to assist in the analysis of aviation activities;
(b) Transportation requirement reviews were last conducted in December 2002 at some of the missions;
(c) The 26,750 actual block flight hours utilized for significant missions were 16,497 hours (38 per cent) fewer than the 43,067 hours budgeted;
(d) The revised Air Operations Manual was yet to be finalized;
(e) On-the-job training completion forms were not submitted to the Department as required by the Air Operations Manual;
(f) Only one mission aviation assessment, at UNAMSIL, out of 14 peacekeeping operations was conducted during the 2003/04 period;
(g) MONUC was not utilizing an aircraft tracking system that had been acquired, notwithstanding the benefits of the system and the cost already incurred;
(h) Liability waiver forms were not always completed;
(i) Areas identified for improvement arising from supplier performance evaluations were not included in the comments from the missions;
(j) Missions were not required to substantiate performance ratings.
Planning of air operations
Establishment of requirements
The mission Chief Aviation Officers are responsible for preparing the missions' budget submissions for aviation requirements.
The United Nations Air Operation Manual, chapter 4 (May 1998 edition), provides missions with guidelines for budget submissions and budget estimates.
The latter are to include, inter alia, the following:
(a) Operating limitations (location of airfields);
(b) Mission situation (support for United Nations personnel, cargo movement requirements);
(c) Helicopter operations (aerial observation, reconnaissance, surveillance, etc.);
(d) Fixed-wing aircraft (liaison and logistical requirements).
There was no explicit requirement for missions to include in their budget submissions information as to whether alternative sources of transportation, including the relevant costs, were considered or whether any benchmarking was done to justify the air transport requirements, although a thorough analysis was made of such alternatives and is reviewed in detail.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations considers that the documentation on alternative forms of travel is not financial information and should not form part of the budget submissions.
However, the Department has improved the aviation budget template as an aid to the mission budget preparation process.
Aircraft utilization reports indicate the total passengers and cargo transported as well as the number of United Nations and non-United Nations persons transported aboard Department of Peacekeeping Operations aircraft.
There was no further analysis by Headquarters of aircraft utilization reports and statistical information in missions' submissions.
Also, no specific database or programme was utilized to assist in the analysis of aviation activities.
The Board recommends that the Administration strengthen its internal systems for the analysis of aviation activities.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the need for an integrated database covering the full spectrum of aviation activities was recognized but funding for a project aimed at establishing such a database was not approved and that the Logistics Support Division would continue to pursue funding for the project.
A transportation requirements review is useful for analysing air transport requirements.
Such reviews were last conducted in December 2002 at MONUC, UNAMSIL and UNMEE.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that it has not conducted additional reviews because of the immediate demands of starting four new missions.
Furthermore, these resource-intensive reviews are directed at missions that are heavily reliant on aviation facilities.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to review transportation requirements on a more regular basis, as appropriate.
Analysis of air operations
The Board conducted an analysis of some of the missions where air operations were considered significant (see table II.6).
For the missions selected, $59 million (17 per cent) of the appropriated funds of $342.3 million had not been spent as at 30 June 2004.
Unfortunately, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was unable to provide statistical information for MONUC and UNMIK, as reflected in the table below.
Of the $59 million that was unspent, 73 per cent ($43.3 million) related to UNMIL and UNAMSIL.
The Department reported that budgets were prepared on the basis of best available historical and future information, with provisions for contingencies, that variances would be inherent in the fluid and dynamic environment of peacekeeping and that it made concerted efforts to optimize air-asset usage and contribute to savings.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the reasons for these significant variances were due to savings made by UNAMSIL on the reduction in contract rates for certain replacement aircraft as well as for landing and ground handling fees.
For UNMIL, the start-up phase of the mission developed at a slower pace than forecast, resulting in a reduction in flight hours utilized.
Also, it was difficult for the Administration to identify air contractors willing to provide services during the start-up phase of UNMIL.
Following the issuance of the previous report of the Board of Auditors (A/58/5, vol. II), the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Procurement Division, after an examination of the commercial industry approach of block-hours costing structure, had endeavoured to move to a costing methodology that would result in the Department paying only for hours that were utilized.
The new cost structure was calculated on a base cost (the contractor's cost for providing aircraft and crews) and a flying-hour cost, which may vary depending on the number of hours expected to be flown.
Some contracts were still entered into on the block-hours basis of the commercial industry approach.
The 26,570 actual block flight hours utilized for significant missions were 16,497 hours (38 per cent) fewer than the 43,067 hours budgeted.
The 16,604 “extra flight hours” budgeted under the block-hour structure were 11,916 hours (72 per cent) more than the 4,688 actual flight hours.
A total of 9,882 hours had been flown by the various missions under the base costing structure, but as these hours had not been budgeted for under that structure, no further analysis could be undertaken.
This was due to the change in approach in the costing structure (block versus base) mentioned above, subsequent to the budget submission for the 2003/04 period, which explains to a certain extent the variances noted in respect of block flight hours, as the budgeted block flight hours were replaced with the base flight hours.
Table II.6
Air operations statisticsa
a Data confirmed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in December 2004.
b The Air Transport Section was unable to provide the Board with information for MONUC and UNMIK.
The Board recommends that the Administration continue its efforts to narrow the gap between the budgeted and actual flight hours utilized by missions.
The Administration informed the Board that it would continue to request missions to ensure that budget forecasts are related to historical and anticipated requirements and that a close monitoring of new missions would be undertaken within the resources available.
United Nations Air Operations Manual
The United Nations Air Operations Manual provides guidelines, information and practices for managing United Nations fixed-wing and rotary aircraft in accordance with International Civil Aviation Authority (ICAO) recommended standards and practices.
It also makes provision for air charter agreements and military letters of assist.
Paragraph 3 of the United Nations Air Operations Manual (May 1998 edition) states that the Manual will be reviewed annually, or more frequently when necessary.
The Board noted that a revised draft Air Operations Manual, although not finalized, had been made available to the missions to allow them to develop and align their standard operating procedures in terms of the Manual.
The Administration informed the Board that resource constraints as well as the increased workload resulting from the start-up activities of four new missions had delayed the finalization of the Manual but that it anticipated finalization by March 2005.
The Board recommends that the Administration expedite the finalization of the revised United Nations Air Operations Manual as a matter of priority.
Aviation training
The Air Operations Manual defines the aviation training programme as consisting of several areas.
This includes initial and refresher courses at Headquarters, on-the-job training provided by missions for aviation assistants and specialized aviation training covering accident investigations, flight operations management and dangerous goods (cargo) provided by accredited institutions and agencies.
The majority of missions prepared on-the-job training completion forms, but they were not submitted to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations as required by the Manual.
No specific measures were in place to ensure that all missions submit on-the-job training completion forms for aviation understudies that are required to undergo on-the-job training.
The Board could not determine the extent of submission of on-the-job training completion forms by October 2004.
The non-submission of the forms limits the Department's ability to analyse and monitor the adequacy of the on-the-job training provided.
The Board recommends that the Administration closely monitor and follow up all missions' completion and submission to Headquarters of on-the-job training completion forms, as required by the United Nations Air Operations Manual, within a prescribed time frame.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that due to the operational requirements for the establishment of the newly mandated missions, lower priority was given to the recording and assessing of on-the-job training.
The Department planned to undertake action for improvements in this area but noted that any action would be greatly dependent on the resources available.
Although the Manual prescribes on-the-job training for aviation assistants and aviation understudies, it was not clear which aviation staff members are regarded as assistants or understudies.
The responsibility for developing on-the-job training programmes rests with the missions.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations provides training programmes in New York and Brindisi to aviation officers who are then tasked with training their staff.
The Board is of the view that missions would benefit from guidance on developing mission-specific on-the-job training programmes.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to provide guidance to missions regarding on-the-job training programmes.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that, in conjunction with ICAO and the International Air Transport Association, it was developing a comprehensive curriculum for on-the-job training.
This project was expected to be completed by April 2005.
In response to the Board's previous concerns on aviation training, the Administration informed the Board that a new chapter on aviation training would be included in the draft revised Air Operations Manual and that a structured approach in the form of a database was being taken.
As of October 2004, the draft revised Air Operations Manual was still to be finalized and the database was in the development phase.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the development of the database to facilitate the monitoring of on-the-job training was delayed when resources had to be diverted to address the immediate requirements of establishing new peacekeeping operations but was planned to be launched in January 2005.
The Board recommends that the Administration expedite the development of the database to enable the proper monitoring and control of on-the-job aviation training.
The Board commends the Administration on the development of the 2004/05 training programme, which clearly indicates the intended participants in the specialized aviation courses and the associated costs, and also provides a brief description of the curriculum.
The Air Transport Section also sent to all missions information on the full range of training opportunities available to mission staff.
Managing air operations
Executive jets
Following the issuance of the previous report of the Board of Auditors (A/58/5, vol. II), the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions reiterated its request that missions using executive jets continue to keep under review the need for and cost-effectiveness of using such aircraft (see A/58/759, para.
The Committee also recommended that the Board continue monitoring this matter.
As of October 2004, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had five medium-range high-speed aircraft (executive jets), one each in UNMIL, UNMEE and UNOCI and two in MONUC.
The need for this type of aircraft is based mainly on considerations of time, particularly for medical and casualty evacuations and movement of senior personnel.
MONUC air operations included two eight-seat HS-125 medium-range high-speed aircraft (UNO 852 and UNO 853) at a cost of $1.1 million for the 2003/04 financial period.
The need for the two aircraft was justified by the Mission especially in conjunction with medical evacuations (the closest acceptable level 4 medical facilities are in Pretoria and Nairobi) and ongoing peace talks where high-level United Nations officials were playing an important role.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations estimated that an air ambulance operating from MONUC to Pretoria and Nairobi varies in cost from $25,000 to $40,000 per trip and that it would take approximately six to eight hours for the aircraft to reach the Mission area.
MONUC also operated 19 fixed-wing and 28 rotary-wing aircraft.
Table II.7 indicates the number of missions flown.
UNO 852 was utilized for casualty and medical evacuation and liaison purposes in 53 per cent of the flights undertaken and for other purposes in 47 per cent.
Similarly, UNO 853 was utilized for casualty and medical evacuation and liaison purposes in 46 per cent of the flights undertaken and for other purposes in 54 per cent.
Table II.7 Utilization of UNO 852 and UNO 853
The contracts for the medium-range high-speed aircraft were based on the base cost structure (contractor's cost for providing aircraft and crews plus flying cost per hour).
Table II.8 Contract cost structure per executive jet
Approximately 780 hours were utilized by both jets after the inception of the contracts in mid-October 2003, of which 383 hours and 397 hours were utilized by UNO 852 and UNO 853 respectively, at a reported total cost of $1,163,476 (based on average cost of expected hours).
This utilization represents approximately 60 per cent of expected hours for UNO 852 and UNO 853.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the functions of these aircraft, such as for medical and casualty evacuations, are emergency-related and can therefore not be scheduled.
There were several instances when both aircraft were simultaneously used to provide such support, and the Department commented that the flexibility of having the two aircraft was therefore operationally essential.
The Department was of the view that the use of the two aircraft better ensures a capacity to meet requirements, considering the increasing size of MONUC.
Furthermore, since ONUB did not have a high-speed aircraft, arrangements were being made for it to share MONUC assets when necessary.
With the revision of the MONUC mandate, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations expected that the Mission would undertake a general reassessment of its fleet to meet the new requirements, and it was highly probable that the need for at least two high-speed aircraft would be greater than at the time of the audit.
The arrival of 6,000 more combat troops and the forthcoming electoral process require more flights in support of the senior leadership of the Mission.
The distances covered between Kinshasa and the eastern part of the African continent justify the utilization of this type of aircraft, since there are no direct commercial flights between the capitals of the belligerent countries.
The Board recommended in its previous report that UNMEE assess the cost-effectiveness of utilizing an executive jet as compared with propeller aircraft and medical evacuation charter flights, and review the need for it (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
The reported cost for the executive jet in 2003/04 was $851,739 while its rate of days flown was only 31 per cent.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations assessed medical evacuation costs and noted that an air ambulance operating from Nairobi was available.
However, it required approximately six hours notice to depart and an additional 3.5 hours to arrive in Asmara, at a total cost of $17,200 per trip.
Air ambulance flights to Jeddah and Amman were estimated at $23,200 and $30,700, respectively, and the cost for an UNMEE executive jet to undertake the trips to Nairobi, Jeddah and Amman were estimated at $5,425, $1,935 and $4,627, respectively.
The executive jet was still under the block cost structure that guaranteed a minimum of 360 hours per year at a cost of $957,400 and an additional 360 hours per year.
The aircraft was utilized for casualty and medical evacuation purposes in 5 per cent (4) of the flights undertaken, while liaison represented 92 per cent (80) of the flights and flights for other purposes made up the balance of 3 per cent (3).
The four life-saving medical evacuation flights with the executive jet represent 7 per cent of the inter-mission medical evacuation flights, which UNMEE believes is a significant percentage.
For over two months in 2004, the jet normally used was out of order.
A similar aircraft temporarily replaced it, but did not fully comply with the contract's requirement to perform night flights.
The replacement aircraft was never used for transportation during that period.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to initiate appropriate action regarding non-compliance in terms of the night-flight contractual provisions.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that it had notified the Procurement Service of the need to assess contractors for failure to adhere to contractual obligations.
The Department has also instructed missions to report any such non-compliance with the provisions of aviation contracts for prompt action.
In UNMEE, where the night-flight incident occurred, the contractor has been penalized and corrective actions have been taken to prevent the recurrence of such a case.
On 1 September 2004, UNMEE reached a technical agreement with Ethiopia on the procedures to reopen the direct route between Asmara and Addis Ababa, which will reduce the flying time to two hours for propeller planes and to one hour for the medium-range executive jet.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations stated that the UNMEE requirement for medium-range aircraft would be reviewed when the direct route between Asmara and Addis Ababa was opened.
It also stated that the review would be within the context of the other factors that triggered the deployment of the aircraft, particularly medical and casualty evacuation and support for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and other senior officers in their national and international liaison activities with interlocutors and other stakeholders.
The Board reiterates its recommendation that MONUC and UNMEE document a cost-benefit analysis to contribute to the justification of the need for executive jets in their reassessment of aircraft fleet requirements.
The Administration informed the Board that the 2005/06 budget for UNMEE excludes provision for the executive jet, resulting from its review of the utilization of the UNMEE air fleet in response to the Board's previous recommendation.
Quality assurance programme
The Secretary General's report on the implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations stated, “An aviation quality assurance programme was established in early 2002 to assess the continued competence of the Department's air-transport operations according to international aviation standards and to monitor and evaluate the operational techniques and activities that are used to fulfil quality requirements” (A/57/711, para.
The aviation quality assurance programme included actions to ensure that the aviation operations of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations were well planned and executed in accordance with the Department's aviation standards international regulations and the operator's Civil Aviation Authority requirements.
The programme was the baseline against which air carrier's compliance was measured.
For the 2003/04 financial period, only one mission aviation assessment was conducted, at UNAMSIL, out of all peacekeeping operations.
In addition, out of the approximately 125 air carriers, only 11 (9 per cent) air carrier on-site visits were undertaken during the financial period under review.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that while quality assurance in respect of aviation standards and vendor prequalification were being undertaken, mission and vendor visits had not been fully carried out due to resource limitations.
The Air Transport Section, in conjunction with the World Food Programme, had initiated the coordination of on-site vendor inspection and prequalification visits on a selected basis.
The Air Transport Section developed a comprehensive mechanism for a quality assurance programme and planned to include routine inspections of missions' operations, including technical and compliance programmes, in accordance with the practice in organizations with large aircraft fleets.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to perform a risk assessment with a view to developing a plan to perform aviation assessments on a more regular basis.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations advised the Board that it would conduct aviation quality inspections and aviation assessments at missions to confirm that established standards are being complied with.
The Department would also develop and execute a plan for the regular conduct of aviation assessments.
Tracking system
The Air Transport Section had been cooperating with MONUC to implement an aircraft tracking system.
Trials had already begun in 2003 on such a system that was pre-installed on one of the Boeing 727 aircraft.
According to the Section, the results were positive, but no formal reports could be furnished.
A number of potential benefits of the system were reported by the Section, such as:
(a) Recording of aircraft activity by time, which can be utilized for verifying hours on carrier invoices;
(b) Recording of aircraft tracking, useful for knowledge of aircraft location or verifying border infringements;
(c) Provision of real-time knowledge of aircraft location for safety and management purposes;
(d) Reducing the number of personnel currently required to make continual radio contact with aircraft, making it possible to reduce the cost of manpower;
(e) Enhancing safety since aircraft location is known even if radio contact is lost;
(f) The ability to monitor aircraft via the Internet in any location, including Headquarters, which enhances the management of aircraft on loan to other missions, global operations and out-of-area flights for senior personnel.
It was a standard requirement of the aircraft charter agreements in 2004 to have this tracking system installed in all aircraft at MONUC.
The cost of the system could not be quantified, as it was incorporated in the contract price.
However, the tracking system was not being utilized by October 2004, notwithstanding the cost already incurred in this regard.
The reasons for not utilizing the system could not be provided.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations sent a request to MONUC in March 2004 for an update on the status of implementation of the tracking system, as it was also considering introducing the system at other peacekeeping missions with large aircraft fleets.
By October 2004, the mission had provided no response.
The Board recommends that the Administration expedite the implementation of the aircraft tracking system at MONUC and assess the feasibility of implementing it at other missions.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that the tracking system was expected to be commissioned in January 2005.
The feasibility of introducing the system in other missions was dependent on the results of the MONUC evaluation.
Liability waiver forms
Although the Board noted a general improvement, there were instances where liability waiver forms were not always completed at the missions.
In some instances, the forms could not be presented for audit.
Therefore, the Board remains concerned regarding the risk that the Organization could be liable for possible claims at certain missions due to the non-completion of the liability waiver forms.
The Board reiterates its previous recommendation that the Administration take immediate steps to ensure that all missions complete and retain liability waiver forms and hold administrative heads of missions accountable for inadequate control in this regard.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that appropriate action had been taken by requesting movement control staff to ensure that passengers who do not have a valid United Nations identity card and/or a completed and signed liability waiver form are not allowed to board aircraft.
The Department also emphasized the critical importance of stringently adhering to these rules to the missions' administrative heads.
Monitoring air operations
Aviation performance reports
The objective of aviation performance reports is to reflect an independent assessment of the air carriers' technical, operational and flight safety “posture” during the tenure of a contract in the field mission.
These reports form an integral part of the aviation quality assurance programme and also aid the Air Transport Section in determining whether air operations are conducted in accordance with the common Aviation Standards for Peacekeeping and Humanitarian Air Transport and in line with the regulations of ICAO, the United Nations Air Operations Manual and an air carrier's local Civil Aviation Authority.
A performance report also confirms that an air carrier is adhering to the provisions of the contract.
The air operator's performance evaluations cover six areas: aircraft; manager; aircrew; mission and operation performances; maintenance; and aviation safety.
The contractor's performance is rated as outstanding, very good, satisfactory or unsatisfactory.
The evaluations provide a column for comments of the mission and of the chief air operations officer.
The performance evaluations were carried out by aviation operations sections and submitted to Headquarters.
The Board reviewed three air operators' long-term charter aircraft performance evaluations and noted the following:
(a) The performance evaluations were compiled per contractor, grouping all aircraft provided by a particular contractor.
The only reference made to separate aircraft was in the cover sheet that indicated the aircrafts' United Nations call signs and registration numbers.
However, the performance evaluation must consider aspects that are specific to aircraft and aircrew, such as aircraft registration, aircrew certificates and licences, reporting actions and safety requirements in flight;
(b) Whereas the guidelines indicated that a satisfactory rating meant that the performance of the contractor fell within acceptable norms, this could also mean that the performance could be improved.
However, areas for improvement were not included in the comments from the missions.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to provide guidance to missions to ensure specificity and consistency in the ratings of contractor performance as well as to require missions to clearly indicate areas for improvement in performance where appropriate or necessary.
Aviation trend identification and analysis practices normally consider one event as an isolated incident, while two similar events may mean the start of a trend.
Trends could be positive and contribute to the aviation programme or negative and impair it.
Both positive and negative trends should be identified and analysed.
Although a satisfactory performance rating could require a trend analysis to be conducted over the contract period to ensure timely corrective action, this was not possible since missions were not required to substantiate performance ratings.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to require missions to substantiate ratings indicated in performance reports.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the Air Transport Section had initiated a review of the performance report format with the intention to improve the process.
Strategic deployment stocks
Summary of conclusions on strategic deployment stocks
The Board of Auditors previously reported on the progress made by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the implementation of strategic deployment stocks (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, paras.
Although progress had been made, improvement was required in areas such as:
(a) The collection of outstanding assessed contributions of $13.6 million;
(b) The implementation of the strategic deployment stock accounting guidelines;
(c) The reconciliation of transactions recorded in Galileo with the entries captured in IMIS;
(d) Centrally monitoring and accounting for stock replenishments and issuances;
(e) Finalizing the establishment of written agreements and standard procedures to guide the transfer of strategic deployment stocks to non-peacekeeping entities;
(f) Policies and procedures with regard to the rotation and replenishment of strategic deployment stocks;
(g) Acknowledgement of receipt of strategic deployment stocks amounting to $7.4 million that had already been shipped to missions.
Financial overview
Total accumulated expenditure of $141.5 million was incurred for strategic deployment stocks as at 30 June 2004, as detailed in table II.9.
During the 2003/04 financial period, strategic deployment stocks amounting to $80.9 million were issued, of which $58.9 million (73 per cent) had been replenished by 30 June 2004.
Approximately $40.9 million in stocks were issued to UNMIL, $34.3 million to other new missions, $1.2 million to older missions and $4.5 million to non- peacekeeping missions.
Table II.9 Breakdown of strategic deployment stock expenditure
(Thousands of United States dollars)
a Included in the total is approximately $4.1 million for the development cost of the Galileo system.
Unliquidated obligations
Unliquidated obligations for strategic deployment stocks amounted to $20.8 million as at 30 June 2004, representing 40 per cent of the total expenditure for the 2003-2004 period for these stocks.
This was due mainly to the following reasons: the redeployment and realignment of funds within strategic deployment stocks, which took place in June 2004; the Communications and Information Technology Service had various contracts that were two years in length, and disbursements on these contracts were made as services were rendered over the term of the contracts, and a complex medical supplies contract that was signed in May 2004 resulting in the late obligation of funds.
This level of unliquidated obligations was reduced to $14.7 million by early October 2004.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that it intended to expend the full amount during the 12-month period ending 30 June 2005 and that the unliquidated obligations had been reduced to $12.5 million as at 10 December 2004.
Outstanding assessed contributions
The Board previously reported that Member States' contributions for strategic deployment stocks amounting to $13.6 million were outstanding as at October 2003 (ibid., vol. II, chap.
II, para.
The same amount of $13.6 million was still outstanding a year later, although the Administration had sent reminder letters.
Of this amount, $13.5 million (99 per cent) related to one Member State's special assessed contribution.
The Administration sent a comprehensive reminder, which covered strategic deployment stock assessments outstanding, in October 2004.
The Board encourages the Administration to continue to follow up on the outstanding contributions.
Timely replenishment of new missions
The Board recommended in its previous report that the Administration consider the timely funding and replenishment of strategic deployment stock reserves to newly established missions (ibid., para.
Strategic deployment stocks accounting guidelines were issued in August 2004 by the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts, clearly defining the funding and replenishment procedures for stocks issued to new missions, already established missions, political missions and the missions funded from the regular budget.
However, these guidelines had not yet been implemented by October 2004.
The Board considers the implementation of the guidelines to be important for ensuring the proper accounting for the stock movements.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to implement the strategic deployment stocks accounting guidelines without any undue delay.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the issuance of strategic deployment stocks to two missions for the period from 1 July 2004 to 15 December 2004 was in the process of being recorded in accordance with the accounting guidelines.
The strategic deployment stocks mock exercise meetings held in November 2004 identified procedural developments that would be incorporated in the strategic deployment stocks accounting guidelines.
The Administration would ensure full compliance with the guidelines.
Recording of strategic deployment stocks
The Board previously reported that stock issuances were not recorded in IMIS at the time of transfer to enable the Peacekeeping Accounts Section to raise the related accounts receivable (ibid., para.
The Board noted the following shortcomings:
(a) A manual compilation, of every item shipped and replenished was performed on a spreadsheet.
This spreadsheet was inconsistent, as each cost centre within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations utilized different reporting methods;
(b) The Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts had to further reconcile items received by these cost centres to rectify errors; reconciliations involved the identification of missing purchase orders, duplicate purchase orders and purchase orders that related to prior-year items;
(c) In certain instances, while the material requisition orders had been included in the spreadsheets, the goods had not actually been shipped.
The Administration subsequently reported that the Peacekeeping Accounts Section liaised with the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi to ensure that only when goods had been shipped were material requisition orders included in the replenishment transactions for strategic deployment stocks as at 30 June 2004;
(d) There was no reconciliation of transactions recorded in Galileo with the entries captured in IMIS.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that this was because the limitations of the Galileo system made it unable to facilitate integration with IMIS, and therefore such reconciliations were not possible.
The Board recommends that the Administration find solutions to ensure the accuracy and completeness of all records of strategic deployment stocks shipped and the related income and expenditure transactions.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that it was working on a reporting structure that would relate object and class code information to the values of items shipped and track them against the planned replenishment values.
These would be later updated to actual replenishment value in the threshold check.
The adoption of revised documentation for “BLB allotment” requests and the exclusive use of “BLB allotment mechanism” for strategic deployment stocks deployment would address the accountability issues previously related to the interoperability of Galileo and IMIS.
Issuance of strategic deployment stocks
Total strategic deployment stocks issued to missions amounted to $95.1 million as at 31 August 2004, of which 79 per cent ($75.2 million) related to issuances to the four new peacekeeping missions (UNMIL, UNOCI, MINUSTAH and ONUB).
Strategic deployment stocks purchased and received by the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi as replenishment amounted to only $14.9 million, since certain stocks were delivered directly by the vendors to the new missions in order to shorten the lead time between the request and receipt of the stock items.
The Board noted that the replenishment of strategic deployment stocks made directly by vendors to the new missions was not centrally monitored by the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi.
Different schedules were maintained by the various commodity managers in order to monitor the replenishment of strategic deployment stocks, which had to be reconciled at the end of the financial period by the Accounts Division.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that accounting for re-routed items would be one of the issues to be discussed during the planned mock exercise on the accounting guidelines.
The Board recommends that the Administration centrally monitor and account for the replenishment and issuance of all strategic deployment stocks.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that it was cognizant of the advantages of centrally monitoring and accounting for the replenishment and issuance of all strategic deployment stocks.
The self-accounting units at Headquarters reported to either the Chief of the Specialist Support Service or the Chief of the Communications and Information Technology Service.
The processes developed for strategic deployment stocks readiness reporting, material resource planning and “BLB allotment” requests were adequate to provide for the required functions of monitoring and accounting for strategic deployment stocks.
Agreements with non-peacekeeping missions
The Board recommended in its previous report that written agreements be established for all future stock transfers stipulating payment arrangements, including the process to be followed when there are significant differences between replacement values and actual costs, for all future issues of strategic deployment stocks to non-peacekeeping missions and other United Nations agencies (ibid., para. 91 (e)).
By October 2004, the Administration was still in the process of finalizing a technical agreement with the World Food Programme to govern strategic deployment stock issues to non-peacekeeping entities.
The Office of Legal Affairs was reviewing the model agreement.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations planned to develop standard procedures regarding such transfers on completion of the model technical agreement.
The Board recommends that the Administration expedite the establishment of written agreements and standard procedures to guide the transfer of strategic deployment stocks to non-peacekeeping entities as a matter of priority.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations advised the Board that it had finalized work on the model agreement, which would serve as the basis for the transfer of strategic deployment stocks to non-peacekeeping entities.
The model agreement has been forwarded to the Office of Legal Affairs for review.
Policies and procedures
The Board had recommended in its previous report that the Administration promulgate policies and procedures regarding the rotation of strategic deployment stocks and include in its procedures steps to be taken to expedite the replenishment of strategic deployment stocks that have reached minimum levels (ibid., para.
By October 2004, policies and procedures had been drafted but not yet finalized.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations planned to discuss these policies at the next strategic deployment stocks Steering Group meeting, after which the policies would be submitted for approval.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to expedite the promulgation and implementation of its strategic deployment stocks policies and procedures as a matter of priority.
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
The United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi has adopted the practice of sealing containers for the storage of strategic deployment stocks to prevent unauthorized access and thereby minimize the risk of losses.
However, not all the containers utilized for the storage of strategic deployment stocks were sealed in accordance with the adopted practice.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation that the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi ensure that the containers holding strategic deployment stocks be properly sealed to prevent tampering and unauthorized access and minimize the risk of potential losses.
The Administration informed the Board that containers have since been sealed in accordance with adopted practices.
In 18 per cent of the stock items tested at the engineering storage facility, the physical descriptions and coding on the items differed from the item descriptions and coding recorded on the Galileo inventory management system.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation that the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi ensure that physical inventory descriptions and coding are consistent with the Galileo records to facilitate the ease of use and monitoring of the strategic deployment stocks.
The Administration informed the Board that a data-cleansing project was in progress in order to ensure the integrity of inventory data and coding.
Strategic deployment stocks shipped pending acknowledgement of receipt
Strategic deployment stocks amounting to $7.4 million shipped to UNOCI, UNFICYP, UNMEE and UNMIL were pending acknowledgement of receipt from those missions; the delays for items amounting to $103,689 had exceeded 90 days by October 2004.
The United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi subsequently received acknowledgements in respect of 21 items from UNOCI and UNFICYP and requested acknowledgement of receipt from UNMIL and UNMEE for the remaining items.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation that the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, in conjunction with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, follow up on and obtain acknowledgement of receipt of items shipped to missions and monitor the shipment of stocks to ensure timely acknowledgement of receipt.
Strategic deployment stocks received pending inspection and recording
Not all strategic deployment stocks shipped to and received by UNMIL were recorded on its inventory management system; 88 items could not be located.
UNMIL informed the Board that due to a shortage of staff members to receive, inspect and record all items of non-expendable equipment received during the start-up phase of the Mission, those items were made available to the contingents to utilize and could be administratively received and inspected only when they were located.
The Property Control and Inventory Unit was in the process of locating the items through continuous inventory counts and verifications.
UNMIL agreed with the Board's recommendation to locate immediately all items of non-expendable equipment and account for them accordingly on the inventory system.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that UNMIL had subsequently confirmed the receipt of all 88 items and updated the Galileo system accordingly and that the Mission had improved the process of equipment inspection and updating on the Galileo system.
The Board noted that in accordance with the draft strategic deployment stocks support policy, the strategic deployment stocks Steering Group may identify areas of support in the deployment of stocks to new missions, which may require temporary deployments of staff.
The support areas may include handling, receipt and inspection and general field deployment support.
Since this policy was yet to be finalized, the envisaged benefits could not be realized.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations anticipated that the policy would be completed during the first quarter of 2005.
The Board recommends that the Administration expedite the finalization and implementation of the draft strategic deployment stocks support policy.
Rations
The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions recommended in its report that the Board of Auditors look into the issue of the management of rations in peacekeeping operations as a whole (see A/58/759/Add.10, para.
Summary of conclusions on rations management
While recognizing that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has implemented a number of measures to improve rations provision, management and accountability, the Board noted that:
(a) A formal rations management manual was still in the process of being finalized;
(b) The Department did not perform detailed reviews of standard operating procedures governing rations management and administration;
(c) The Supply Section was not involved in the registration of prospective rations vendors prior to the bidding process to ensure that only vendors with relevant experience in the provision of such services are invited to submit proposals during the bidding process;
(d) Performance standards and performance indicators were not rolled out to all missions;
(e) UNMIL experienced difficulties with the rations contractor's service delivery;
(f) There was no continuous cooperation among the missions and Headquarters relating to lessons learned and common areas of concern that could be beneficial to all;
(g) Information pertaining to the value and quantities of rations written off were not maintained at Headquarters; therefore, overall monitoring of rations written off was not performed;
(h) Quality assurance programmes prepared by missions were not submitted to the Logistics Support Division for review to ensure that the missions had adequate processes in place to enable the continuous and consistent monitoring of the contractors in relation to the terms of the contract.
The Board coordinated its efforts with the Office of Internal Oversight Services, since the Peacekeeping Section of the Internal Audit Division reviewed rations management at various peacekeeping missions.
In order to avoid a duplication of use of resources at the mission level, the Board followed up on the recommendations made in the final reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services issued to the missions by October 2004.
The United Nations sustains its military contingents in peacekeeping field missions with fresh, frozen, chilled, dried, canned and composite types of rations (ration packs) for the duration of their assignment.
To provide for satisfactory selection of provisions, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had developed a “wholesome and dietetically balanced rations scale” of more than 400 food items.
The scale consists of a broad and culturally responsive range of foods that provides for sufficient flexibility in the selection of items to accommodate national, seasonal or climatic requirements.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations had nine rations contracts in place, amounting to approximately $329.6 million, in respect of nine missions with an aggregate authorized troop strength of 61,257 and an actual troop strength of 51,351 by September 2004.
Eight of those contracts were awarded to two contractors.
The contracts covered different periods, almost all of them ending in 2006 or 2007.
Rations Management Manual
The provisional Rations Management Manual came into effect on 1 July 2004, although it had been in use by various missions for approximately 13 months.
The Manual gives basic guidelines for providing rations for peacekeeping troops in field missions.
It primarily addresses management issues in the context of turnkey rations contracts as well as established missions that operate central warehousing and onward distribution by United Nations means.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to expedite the finalization of the Rations Management Manual and incorporate therein lessons learned at the various peacekeeping missions.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the Manual was designed to be a living document and as such would be subject to regular review, at which point lessons learned would be incorporated into the document.
The provisional nature results from review procedure processes external to the Department prior to the final adoption of the Manual.
The finalization would require the concurrence of the Office of Legal Affairs and the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts.
Dialogue was ongoing with these stakeholders to obtain their agreement.
Under the terms of the provisional Rations Management Manual, missions are required to develop standard operating procedures that govern rations management and administration at the contingent level.
The Board noted that the Supply Section of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations did not perform a detailed review of the standard operating procedures that were received from the missions.
A review of standard operating procedures would allow potential weaknesses and inconsistencies to be identified and facilitate timely corrective action.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to review in detail the rations management standard operating procedures of missions to ensure that they are in line with the Rations Management Manual.
Evaluation of bids
The Supply Section was not involved in the registration of prospective rations vendors prior to the bidding process.
However, during the evaluation of bids, the Supply Section had, on the basis of its own predetermined criteria, carried out a technical assessment of the contractors.
The scoring of proposals was based on the evaluation criteria provided by the Supply Section to the Procurement Service prior to the closing of the request for proposal.
The technical evaluation of rations proposals for UNOB performed by the Supply Section noted that proposals from two of the five companies were rejected for technical reasons, such as “no experience in providing ration services including logistics to troops in hardship locations” and “global company with experience in catering, hotel services”.
Also, the matrix utilized to assess the contractors did not include the contractors' technical compliance history with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The Procurement Service considered that it would be beneficial to have a more thorough technical evaluation of the capabilities of potential rations suppliers at the time of a vendor's registration.
However, the Department considers that the technical clearance of a prospective vendor involves a more thorough technical evaluation requiring specialized expertise.
Performance evaluations
Performance meetings between a rations contractor and a mission serve as a forum in which any problems relating to contractual issues and service delivery can be identified.
The minutes of these meetings serve as a record of any unsatisfactory performance of the contractor and as evidence of the corrective action to be taken.
The Rations Management Manual requires that these minutes be submitted to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations Logistics Support Division.
However, the Logistics Support Division did not maintain an accurate record of minutes received or outstanding from the missions and therefore could not monitor the extent to which such meetings were conducted on a regular basis.
The Board recommends that the Administration monitor missions' compilation, submission and retention of accurate minutes of meetings.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that contractor performance meetings were subsequently conducted on a regular basis in missions.
The minutes of these meetings were forwarded to Headquarters for review and necessary action as appropriate.
As at 15 December 2004, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had received eight of the nine minutes required for November 2004.
The performance of contractors was also assessed on a continual basis in the form of quarterly performance evaluation reports, which was also an indication of contractual compliance and contractor services.
The performance reports require positive and negative identification (yes/no responses) from missions in assessing the performance of the contractor, as well as an assessment on a scale of 1 to 5 of the contractor's technical, cost and management performance.
In an effort to address the lack of information contained in these reports, the Logistics Support Division developed a range of standards and indicators against which the contractors' performance would be measured.
These standards included timely delivery, conformity with orders and quality of products.
Key performance indicators were applied to evaluate the contractor.
The Board noted that the performance standards and indicators mentioned above had been rolled out to only six missions by October 2004.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that it was reviewing these standards and indicators to determine their continued relevance and effectiveness in the evolution of a more performance-based contract model.
The Procurement Service noted that the standards and indicators would improve the vendor management process.
The Department subsequently reported that performance-based criteria were being used in eight large missions by the end of 2004, covering rations contracts delivering services to more than 49,000 troops in the field, representing more than 80 per cent of total troops deployed.
The Board recommends that the Administration refine and roll out the performance standards and indicators for rations vendor evaluations to all missions.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that it had subsequently developed and rolled out performance standards to all new missions and existing missions where rations contracts re-bid exercises had occurred recently.
This initiative was part of an ongoing programme of introducing a robust quality assurance programme in the management of rations.
The implementation of performance standards in other missions would be carried out during the re-bid of their rations contracts.
The performance report on the rations contract between UNMIL and the service provider, dated 26 January 2004, reflects significant problems with the contractor, such as “slow mobilization of the service provider's Monrovia warehouse, lack of qualified staff, lack of specialized personnel and software resulted in a poor start to the warehouse.” The Procurement Service noted that the management of performance-based contracts required strengthening in peacekeeping missions.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the initial performance failures of the rations contractor were being pursued vigorously.
The services of an independent inspection agency were engaged to confirm that the contractor had fully complied with the performance measurements in the contract.
UNMIL was requested to schedule a follow-up inspection to confirm the sustainability of the contractor's remedial action programme.
The Board recommends that the Administration implement adequate measures to prevent the recurrence of problems identified with regard to vendor performance failures.
The Procurement Service informed the Board that it intended to develop a training programme for performance-based contracting in 2005 to strengthen the skills of staff at both Headquarters and in the missions.
Also, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that it had put a mechanism in place for a short-term bridging contract while the long-term contract was being processed.
Furthermore, the Department has developed a modified rations plan that allows the rations contractor to fully mobilize warehouse and distribution facilities in the mission areas without direct access to seaports of entry.
As a further safeguard, missions and the rations contractors are required to maintain a minimum of 14 days' rations based on a mission's critical rations scale.
Monitoring of rations
The UNOCI rations contract for the period June 2004 to 4 June 2006 refers to “Haiti import regulations”, which shows a lack of attention to the processing of a previous model.
The contract authorizes the United Nations to demand compensation from the contractor in case of failure to perform its obligations, but there is no agreed price reduction scale linked to the performance score, which could mathematically determine the compensations to be claimed for insufficient performance.
The score should not be less than 95 on a scale of 100, but did not exceed 84.47 for the first period, due to poor timeliness of deliveries and submission of documentation.
The contractor's warehouse is located in the Abidjan port.
The two UNOCI staff members permanently assigned to the premises had no means of communication (telephone or e-mail) at the time of the Board's visit, although 170 GSM phones were in stock.
From 25 August to 11 September 2004, the average temperature of frozen and chilled food was not compliant with the requirements.
The monitoring and maintenance of temperature records for storage facilities are facilitated by built-in recorders, but the recording paper was not renewed in a timely manner despite the on-site staffing.
The contractor did not produce archived records.
The packaging of dry and fresh food ready for delivery was inadequate, leading to the risk of its being unfit for consumption following transportation.
The Logistics Support Division performed an inspection during June 2004 on rations at UNMISET.
It reported that UNMISET had established an electronic control system for requisitions and invoice documentation.
UNMISET indicated that this system had enhanced and streamlined the process of requisitioning and invoicing.
The Logistics Support Division indicated that no prior notification had been given by UNMISET regarding the implementation of the electronic control system, and the Board noted that the adequacy of the system had not been evaluated in terms of proper rations management.
Similar systems had been implemented at UNMEE and MONUC to enhance their rations management.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that it was concerned that these tools may not address all systemic issues.
The Logistics Support Division was in the process of establishing and collecting user requirements to develop a more comprehensive system.
The fact that different systems have been developed by two missions to improve the monitoring of rations is indicative that there was no continuous cooperation among the missions and Headquarters relating to lessons learned and common areas of concern in this respect.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to ensure that missions inform Headquarters of all initiatives undertaken with a view to harmonizing processes for monitoring rations that could be applied systematically across all peacekeeping operations.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that it had embarked on an initiative that would harmonize processes and procedures across all missions.
In this regard, the Department has issued guidelines advising all missions to consult with Headquarters on critical issues relating to rations management.
The Department has introduced a standardized performance measure and will implement an electronic rations control system that will minimize disparities among missions in critical rations management areas.
Furthermore, the Department conducts annual workshops for rations officers in peacekeeping missions, which provide a forum for the exchange of best practices.
Inventory control techniques and principles require reconciliations between the physical stock on hand and the quantities recorded in the stock records.
These reconciliations would also facilitate determining the value, quantity and type of items that should be written off owing to spoilage, obsolescence or pilferage.
This information could assist Headquarters in developing trend analyses concerning missions holding uneconomical inventory levels.
The Board noted, however, that information pertaining to the value and quantities of rations written off were not maintained at Headquarters and that therefore overall monitoring of rations written off was not performed.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to maintain proper and complete records of all rations written off to facilitate the monitoring of obsolete and excessive rations as well as spoilage levels in order to utilize this information to identify problem areas where corrective actions should be taken.
Quality assurance programme
The Rations Management Manual stipulates that it is the responsibility of the designated official for rations management to conduct quality assurance to confirm compliance.
The guideline states that one of the responsibilities of the Staff Officer for Food is to assist in the design and implementation of quality assurance programmes to verify compliance by the contractor with rations specifications, hygienic standards and delivery programmes.
The Logistics Support Division informed the Board that a quality assurance programme includes, inter alia, the following processes: contingent food meetings, hygiene inspections, troop feedback, performance meetings, contractor performance evaluations (performance indicators) and contractor warehouse inspections.
The missions were responsible for implementing quality assurance programmes.
However, the Board noted that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations did not monitor the implementation of the programmes.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to implement mechanisms to monitor and ensure the implementation of adequate quality assurance programmes at missions.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that initial steps had been taken in developing a basis for a quality assurance programme and that it would disseminate the materials developed to all field missions and monitor the implementation of quality assurance programmes.
An independent inspection and evaluation of the rations contractor was conducted at UNMIL based on the International Organization for Standardization 9001 standards.
This contractor held five (56 per cent) of the nine contracts that were in place at peacekeeping operations as at September 2004.
The August 2004 report of the independent reviewer indicated that the rations service provider needed to put in place a real quality management system taking into account the “hazard analysis control critical point” process and other professional hygiene requirements for its warehouse and transport activities.
A quality management programme was one of the technical evaluation criteria against which all rations proposals were evaluated during the pre-contract award phase.
The proposal of the selected vendor was incorporated into the final contract and was binding on the vendor.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation that missions monitor and evaluate rations contractors' quality management systems to ensure that food quality and hygienic conditions are in accordance with acceptable standards.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations advised the Board that monitoring rations contractors' quality management systems was being made an integral component of the quality assurance programme in missions.
Office of Internal Oversight Services review of rations
The Office of Internal Oversight Services reviewed rations management at six missions (MONUC, UNMISET, UNAMSIL, UNMEE, UNMIL and UNMIK).
By October 2004, the Office had issued its final reports to two missions (MONUC and UNMISET) and a further three were in draft form (UNAMSIL, UNMEE and UNMIL).
At UNMISET, the Office of Internal Oversight Services reported several discrepancies in the contractor's monthly returns, which reflected the total quantities of items received, issued and held in stock.
UNMISET informed the Office that a system was already in place under which it retains a copy of the import documents.
However, the system was not operative during the period September 2003 to May 2004, due to extended staff absences.
The system was reactivated in May 2004, as evidenced by the rations cell records.
At MONUC, the Office of Internal Oversight Services reported that the combat rations stocks held by most contingents during the period 6 to 12 October 2003 were below the 14-day requirement of MONUC standard operating procedures.
The Office also observed that the combat rations stocks at Kinshasa were inadequate due to poor planning by the food cell.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that the situation was a result of having prioritized deliveries to UNMIL at that time and confirmed that the replenishment of stocks of combat rations is now in compliance with the 14-day requirement.
The Board was pleased to note that MONUC had taken steps to implement the internal audit recommendations, although noting that some recommendations remained outstanding by August 2004.
The Board is of the view that the implementation of internal audit recommendations would contribute to better control and increased efficiency.
This was especially important in view of the increase in the troop strength and operations of MONUC.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that reminders would be sent to all missions on the importance of ensuring the implementation of OIOS recommendations and that it would monitor the missions' compliance through the required reports submitted to Headquarters.
Procurement and contract management
Summary of conclusions on procurement and contract management
In addition to the previous sections of the present report related to rations contracts, the Board continued to focus on other procurement and contract management aspects.
In summary, the Board noted that:
(a) Guidelines for the implementation of the essential ethical principles for United Nations staff working in the procurement process were still to be finalized and promulgated;
(b) A code of conduct for suppliers to the United Nations had only recently been drafted and circulated for comments;
(c) Not all the peacekeeping missions formally identified training needs or developed training plans for procurement officers;
(d) Not all missions submitted procurement plans to Headquarters in a timely manner;
(e) Some of the mission procurement plans submitted were incomplete;
(f) None of the peacekeeping missions revisited procurement plans on the prescribed quarterly basis;
(g) Some missions operated without any reference to their procurement plans;
(h) Prospective vendors were registered on the computer database without being prequalified in accordance with the requirements of the Procurement Manual;
(i) Although various measures had been taken to improve lead times, the average procurement lead times were still lengthy at some missions, ranging from six to eight months;
(j) Supplier evaluations were not available for 88 per cent of contracts selected.
Cost-effectiveness
The Board considered procurement actions at some missions to determine if transactions were efficient and economical.
Some of the Board's findings are set out below.
The Board had previously noted that UNMEE paid, for Addis Ababa services, corporate and sales taxes from which it was exempted.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations had indicated that the contract would be reviewed, but it was not.
Taxes still represented 55 per cent of the invoice amount for 2003/04.
UNMEE accepted the vendor's cancellation of references to taxes in amendment 2 to contract UNMEE/CON/196/02, effective 1 August 2003, but the cost per employee per month would remain the same, at $350.
The vendor still alleged that the taxes mentioned were its own obligations to the Government for the income received from UNMEE, but the invoices and UNMEE tax claims clearly documented them as taxes from which UNMEE is exempted — a 55 per cent difference on a yearly expenditure of $117,600.
The contract was furthermore renewed for one year without competitive bidding.
UNMEE and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations have agreed again to enforce the Board's recommendation and to resort to competitive bidding.
By comparison with the monthly rate of $350, another United Nations agency paid $219 per employee for similar Addis Ababa security services.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to promote throughout the United Nations system inter-agency local benchmarking and, where appropriate, joint sourcing for the procurement of basic services and goods.
The Procurement Service advised the Board that it had made available all its systems contracts for goods and services provided to the other agencies with a view to creating opportunities for cost savings through reduced administrative duplication and economies of scale.
Following the Board's previous audit, UNMEE undertook an Addis Ababa site security assessment and plan.
However, related equipment requested in March 2004 was still not delivered or even ordered by September 2004.
Basic fire escape standards were yet to be complied with.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations concurred “that UNMEE should expedite action on the procurement of equipment to strengthen its security system.
The Mission management would review the status of procurement actions on a monthly basis and follow up with vendors to ensure the timely delivery of ordered goods and services.
Meanwhile, the Mission has ordered additional items to enhance the security of the Addis Ababa headquarters”.
The Department reported that as of November 2004, the fire escapes were declared operational and that security equipment was either installed or received and awaiting installation.
UNMIK decided in 2001, in order to improve efficiency and reduce costs, to consolidate all United Nations functions in the regions into United Nations regional compounds (United Nations logistical bases).
UNMIK pre-positioned assets such as containers by the end of 2003.
However, by September 2004, UNMIK had not fully vacated the former buildings.
Twelve staff members remained in the Peja building (with over 100 square metres of office space for each of them), 14 in Gjilane (25 square metres) and about 26 in Prizren (almost 100 square metres).
The cost of maintaining these 52 staff members in the old buildings amounted to $53,849 per month.
The net savings that would be achieved by transferring the 52 staff members were estimated by UNMIK at nearly $42,966 per month.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that, following the Board's audit, the movement of all staff members out of the three buildings was completed on 15 November 2004.
On 13 April 2004, UNMEE issued a circular stating, “The approved funds of the Mission for official travel have been grossly exceeded.
… Initial stay in five-star hotels in the mission … for new arrivals for the purpose of availing higher MSA rate is no longer an entitlement, as reasonable class hotels abound in both capitals of the Mission.” The aim of that decision was to enforce administrative instruction ST/AI/1998/3 on the system for daily allowance, which in section 1.4 set the condition that “the special rates established by ICSC for specified hotels … shall be payable subject to the following conditions: (a) Certification by a senior official that good commercial hotels were not available”.
It has not been fully complied with: certifying officers have authorized stays at the most expensive hotel in Addis Ababa, while rooms were available in a similar but less expensive hotel nearby.
The additional cost of special daily subsistence and mission subsistence allowance rates paid has ranged from 21 per cent to 34 per cent, depending on the periods involved.
For April and June 2004, UNMEE reported payments made for 223 nights at the hotel corresponding to the highest mission subsistence allowance rate, while a less expensive, similar class hotel was available.
The cost was an additional 25 per cent over the basic cost of $36,572 at the latter hotel.
The Board is of the view that, beyond the actual costs in monetary terms, such a practice raises an issue of accountability at the certifying officer level.
The Board recommends that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations strictly enforce compliance with the administrative instructions relating to the payment of allowances at special rates.
In the same hotel, UNMEE rents a year-round suite for the Asmara-based Special Representative of the Secretary-General at a yearly cost of $42,559.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that the Special Representative spends equal time in the two capitals.
Furthermore, an executive jet is used for quick round trips between the two capitals, as mentioned above and in the last report of the Board.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations stated that there would be additional security considerations if a different room were to be used on each visit and that if the contract were not maintained to secure the room for the sole use of the Special Representative, the actual cost per night would be much higher.
From August 2003 to July 2004, the Special Representative made 20 round trips between Asmara and Addis Ababa with a retinue of over four members of “his immediate staff”, staying at the same hotel.
Such a large travelling staff might be justified were it not for the large office there, with the Deputy at the level of Assistant Secretary-General and the professional competence of the 110 locally based staff members available full-time to provide support to the Special Representative while he is in Addis Ababa.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations did not consider the number of staff travelling with the Special Representative to be excessive.
It explained that all travellers were relevant to the terms of reference of the trips and were authorized in accordance with the established procedure, but that UNMEE would explore the feasibility of implementing the Board's recommendation to reduce such expenditures.
In April 2004 UNOCI issued a requisition for 15 GSM mobile telephones.
After competitive bidding, UNOCI purchased them on 30 April 2004 at an average price of $1,276 each, including accessories.
Vendors submitted quotations of less than $700 for very similar models that had been proposed — without an extra memory stick requested by UNOCI.
UNOCI later purchased another 15 phones for $1,237 per unit.
Twelve of them were still in stock by 15 September 2004.
UNOCI subsequently purchased 300 basic GSM phones, at less than $100 each.
The Procurement Service reported that it would review these issues with the respective staff with a view to offering advice for future similar requirements.
The Board recommends that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations review the relevance of the purchase of top-of-the-line equipment with a view to preventing the recurrence of expenditures not in line with financial constraints and technical needs.
Code of ethics and declarations of independence
The Board had recommended in its previous reports that the Administration finalize and expedite the promulgation and implementation of a code of ethics and the signing of declarations of independence after due consideration by the relevant stakeholders (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
161, and A/57/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
Subsequently, version two of the United Nations Procurement Manual was promulgated in February 2004, which included a section on staff ethics and professional responsibility.
The revised procurement guidelines addressing the matter of acceptance of gifts and hospitality by staff in the Procurement Service, as well as an inter-office memorandum on conflict of interest and confidential information (SSS/03/14/CS/SS, dated 25 March 2004) was also made available to all staff on the United Nations Intranet.
In order to promote acceptance throughout the entire United Nations system, the plain-language guidelines for the implementation of the essential ethical principles for United Nations staff working in the procurement process was shared with other United Nations organizations in the Inter-Agency Procurement Working Group in May 2004.
The Administration anticipated that these guidelines, once finalized, would be applicable to all United Nations staff members associated with the procurement process.
The Procurement Service had also drafted declarations of independence following consultations with the General Legal Division, which were under consideration by the Office of Human Resources Management.
The Board recommends that the Administration establish a time frame for the finalization of the promulgation and implementation of the guidelines on ethical principles for United Nations staff working in the procurement process.
The Board also noted that the Office of Central Support Services had drafted a code of conduct for suppliers to the United Nations, containing ethical principles.
The Office of Central Support Services had circulated the draft code to all the relevant stakeholders for comments, and inputs were received from most of them.
The Board recommends that the Administration finalize and expedite the promulgation and implementation of a code of conduct for suppliers to the United Nations.
Procurement staffing and training
At UNOCI, eight successive staff members have assumed the functions of either Officer-in-Charge of the Procurement Section or Chief Procurement Officer in the 18 months ending in August 2004.
Six of the seven predecessors of the latest Chief Procurement Officer left the Mission.
UNOCI acknowledged that this has had a negative impact on procurement operations, as confirmed by the Board's audit.
The Procurement Service was of the view that the lack of job security due to limitations on contract length prevented the attracting and developing of a pool of qualified candidates willing to serve peacekeeping missions in the longer term.
In order to improve procurement training, the Procurement Service developed and implemented a five-day advance procurement training course for field procurement officers.
Approximately 300 field procurement officers received advance procurement training during the 2003/04 period.
The Procurement Service also hosted a conference in New York where all chief procurement officers received briefings and training over a period of one week, including a session on procurement ethics.
Furthermore, the Procurement Service was in the process of preparing further field procurement training sessions for 2005 and planned to provide staff from new missions with training, as well as staff from other missions who were unable to attend previous sessions.
The Procurement Service also noted that, in the third quarter of 2004, the United Nations System Staff College had commenced work on the development of the United Nations common procurement training and certification programme, planned for implementation in early 2006.
The Board noted that all training participants were required to complete a questionnaire on completion of training interventions.
The Procurement Service used these questionnaires to determine the quality of training.
The effectiveness of training initiatives was further measured by reviewing the performance of staff to identify areas where additional training was required.
However, the Board noted that some peacekeeping missions — for example MONUC and UNMIL — did not formally identify training needs or develop training plans for procurement officers.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that UNMIL had subsequently prepared and submitted its procurement training plan and that MONUC was developing such a plan.
The Board recommends that the Administration take further steps to ensure that all peacekeeping missions formally identify the training needs of all procurement officers and communicate these needs to Headquarters.
Procurement planning
In its previous report the Board encouraged the Administration to ensure that all peacekeeping missions submit procurement plans to the Procurement Division in a timely manner to expedite the development of a complete and overall procurement plan (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
The Procurement Division requested the missions to submit their procurement plans by 16 April 2004 for the 2004/05 period.
However, out of a total of 17 missions that were required to submit procurement plans, 8 (47 per cent) submitted their plans by the required date, 6 (35 per cent) submitted the plans after the deadline and 3 (18 per cent) had not yet submitted procurement plans by the time of the audit (September 2004).
Reasons for delays in the submission of procurement plans included, inter alia, the late submission of mission budgets to the Finance Management and Support Service and the establishment of new missions.
Although the Department of Peacekeeping Operations provided missions with templates of procurement plans covering approximately 80 to 90 per cent of a mission's requirements, some of the procurement plans were not complete in respect of all the required sections.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to hold the administrative heads of all peacekeeping missions accountable for submitting complete procurement plans to the Procurement Service, in a timely manner, to expedite the compilation of an overall procurement plan.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that it would send facsimiles to all administrative heads of missions reminding them of the importance of timely submission of procurement plans to the Procurement Service.
The Department would also hold administrative heads of missions accountable for any failure to make submissions on time.
In addition, the Department set up an internal mechanism to monitor the timely submission of all procurement plans to Headquarters.
The United Nations Procurement Manual requires requisitioning offices to provide proposed revisions to the plans at intervals of no more than three months.
However, none of the peacekeeping missions revisited procurement plans on a quarterly basis.
The Procurement Service intended to discuss the matter of updates and amendments to acquisition plans at the next conference of chief procurement officers, to be held in 2005.
The Board recommends that the Administration make it compulsory for all peacekeeping missions to revisit procurement plans on at least the prescribed quarterly basis to ensure that these plans are updated with regard to the operational requirements of the missions.
In order to realize the benefits offered by proper procurement planning, peacekeeping missions need to operate with reference to their procurement plans.
However, the Board noted that:
(a) MONUC, UNDOF, UNIFIL and UNOMIG operated without any reference to their procurement plans;
(b) At UNDOF, 228 purchase orders (43 per cent) were raised during the last quarter of the financial year, which could be an indication of ineffective procurement planning.
The Board recommends that the Administration enforce the use of a procurement plan as a tool to facilitate effective and efficient procurement management.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations advised the Board that it would stress the importance of missions' developing realistic procurement plans based on the foreseeable requirements of a given year.
Also, it would instruct administrative heads of missions to use their routine meetings and section chief meetings to convey the importance of enforcing the procurement plans.
Registration of prospective vendors
The United Nations Procurement Manual requires, inter alia, that the Procurement Service maintain a computer database of prospective companies for the supply of products and services to the United Nations.
Before vendors can be included on the roster under the commodities and services they provide, they should successfully complete the registration process as outlined in the Procurement Manual.
At MONUC, UNOCI, UNDOF, UNIFIL, the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, UNMIL, UNMISET and UNOMIG, prospective local vendors were registered on the computer database without being prequalified in accordance with the requirements of the Procurement Manual.
At most of these missions, the Board noted that difficulties were experienced by local vendors in meeting all the prequalification requirements.
While in most cases local vendors at missions did not meet the required criteria to be registered on the vendor database, the missions considered that those vendors could still provide quality services on goods in a timely manner.
The Board recommends that the Administration, in consultation with the peacekeeping missions, analyse the prequalification requirements for registering prospective local vendors in the context of the difficulties being experienced with respect to local vendors and with a view to considering alternative compensating controls for registering those local vendors where goods or services are required urgently.
The Administration informed the Board that the Procurement Service had participated in the United Nations Global Marketplace, a single, Internet-based gateway for the registration of vendors for the organizations of the United Nations system, since February 2004.
The Procurement Service planned to implement new procedures whereby United Nations organizations with technical expertise in particular markets would conduct technical evaluations of vendors in those areas.
This initiative was expected to improve the quality of suppliers used by the missions, since the intention was to roll out the United Nations Global Marketplace to the missions in the second half of 2005.
The Board further noted that not all missions had established local vendor review committees or appointed a local vendor database officer, as required by the Procurement Manual.
MONUC, UNOCI, UNDOF, UNIFIL, the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, UNMIL, UNMISET, UNMIK and UNOMIG serve as examples in this regard.
The Procurement Service was of the view that establishing local vendor review committees might be too great an additional burden at some missions with limited staffing and that the chief procurement officers could be authorized to review the registration and performance of vendors.
Complex issues could be submitted to the Procurement Service for review.
The Board recommends that the Administration consider the feasibility of compliance by missions with the Procurement Manual in respect of local vendor review committees and vendor database officers with a view to revising the Manual, if appropriate, while ensuring proper controls and accountability.
Procurement lead times
In its two previous reports, the Board recommended that the Administration take measures to decrease procurement lead times to a reasonable level (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
177, and A/57/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
The Board calculated the average lead time for purchase orders selected for testing, from the time the requisition was raised until goods were received and inspected.
The procurement lead times at Headquarters had improved from an average of six months in 2002/03 to an average of three months in 2003/04.
Although measures had been taken, the average lead times were still ranging from six to eight months at some missions.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has prepared a detailed flow chart on the acquisition process with a view to identifying critical gaps in the process in order to improve the procurement lead times.
The Department planned to discuss the results and the intended actions with the Procurement Service.
The Board encourages the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in conjunction with the Procurement Service, to continue to monitor and address causes of excessive procurement lead times at peacekeeping missions.
Performance reports
The Board recommended in its previous two reports that missions compile assessments of progress and final performance of vendors and that those assessments be forwarded to the Procurement Service in a timely manner (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
192, and A/57/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
Vendor performance reports at appropriate intervals or at the completion of contracts were still not always completed at missions such as UNMISET and UNOMIG.
The absence of performance reports could result in contracts being maintained with vendors with unsatisfactory or poor performance.
No supplier evaluations could be found for a sample of nine recently expired (June 2004) contracts valued at $62.3 million.
By October 2004, eight out of the nine vendors still appeared on the active supplier roster.
For seven of a sample of nine contracts close to expiry, for which contracts at a value of $162.5 million had been issued, no supplier evaluations could be submitted regarding purchases of $160.7 million.
The Procurement Service informed the Board that the policies and practices in place, as well as the procurement staff's increasing awareness of the importance of verifying contractor performance before placing new contracts or extending existing ones, should be sufficient to adequately protect the Organization, and that it continually reminded peacekeeping missions of the importance of vendor performance reports.
The Board reiterates its previous recommendation that the Administration ensure that peacekeeping missions compile assessments of progress and final performance of vendors and forward them to the Procurement Service in a timely manner in order to prevent situations in which contracts are maintained, extended and/or renewed in the absence of vendor evaluations.
Performance bonds
The Board established that one contractor was declared bankrupt in May 2002 and could therefore not fulfil contract requirements.
Performance bonds in respect of the contract should have been provided for $1.4 million, as required by the contract, but could not be furnished for audit purposes.
The absence of performance bonds could have a negative impact, as losses could be suffered due to the fact that limited recourse actions would be available without them.
The performance bond for another contract worth $63.5 million was furnished for audit purposes on 30 September 2004.
However, the document was dated 29 September 2004 and was obtained only as a direct result of the audit request.
According to the contract, the contractor should have provided the bond within 10 days after signing the contract on 4 February 2004.
The Procurement Service intended to explore the feasibility of developing an electronic system to remind staff of the need to follow up with contractors for timely delivery of performance bonds upon signature of contracts.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to ensure that performance bonds are obtained from contractors, in a timely manner, in accordance with the contract stipulations, and appropriately filed.
Management reviews
The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions recommended in A/58/759, paragraph 33, that the Board of Auditors follow up on the issue of periodic and timely reviews conducted by management.
The Advisory Committee expressed concern that the findings of such reviews may become irrelevant if they are not communicated in a timely manner because otherwise the mission in question may be facing new challenges by the time the findings are received.
Reviews and periodic assessments of peacekeeping missions were conducted on an ad hoc basis by integrated teams, led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations Office of Operations.
The Department could not provide the Board with an overall and specific plan or schedule for the performance of reviews or periodic assessments of missions.
There was no central point where information regarding management reviews or assessments could be obtained.
Therefore, the Board was not able to assess the extent of such reviews or assessments.
The Board recommends that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations properly plan, coordinate and monitor centrally all reviews and periodic management assessments of peacekeeping missions.
Management review of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions recommended in A/58/759/Add.1, paragraph 14, that the Board of Auditors follow up on the issue of the review of the staffing and organizational structure of UNOMIG conducted by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in April 2003.
The purpose of the review had been to establish resource requirements and to identify opportunities for improvement in the roles, structures and functions necessary for the Mission to achieve its objectives.
The management team that performed the review comprised representatives of the Peacekeeping Financing Division, the Office of Operations and the Office of Mission Support.
The management review team applied a methodology that included the following:
(a) Identification of key functions and activities;
(b) Assessment of the organizational structure of the Mission;
(c) Utilization of generic job profiles and local job descriptions;
(d) Correlation and integration of roles and responsibilities;
(e) Relationship of functions to outputs of the Mission.
The methodology also included a comparison with the staffing structure of other missions of similar scope and activity levels to allow an assessment of UNOMIG against those missions.
Although the team leader signed off on the final draft report on 31 December 2003, the report had not yet been finalized and was still pending by October 2004 because of the disagreement of UNOMIG with the scope and content of the review.
The report was discussed at various stages between the Mission and senior personnel of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and reaching consensus proved to be time-consuming.
The recommendations contained in the report had been overtaken by subsequent events, such as:
(a) The Baghdad bombing of the United Nations mission, which changed the perception of security functions and the outsourcing thereof;
(b) Decisions taken during the 2004/05 budgetary review regarding the use of individual contractors in core positions and the conversion of 300-series staff, which had an impact on many of the conclusions of the report;
(c) The extension of the mandate of the mission in 2003 to incorporate a civilian police component with associated support requirements.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to finalize in a timely manner all reviews undertaken by management to ensure the relevance of the findings reported, even if this means reporting on disagreements.
Results-based budgeting
The programme budget for the 2004/05 financial period was the second budget that reflected the concept of results-based budgeting, and the 2003/04 performance reports would therefore be the first to fully reflect the results-based budgeting framework.
The actual results for the 2003/04 financial period would be measured against the expected accomplishments, which was the baseline data included in the 2003/04 results-based budgeting framework.
The Board commends the Administration for the significant progress made in the implementation of results-based budgeting in peacekeeping operations during the 2003/04 financial year.
The Board noted that most of the relevant staff from the administrative and substantive units at missions was involved in the results-based budgeting process.
There were, however, areas that needed further improvements, as noted below.
Systems to measure, monitor and validate performance
The Board previously reported that there were no systems in place to ensure the accuracy of the indicators of achievement as reported in the performance reports compiled by missions (see A/58/75, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
The Administration subsequently sent budget instructions to all missions for the performance reports for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004, which included a format and guidance to establish a “portfolio of evidence” for all actual indicators of achievement and actual outputs included in the performance report of each peacekeeping mission.
However, the portfolio of evidence was not in all cases available at the time of the Board's mission audits.
In cases where the portfolio of evidence was available at the missions, the following was noted:
(a) Management did not have any systems, tools or methods in place to ensure the accuracy of the actual indicators of achievement as reported in these records;
(b) The summary of the evidence did not always have a direct link to the actual output achieved;
(c) Formal data collection was not performed throughout the period, which made the compilation of a portfolio of evidence at the end of the financial period an enormous and time-consuming task;
(d) Discrepancies were noted between the portfolio of evidence and the source documents.
The Board recommends that the Administration monitor peacekeeping missions to ensure the implementation of standardized procedures and methods for information-gathering in order to compile a portfolio of evidence to substantiate the actual accomplishments recorded on the performance reports.
Furthermore, validation mechanisms or procedures to ensure the accuracy and completeness of the portfolio of evidence were not yet in place.
Validation of the portfolio of evidence Validation on a test basis by the resident auditors at missions is an option that could increase the credibility of the performance reports.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to consult with the Office of Internal Oversight Services with a view to the resident auditors at missions conducting reviews of the portfolio of evidence supporting results, on a test basis, to ensure the accuracy and completeness of the performance reports, thereby increasing the credibility thereof.
The Administration informed the Board that the internal process within the missions of ensuring that their results-based budgeting frameworks are accurate is the responsibility of the respective missions' management and that by early 2005 the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts would have identified its future supporting role.
Milestones included in the framework
The Board noted that vague milestones were used in some of the indicators of achievement and outputs included in the results-based budgeting framework.
Progress had been made in this regard in the budgets for the 2004/05 period as compared with those of the 2003/04 period.
For the 2004/05 period, 84 per cent of the total number of outputs included in the results-based budgeting framework were considered measurable, compared with 51 per cent in the 2003/04 budgets.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to further enhance the specificity and measurability of the indicators of achievement and outputs recorded in the results-based budgeting framework.
Only 30 per cent of the total number of indicators in all of the 2004/05 budgets, including the indicators for the support component, have a numerical baseline with a projected increase or decrease for the budget period.
The Board recommends that the peacekeeping missions document the baseline data for all indicators from which the improvement is to be measured, to the extent possible.
Information and communication technology
Information and communication technology strategy
In his report of 13 February 2001 (A/55/780), the Secretary-General stated that it was vital that each department develop its own plans and projects within the framework of the objectives mentioned in that report so as to meet its own specific substantive requirements.
In a bulletin of 8 June 2001 (ST/SGB/2001/5), the Secretary-General also indicated that the Information and Communications Technology Board, on the basis of departmental plans, would coordinate the comprehensive analysis of future requirements for infrastructure and services and that departmental representatives on the Board or on local committees would be the liaisons between departments and the Board to ensure the consistency of departmental plans and strategies with the overall Secretariat strategy and would contribute to its constant updating.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations had implemented the information and communication technology strategy as contained in the report of the Secretary-General dated 20 November 2002 (A/57/620).
Although the Department had adopted the overall Secretariat strategy, it had not developed its own plan and projects in order to meet its own specific requirements.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that it had initiated the development of a Department-wide information management strategy within the framework of the Secretary-General's information and communication technology strategy prior to the development of a Department-wide strategic information and communication technology plan.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations agreed with the Board's recommendation to develop and approve an information and communication technology strategic plan and to update the plan regularly to address the changing needs and requirements of the department.
Business continuity plan and information technology security policy
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations mission disaster recovery and business continuity plan was formally presented during a conference held at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi in April 2004.
The purpose of the plan was to ensure the security of data and the continuity of mission operations in the event of a catastrophic situation and/or evacuation of essential mission staff.
Phase I of the implementation, covering the establishment of local back-up policies and procedures, the creation of redundant local data centres and provisions for business continuity at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi in the event of evacuation was expected to be completed by January 2005.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations considered that some of these tasks might require additional technical or personnel resources for missions.
Disaster recovery training was conducted at the Logistics Base in June 2004, attended by technical representatives from each mission appointed as disaster recovery and business continuity specialists.
The Board, however, noted that some missions — for example, MONUC, MINURSO, UNAMSIL, UNIFIL, the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi and UNMIL — did not have formal information technology security policies in place or properly implemented.
Although these policies had been drafted in many instances, they had not been finalized and fully implemented.
In the case of MONUC, no formal back-up plan or policies had been implemented.
The Board encourages the Administration to continue its implementation of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations mission disaster recovery and business continuity plan as a matter of priority.
Access rights to information systems
At UNMEE, the management of access rights was partly delegated to local staff members.
This practice presents additional operational risks.
There was also inconsistency in the management of these rights.
The Mission did not continuously update its list of access rights.
UNMEE agreed that there were significant risks and that the staff check-out and check-in process might be carried out more accurately through a more coordinated update of the databases managed by the various sections.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to review the policy relating to the field information technology access rights.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that it was working on the final draft standard operating procedures on information and communication technology, which included disaster recovery, and that it anticipated completing this project during the first quarter of 2005 for distribution to all missions for compliance.
Human resources
Leave management
The Board previously reported that IMIS was not being utilized to update leave records at missions as required by Headquarters (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
The IMIS Steering Committee approved the implementation of IMIS for other categories of mission staff in June 2004.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations expected that when the project was fully implemented, all categories of staff would be administered under IMIS for time and attendance and financial and human resources management.
Meanwhile, the working group of IMIS experts from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of Human Resources Management, the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts and the Information Technology Services Division had conducted a gap analysis on IMIS.
The report on the analysis, which was in draft form by October 2004, captured major gaps in IMIS time and attendance management functionality for field personnel.
These gaps would have to be rectified when the development of field-specific IMIS functions was completed as part of the overall field IMIS implementation project.
The Board recommends that the Administration expedite the necessary amendments to the Integrated Management Information System regarding leave management within a predetermined time frame.
Grading of posts
The Board previously reported on the inconsistency in the application of entry rules and grading of employees (ibid., para.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the advertisements for most posts in peacekeeping missions were based on generic job profiles.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations Personnel Management and Support Service and the Office of Human Resources Management were working closely to finalize the updating and/or creation of generic job profiles for all occupational groups and functional titles and the grading guidelines for Professional-level and Field Service-level staff.
Concurrently, the Department has streamlined the list of functional titles to be used in peacekeeping operations.
The Board reiterates its recommendation that the Administration expedite the finalizing and aligning of the generic job profiles and grading guidelines to eliminate any inconsistencies and disparities in the application of entry rules and grading of employees.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that it had subsequently reduced and streamlined the list of functional titles and circulated it for review to the relevant substantive and technical offices.
This list has been matched to the available generic job profiles being used to prepare the vacancy announcements.
In order to ensure consistency and facilitate the recruitment process, the staffing tables for existing missions, as well as the list of titles and the level of each post, are being uploaded into Nucleus (a suite of human resource applications based on Personnel Management and Support Service data).
Training reports
The Board previously reported that the training reports from missions did not cover all aspects relating to training (ibid., para.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations had announced the completion of a dedicated database to be operational by 31 December 2003, while in reality the database project was cancelled in June 2003 because of insufficiency of resources in the Communications and Information Technology Service, as stated by UNMIK — six months before the Department's reply.
A year later, the Department has decided to pursue a learning management system that would allow the maintenance of records of training, costs, student performance, course nominations and distance learning material, rather than creating an “orphan” database.
The Department has started a formal examination of the learning management systems in use by United Nations agencies.
The Department expected to issue standard guidelines for the preparation of reports following a decision on which learning management system was to be acquired.
This process was expected to be completed by June 2005.
Training focal points at missions
The Board previously recommended that the Administration evaluate the resource requirements of the training focal points at missions and consider delegating the responsibilities of training to a specified qualified staff member in order to ensure that training matters were managed efficiently and effectively (ibid., para.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that in every mission where a training officer was not present a training focal point had been established.
Nevertheless, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was of the view that this was not the optimal solution, as the individual assigned the responsibility did not always have the requisite skills and was also responsible for other regular full-time assignments.
The Department intended to establish an integrated mission training centre with at least one civilian training officer post in every new mission.
For missions with training focal points, a needs assessment was to be undertaken by April 2005 to determine whether mission training needs were being met effectively by a training focal point or whether a full-time training officer was required.
In the cases of missions whose needs could continue to be met by training focal points, more support would be provided by the Department and, when possible, training officers in nearby missions.
Evaluating the effectiveness of training
The Board previously recommended that the Administration evaluate the impact of training actions (ibid., para.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations was developing a departmental approach to the use of the Kirkpatrick model for evaluating the effectiveness of training and was currently evaluating civilian training effectiveness for the individual.
The Department informed the Board that it did not yet have the capacity to evaluate the long-term effectiveness of training for both the individual and the work unit.
This was to be done in the field by trained managers, and the Department considered this a long-term project.
The Board recommends that the Administration develop a plan with time frames for training managers in the field to evaluate the effectiveness of training for both the individual and the organization.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that it planned to conduct a pilot project to review the effectiveness of training, by June 2005, focused on measuring the difference in the individual's knowledge prior to and after training.
The Board had previously recommended (ibid., para.
259) that the Administration properly use the performance appraisal system process to identify and evaluate the achievement of training needs.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the mission “culture” and systems were not set up to support this effort.
Furthermore, regular training needs assessments were not completed because of the lack of professional training staff in missions, and there was no mechanism that could be connected to the electronic performance appraisal system to gather information across groups or missions to track competency gaps.
The Board recommends that the Administration evaluate mechanisms that could be implemented to effectively gather information to track competency gaps.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that it had reviewed civilian field staff training needs and that a training programme would address the priority needs in 2005.
Code of conduct
MONUC civilian and military personnel have been associated with many acts of sexual exploitation and abuse, some of which are presumably criminal in nature.
The details of such behaviour were summarized by the Secretary-General in his third special report on MONUC, dated 16 August 2004, in which he described the serious allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse (S/2004/650, paras.
The allegations were under investigation by the Office of Internal Oversight Services by October 2004.
The Secretary-General's report indicated that the United Nations would strictly discipline civilian personnel found to be responsible and urged “the troop contributors concerned to ensure that the necessary disciplinary follow-up action is taken once the formal investigations are completed” (ibid., para. 32).
This alleged criminal behaviour was also in violation of the widely distributed MONUC code of conduct, which had indicated a zero tolerance policy for such abuses.
This approach was amplified in a leaflet published by MONUC on directives from the Secretary-General regarding special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse (with reference to ST/SGB/2003/13), which quotes the message of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General regarding the implementation of the zero tolerance policy.
It is widely recognized that the credibility and integrity of a United Nations operation are fundamental elements for its success.
The Board is of the view that the strongest action is needed by the Administration and Member States to prevent the integrity and credibility of the United Nations from being undermined and that this is critical for the success of peacekeeping missions.
In order to deter misconduct, MONUC established a rapid-response action plan involving four elements: investigation, deterrence, the creation of an emergency task force and the launching of an extensive public relations and information campaign.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General also planned to take action regarding unethical behaviour, which included tasking individuals to follow up and report on the status and nature of disciplinary actions taken against civilian and military personnel.
Exposing such details, as well as the ensuing criminal charges and sanctions, would be a strong deterrent to misconduct and crime by civilian and military personnel.
The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation that, in consultation with the Administrations of other United Nations entities, it institutionalize the reporting of disciplinary and judicial action taken or to be taken against military and civilian personnel for serious misconduct and crime, including reporting on the status and nature of such actions.
Contingent-owned equipment
Memorandums of understanding
The Board followed up on its previous recommendation regarding the timely finalization of memorandums of understanding (see A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para. 205).
The Board again noted that memorandums of understanding between certain troop-contributing countries and the United Nations regarding UNDOF, MINURSO, UNMISET and UNOCI had not been signed.
At UNOCI, military contingents were deployed in April 2004, but none of the corresponding 25 memorandums of understanding had been signed by mid-September 2004.
The mission did not receive copies of the unsigned drafts in a timely manner, when they could have served as a starting point with the contingent.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations informed the Board that the finalization of draft memorandums of understanding was dependent upon the legislative process of each troop-contributing country, and therefore the rate of progress in signing them was often dependent on factors beyond the control of the Department.
The Board recommends that the Administration continue its efforts to improve the timely finalization of memorandums of understanding.
Pre-deployment visits
The Board recommended in its previous report that the Administration expedite the finalization and continue the implementation of the policy on pre-deployment visits to improve the verification of the contingent-owned equipment process (ibid., para.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations expected to complete the policy on pre-deployment visits by 31 December 2004.
Troop-strength reports
The Office of Internal Oversight Services performed an internal audit on reimbursements made to troop-contributing countries during February and March 2004 at MONUC.
The internal audit report, issued in August 2004, highlighted that the reports submitted on the monthly troop strengths were not always accurate and contained various errors and duplications, estimated at nearly $1.9 million.
The numbers reported in the troop-strength reports submitted by the Chief Military Personnel Officer for the payment of daily allowances to the troops did not match the troop-strength figures provided in the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts report.
The Board noted that the practices for reimbursement of daily allowances were not formalized and there were no clear guidelines.
MONUC informed the Board that the underlying cause of the discrepancies noted above were the understaffing of the MONUC military office, a lack of sufficient office accommodation and the fact that the existing system of procedures for troop-strength reporting was cumbersome and resource-intensive and in most cases resulted in a duplication of efforts.
The Board recommends that the Administration quantify the differences with regard to daily allowances for troops at MONUC for the entire financial period and develop and formalize procedures to ensure the accurate computation and payment of such daily allowances.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that the Mission had put in place appropriate mechanisms to ensure the accuracy of troop-strength reports that serve as the basis for the payment of daily allowances to troops and reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment.
The Mission has also developed standard operating procedures on the monthly payment of daily allowances.
The Mission performed the reconciliation of the troop-strength reports for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 and noted that, in overall terms, there were no overpayments of the daily allowances.
Liquidation of missions
The Security Council, by its resolution 1490 (2003) of 3 July 2003, extended the mandate of UNIKOM for a final period until 6 October 2003.
During those final months, the Mission was expected, inter alia, to undertake reconciliation of assets and disposal of United Nations property.
A liquidation directive was issued in order to initiate coordinated activities to ensure smooth transition into the liquidation phase on 7 October 2003 and the prompt completion of technical liquidation activities in the field by 31 October 2003.
The keys to successfully achieving all the required goals were drafted in a liquidation plan, which was approved by the Logistic Support Service on 5 September 2003.
However, the 31 October 2003 target date for the completion of liquidation activities in the field was not achieved for the following reasons:
(a) Significant information gaps developed between Headquarters and UNIKOM during the liquidation exercise, owing to the continuous referral of matters to the Mission by Headquarters.
UNIKOM indicated that differing views were not synthesized into a Headquarters position before transmittal to the field and weekly liquidation reports were not received by the members of the Headquarters liquidation group;
(b) The timing of overland shipments to Iraq was erratic, with convoys subject to delays arising from the security situation;
(c) The proposal for the donation of assets could not be finalized owing to the failure to identify and remove assets that were to be transferred to the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI);
(d) The attack on the United Nations building in Baghdad contributed to a general embargo on the shipments to other missions.
Consequently, shipments to UNMIL were finalized only by the last week of October 2003.
As a result of holding assets for Iraq, many items remained in Kuwait that had been intended for UNMIL and other missions.
These were moved to UNMIL by United Nations aircraft at the end of November 2003;
(e) While the disposal of mission property continued, certain categories of mission property that exceeded the delegated authority of the Chief Administrative Officer had to be disposed of prior to the withdrawal of all UNIKOM personnel from Kuwait.
At the conclusion of the liquidation activities in the field in December 2003, approximately 2,900 assets (with an acquisition value of approximately $13 million) had been transferred to other missions.
Approximately 1,800 assets ($3 million) were lost or missing, and 571 assets ($1.04 million) were abandoned because of being uneconomical to recover.
Sales of written-off equipment amounted to $0.6 million, representing nearly 40 per cent of the residual value of items sold.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations reported that most of the weaknesses noted were due mainly to the deteriorating security conditions over which it had no control.
The Board recommends that the Administration ensure that clear and coordinated direction and advice be given by Headquarters to missions during their liquidation phase to promote efficient liquidation.
Fraud and presumptive fraud
As required under the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, the Administration reported to the Board all six cases of fraud and presumptive fraud known to it for the financial period ended 30 June 2004.
These may not reflect the entire universe of fraud cases system-wide, as some cases may be under review by other offices, units or oversight bodies.
The Administration informed the Board that the United Nations did not incur financial losses in the three cases reported in (a), (b) and (d) below.
The extent of potential losses for the cases reported in (c), (e) and (f) below has yet to be determined by the Administration:
(a) A staff member at UNIKOM submitted a false certification in connection with a claim for reimbursement for lost property at a value of $21,893.
No funds were paid out, and the staff member was charged with attempted fraud and false certification and was summarily dismissed;
(b) A staff member attempted to ship personal effects using a United Nations aircraft to the United Nations Logistics Base, although the staff member had opted for a lump sum payment of $1,200 in lieu of his 100-kilogram shipment entitlement.
The payment of the lump sum was withheld when the incident was noted.
A formal letter of reprimand was issued and placed in the staff member's official status file;
(c) At UNAMSIL, members of a military contingent were siphoning and selling fuel and overdrawing fuel entitlements.
The exact financial loss in this case could not be determined.
The Force Commander issued a formal warning to the contingent concerned;
(d) At UNDOF, a staff member allegedly increased the price of a bid response from a vendor by $437.
The case was detected before any financial loss was incurred, and a disciplinary case was pending;
(e) There was abuse of telephone facilities at UNMEE by staff members, estimated at more than $500,000, as detailed in paragraphs 347 and 348 below;
(f) Payments made to United Nations Volunteers amounting to $4,092 were cashed by a staff member for personal benefit.
Investigations were still continuing to determine if there were any other amounts and personnel involved.
The Administration informed the Board that controls had been implemented to prevent the recurrence of such cases and that, where possible, action had been taken against the individual staff members.
The UNMEE telephone fraud case involved mainly two contingents.
Soldiers normally have to pay for personal calls.
Some of them used stolen personal identification number (PIN) codes.
At the time of the Board's audit (March-December 2003) the amount involved was $123,346 for the period reviewed.
Others abused the practice of a grace period of up to one minute before the billing to the user begins: the Office of Internal Oversight Services found that some soldiers dialled blocks of 20 to 100 consecutive calls within an hour every day, each lasting less than one minute.
The amount involved was $217,608 for the March-December 2003 period alone.
The issuance of PIN codes has been restricted, and their security has been enhanced.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has instructed all missions to limit the grace period to 30 seconds or to regularly monitor telephone activity.
It has also initiated a recovery action through the permanent missions to the United Nations of the Member States involved: the 2003/04 financial statements include accounts receivable (contingents) of $67,979 for one country and $196,604 for another.
The UNMEE Finance Section asked for the assistance of the Office of the Force Commander in July 2004.
The Office promised assistance only for the calls resulting from stolen PIN codes, but did not provide it; nor did it for those resulting from the abuse of free personal calls of less than one minute.
While significant amounts, related to stolen PIN codes as well as to grace-period abuse, could be at stake, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations eventually decided that to trace and recover the outstanding amounts from the Member States involved prior to March 2003 would be problematic and concurred with the proposal of the Office of the Force Commander that UNMEE should absorb the cost as a one-time measure.
This potentially costly decision runs counter to the external and internal auditors' recommendations, which had been accepted by UNMEE, but was under review by the Controller's Office by the end of 2004.
D. Acknowledgement
The Board of Auditors wishes to express its appreciation for the cooperation and assistance extended to its staff by the Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General for Management, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and members of their staffs, as well as to the staff at the peacekeeping missions.
(Signed) Shauket A. Fakie
Auditor-General of the Republic of South Africa
(Lead Auditor)
(Signed) Guillermo N. Carague
Chairman, Philippine Commission on Audit
(Chairman, United Nations Board of Auditors)
(Signed) Philippe Séguin
First President of the Court of Accounts of France
8 February 2005
Note: The members of the Board of Auditors have signed only the original English version of the report.
Annex I
List of missions audited
Active peacekeeping operations
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) 1973 and United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM)
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG)
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL)
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI), formerly United Nations Mission in Côte d'Ivoire (MINUCI)
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB)
Special purpose accounts
United Nations Peacekeeping Reserve Fund
Support account for peacekeeping operations
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
Completed peacekeeping operations
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT)
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH), United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH) and United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH)
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA)
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) and United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM)
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP)
United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) and United Nations Civilian Police Support Group (UNPSG)
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
United Nations Peace Forces (UNPF)
Military Observer Group of the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA)
United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH)
United Nations Assistance Mission in Rwanda (UNAMIR) and United Nations Observer Mission to Uganda-Rwanda (UNOMUR)
United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) and United Nations Observer Group in Central America (ONUCA)
United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ)
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM)
United Nations Military Liaison Team in Cambodia (UNMLT)
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC)
United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG)
United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG)
Special Account for the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) 1956
Ad Hoc Account for the United Nations Operation in the Congo (ONUC)
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), including United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka (UNMOP)
Regular budget-funded missions
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO)
United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP)
Annex II
Summary of status of implementation of recommendations for the financial period ended 30 June 2003 (A/58/5, vol. II, chap.
a A United Nations-wide initiative is required to implement this recommendation, which will therefore be followed up accordingly.
Annex III
Status of implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
Chapter III
Audit opinion
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of the United Nations Peacekeeping Operations comprising statements numbered I to XLII and the supporting notes for the financial period ended 30 June 2004.
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the common auditing standards of the Panel of External Auditors of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency and the International Standards on Auditing.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining, on a test basis, and as considered by the auditor to be necessary in the circumstances, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements.
An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by the Secretary-General, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for the audit opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position at 30 June 2004 and the results of operations and cash flows for the period then ended, in accordance with the United Nations peacekeeping operations accounting policies set out in note 2 to the financial statements, which were applied on a basis consistent with that of the preceding financial period.
Further, in our opinion, the transactions of the United Nations peacekeeping operations that have come to our notice which we have tested as part of our audit have in all significant respects been in accordance with the Financial Regulations and legislative authority.
In accordance with article VII of the Financial Regulations, we have also issued a long-form report on our audit of the financial statements on the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
(Signed) Shauket A. Fakie Auditor-General of the Republic of South Africa (Lead Auditor)
(Signed) Guillermo N. Carague Chairman, Philippine Commission on Audit (Chairman, United Nations Board of Auditors)
(Signed) Philippe Séguin First President of the Court of Accounts of France
8 February 2005
Note: The members of the Board of Auditors have signed only the original English version of the audit opinion.
Chapter IV
Certification of the financial statements
The financial statements of the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the 12-month period 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 have been prepared in accordance with financial rule 106.10.
The summary of significant accounting policies applied in the preparation of these statements is included as notes to the financial statements.
These notes provide additional information on and clarification of the financial activities related to peacekeeping operations undertaken by the Organization during the period covered by these statements, for which the Secretary-General has administrative responsibility.
I certify that the appended financial statements of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, numbered I to XLII, are correct.
(Signed) Jean-Pierre Halbwachs Assistant Secretary-General, Controller
28 September 2004
Chapter V
Financial statements for the 12-month period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004
Notes to the financial statements for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004
Note 1
The United Nations and its activities
(a) The Charter of the United Nations was signed on 26 June 1945 and came into force on 24 October 1945.
The Organization's primary objectives, to be implemented through its five major organs, are as follows:
(i) The maintenance of international peace and security;
(ii) The promotion of international economic and social progress and development programmes;
(iii) The universal observance of human rights;
(iv) The administration of international justice and law;
(v) The development of self-government for Trust Territories.
(b) The General Assembly focuses on a wide range of political, economic and social issues as well as the financial and administrative aspects of the Organization.
(c) Under the direction of the Security Council, the Organization has been involved in various aspects of peacekeeping and peacemaking, including efforts towards resolving conflicts, restoring democracy, promoting disarmament, providing electoral assistance and facilitating post-conflict peacebuilding, and engaging in humanitarian activities to ensure the survival of groups deprived of basic needs and overseeing the prosecution of persons responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law.
(d) The Economic and Social Council plays a particular role in economic and social development, including a major oversight role in the efforts of other organizations of the United Nations system to address international economic, social and health problems.
(e) The International Court of Justice has jurisdiction over disputes between Member States brought before it for advisory opinions or binding resolutions.
(f) The Trusteeship Council completed its primary functions in 1994 with the termination of the Trusteeship Agreement for the last United Nations Trust Territory.
Note 2
Summary of significant accounting and financial reporting policies of the United Nations
(a) The accounts of the United Nations are maintained in accordance with the Financial Regulations of the United Nations as adopted by the General Assembly, the rules formulated by the Secretary-General as required under the regulations and administrative instructions issued by the Under-Secretary-General for Management or the Controller.
They also take fully into account the United Nations system accounting standards, as adopted by the Administrative Committee on Coordination, which has since been replaced by the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination.
The Organization follows international accounting standard 1, “Presentation of financial statements”, on the disclosure of accounting policies, as modified and adopted by the Chief Executives Board for Coordination as follows:
(i) Going concern, consistency and accrual are fundamental accounting assumptions.
Where fundamental accounting assumptions are followed in financial statements, disclosure of such assumptions is not required.
If a fundamental accounting assumption is not followed, that fact should be disclosed together with the reasons;
(ii) Prudence, substance over form and materiality should govern the selection and application of accounting policies;
(iii) Financial statements should include clear and concise disclosure of all significant accounting policies that have been used;
(iv) The disclosure of the significant accounting policies used should be an integral part of the financial statements.
The policies should normally be disclosed in one place;
(v) Financial statements should show comparative figures for the corresponding period of the preceding financial period;
(vi) A change in an accounting policy that has a material effect in the current period or may have a material effect in subsequent periods should be disclosed together with the reasons.
The effect of the change should, if material, be disclosed and quantified.
(b) The Organization's accounts are maintained on a “fund accounting” basis.
Separate funds for general or special purposes may be established by the General Assembly, the Security Council or the Secretary-General.
Each fund is maintained as a distinct financial and accounting entity with a separate self-balancing, double-entry group of accounts.
Separate financial statements are prepared for each fund or for a group of funds of the same nature.
(c) The financial period for peacekeeping operations is one year, from 1 July to 30 June.
The financial period of the Organization for all other funds is a biennium and consists of two consecutive calendar years.
(d) Generally, income, expenditure, assets and liabilities are recognized on the accrual basis of accounting.
For assessed income, the policy in (j) (ii) below applies.
(e) The accounts of the Organization are presented in United States dollars.
Accounts maintained in other currencies are translated into United States dollars at the time of the transactions at rates of exchange established by the United Nations.
In respect of such currencies, the financial statements shall reflect the cash, investments, unpaid pledges and current accounts receivable and payable in currencies other than United States dollars translated at the applicable United Nations rates of exchange in effect as at the date of the statements.
In the event that the application of actual exchange rates at the date of the statements would provide a valuation materially different from the application of the Organization's rates of exchange for the last month of the financial period, a footnote will be provided quantifying the difference.
(f) The Organization's financial statements are prepared on the historical cost basis of accounting and are not adjusted to reflect the effects of changing prices for goods and services.
(g) The cash flow summary statement is based on the “indirect method” of determining cash flow, as referred to in the United Nations system accounting standards.
(h) The Organization's financial statements are presented in accordance with the ongoing recommendations of the Task Force on Accounting Standards to the Chief Executives Board for Coordination.
(i) The results of the Organization's operations presented in statements I, II and III are shown at a summary level by general type of activity as well as on a combined basis after the elimination of all inter-fund balances and instances of double-counting of income and expenditure.
Their presentation on a combined basis does not imply that the various separate funds can be intermingled in any way, since, normally, resources may not be utilized between funds.
(j) Income:
(i) Amounts necessary to finance the activities of peacekeeping operations are assessed on Member States according to the scale of assessments determined by the General Assembly;
(ii) Income is recognized when an assessment on Member States has been authorized by the General Assembly.
Neither appropriations nor spending authorities are recognized as income except to the extent that a matching assessment on Member States has been levied;
(iii) Amounts assessed on non-member States that agree to reimburse the Organization for their participation in its treaties, organs and conferences are credited to miscellaneous income;
(iv) Voluntary contributions from Member States or other donors are recorded as income on the basis of a written commitment to pay monetary contributions at specified times within the current financial period.
Voluntary contributions made in the form of services and supplies that are acceptable to the Secretary-General are credited to income or noted in the financial statements;
(v) Allocations from other funds represent monies appropriated or designated from one fund for transfer to and disbursement from another fund;
(vi) Income for services rendered includes amounts charged for salaries of staff members and other costs that are attributable to the provision of technical and administrative support to other organizations;
(vii) Interest income includes all interest earned on deposits in various bank accounts and investment income earned on the cash pool.
All realized losses and net unrealized losses on short-term investments in the cash pool are offset against investment income.
Investment income and costs associated with operation of investments in the cash pool are allocated to participating funds;
(viii) Miscellaneous income includes income from rental of premises, sale of used or surplus property, refunds of expenditures charged to prior periods, income from net gains resulting from currency translations, settlements of insurance claims, amounts assessed on new Member States for the year of admission to the United Nations, amounts assessed on non-member States as stated in paragraph (j) (iii) above, monies accepted for which no purpose was specified and other sundry income;
(ix) Income relating to future financial periods is not recognized in the current financial period and is recorded as deferred credits, as referred to in paragraph (m) (iii) below.
(k) Expenditure:
(i) Expenditures are incurred against authorized appropriations or commitment authorities.
Total expenditures reported include unliquidated obligations and disbursements;
(ii) Expenditures incurred for non-expendable property are charged to the budget of the period when the property is acquired and are not capitalized.
The inventory of such non-expendable property is maintained at historical cost;
(iii) Expenditures for future financial periods are not charged to the current financial period and are recorded as deferred charges, as referred to in paragraph (l) (v) below.
(l) Assets:
(i) Cash and term deposits represent funds in demand deposit accounts and interest-bearing bank deposits;
(ii) The cash pool comprises participating funds' share of the cash and term deposits, short-term and long-term investments and accrual of investment income, all of which are managed in the cash pool.
The investments in the cash pool are similar in nature.
Short-term investments are stated at cost or market value, whichever is lower; long-term investments are stated at cost.
Cost is defined as the nominal value plus or minus any unamortized premium or discount.
The share in the cash pool is reported separately in each of the participating fund's statements, and its composition and the market value of its investments is disclosed in the footnotes to the individual statements;
(iii) Assessed contributions represent legal obligations of contributors, and therefore the balances of unpaid assessed contributions due from Member States are reported irrespective of collectability.
It is the policy of the United Nations not to make provision for delays in collection of such assessments;
(iv) Inter-fund balances reflect transactions between funds and are included in the amounts due to and from the United Nations General Fund.
Inter-fund balances also reflect transactions directly with the United Nations General Fund.
Inter-fund balances are settled periodically, depending upon the availability of cash resources;
(v) Deferred charges normally comprise expenditure items that are not properly chargeable to the current financial period.
They will be charged as expenditure in a subsequent period.
These expenditure items include commitments approved by the Controller for future financial periods in accordance with financial rule 106.7.
Such commitments are normally restricted to administrative requirements of a continuing nature and to contracts or legal obligations where long lead times are required for delivery;
(vi) For purposes of the balance sheet statements only, those portions of education grant advances that are assumed to pertain to the scholastic years completed as at the date of the financial statement are shown as deferred charges.
The full amounts of the advances are maintained as accounts receivable from staff members until the required proofs of entitlement are produced, at which time the budgetary accounts are charged and the advances are settled;
(vii) Maintenance and repairs of capital assets are charged against the appropriate budgetary accounts.
Furniture, equipment, other non-expendable property and leasehold improvements are not included in the assets of the Organization.
Such acquisitions are charged against budgetary accounts in the year of purchase.
The value of non-expendable property is disclosed in notes to the financial statements.
(m) Liabilities and reserves and fund balances:
(i) Operating and other types of reserves are included in the totals for “reserves and fund balances” shown in the financial statements;
(ii) Unliquidated obligations for future years are reported both as deferred charges and as unliquidated obligations;
(iii) Deferred credits include income received for future periods and income received but not yet earned;
(iv) Commitments of the Organization relating to prior, current and future financial periods are shown as unliquidated obligations.
Current-period obligations related to peacekeeping operations remain valid for 12 months following the end of the financial period to which they relate.
As per financial regulation 5.5, unliquidated obligations of peacekeeping operations owed to Governments may be retained for an additional period of four years beyond the 12-month period provided for in financial regulation 5.3;
(v) Contingent liabilities, if any, are disclosed in notes to the financial statements;
(vi) The United Nations is a member organization participating in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, which was established by the General Assembly to provide retirement, death, disability and related benefits.
The Pension Fund is a funded defined benefit plan.
The financial obligation of the Organization to the Pension Fund consists of its mandated contribution at the rate established by the General Assembly together with its share of any actuarial deficiency payments under article 26 of the Regulations of the Pension Fund.
Such deficiency payments are payable only if and when the General Assembly has invoked the provision of article 26, following a determination that there is a requirement for deficiency payments based on an assessment of the actuarial sufficiency of the Pension Fund as at the valuation date.
As at the date of the current financial statement, the General Assembly had not invoked this provision.
Note 3
Accounting policies for peacekeeping operations
The accounts for the peacekeeping operations have been maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, with due regard for the following:
(a) Financial regulation 1.2, which states that the financial period of peacekeeping operations with special accounts shall be one year, from 1 July to 30 June.
(b) Financial regulation 6.5, which states that the annual accounts for peacekeeping operations with special accounts shall be submitted by the Secretary-General to the Board of Auditors no later than 30 September each year.
(c) Financial regulation 5.5, which states that obligations to Governments for troops, formed police units, logistical support and other goods supplied and services rendered to peacekeeping operations shall be retained beyond the 12-month period provided for in financial regulation 5.3 if the requisite claims are not received or processed during the financial period to which they pertain.
Those obligations shall remain valid for an additional period of four years following the end of the 12-month period provided for in financial regulation 5.3.
At the end of the additional four-year period any unliquidated obligations shall be cancelled and the remaining balance of any appropriations retained shall be surrendered.
(d) Voluntary contributions:
(i) General provisions:
Voluntary contributions in cash shall be considered income to be credited to the special account of the peacekeeping operation;
b.
Voluntary contributions in kind in the form of supplies and services shall be recorded as income under the heading “voluntary contributions” at the time of delivery of supplies or commencement of services, provided budgetary provision for such supplies or services was made.
In case there was no budgetary provision, no accounting entry shall be made, but the amount of the contribution shall be reflected in a footnote to the financial statements.
Cost of facilities provided under an agreement with a Member State in whose country a peacekeeping operation is located is excluded from the determination of voluntary contributions;
(ii) United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus accounts:
Prior to 16 June 1993, the Secretary-General was not authorized to utilize any funds other than the voluntary contributions pledged by Member States for the financing of UNFICYP.
The recording of obligations for the period prior to 16 June 1993 was limited to amounts that were within the total of pledged contributions.
As a consequence, the full amount of UNFICYP obligations that are payable for the period prior to 16 June 1993 has not been recorded, in particular with respect to reimbursements for extra costs in connection with pay and allowances of contingents and for extra costs in connection with contingent-owned equipment.
Such unrecorded obligations for the period prior to 16 June 1993 totalled $196,598,992 and are reflected in footnote f to the UNFICYP financial statement (statement IV);
b.
The General Assembly decided by its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993 that beginning 16 June 1993 the costs of UNFICYP should be treated as expenses of the Organization to be borne by Member States in accordance with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations.
From 16 June 1993 onwards, appropriations and assessments have been raised on the Member States in accordance with relevant General Assembly resolutions.
(e) Peacekeeping Reserve Fund:
(i) By its resolution 47/217 of 23 December 1992, the General Assembly established the United Nations Peacekeeping Reserve Fund as a cash-flow mechanism to ensure the rapid response of the Organization to the needs of peacekeeping operations.
The level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund was established at $150 million.
In accordance with the above-cited resolution, $49,242,762 was allocated from unencumbered balances in the special account of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group, $18,156,200 from unencumbered balances in the special account of the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group and $82,601,038 from authorized retained savings in the United Nations General Fund;
(ii) In accordance with General Assembly resolution 57/317 of 18 June 2003, during the period ended 30 June 2004 an amount of $33,250,000 was applied to meet the requirements of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004.
Note 4
Explanatory notes on assessed contributions receivable
Assessed contributions receivable have been recorded in accordance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the policy of the United Nations.
With reference to the amounts shown as unpaid, certain Member States have indicated that they do not intend to pay some of their assessed contributions or that such contributions will be paid only under certain conditions.
Based on United Nations policy as stated in note 2 (l) (iii) above, no provision has been made for delays in the collection of outstanding assessed contributions.
With regard to the foregoing, a number of Member States have requested that attention be drawn to their positions (as stated by their delegations at successive sessions of the General Assembly), in particular with respect to the following:
(a) To the extent that the amounts relate to expenditures under the Special Account for the United Nations Emergency Force 1956 and under the Ad hoc Account for the United Nations Operation in the Congo, which, in the view of some Member States, were illegal, they do not consider themselves bound, under the provisions of Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations, to participate in paying for those expenditures.
As a result, withholdings by certain Member States from payments for the financing of UNEF 1956 (statement XLI) and ONUC (statement XLII) are estimated to be $38.6 million and $70.2 million, respectively.
The estimate, which is based on the apportioned shares of the Member States concerned, excludes $5.3 million and $6.7 million in unpaid assessed contributions to UNEF 1956 and ONUC, respectively, by China for the period up to 24 October 1971.
Following the adoption by the General Assembly of its resolution 2758 (XXVI), entitled “Restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations”, on 25 October 1971, that amount was transferred to a special account pursuant to General Assembly resolution 3049 C (XXVII) of 19 December 1972.
(b) Certain Member States have stated that they do not intend to participate in the financing of UNEF 1973 and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
Other Member States have stated that they have excluded from their contributions to UNEF 1973 their shares of the expenses that they attribute to the additional functions resulting from the agreement of 4 September 1975 between Egypt and Israel.
As a result, withholdings by certain Member States from payments from the financing of UNEF 1973 and UNDOF are estimated to be $0.3 million, which covers UNEF 1973 until its liquidation in 1979 and UNDOF to 30 June 2004.
That amount excludes $36 million in unpaid assessed contributions by China for the period from 25 October 1971 to 31 December 1981, which was transferred to a special account pursuant to General Assembly resolution 36/116 A of 10 December 1981.
(c) Certain Member States have stated that they do not intend to participate in the financing of UNIFIL.
As a result, withholdings by certain Member States from payments for the financing of UNIFIL are estimated to be $8.2 million.
That estimate, which is based on the apportioned shares of the Member States concerned from the inception of UNIFIL on 19 March 1978 to 30 June 2004, excludes $19.6 million in unpaid assessed contributions by China for the period from 25 October 1971 to 31 December 1981, which was transferred to a special account pursuant to General Assembly resolution 36/116 A.
(d) Status of unpaid assessed contributions as at 30 June 2004: Detailed information for each of the separate peacekeeping operations on assessments and collections as at 30 June 2004 and on all outstanding balances due from each Member State is shown in the status of contributions report (ST/ADM/SER.B/631).
The status of contributions report for 30 June 2004 was printed too early in July to reflect any assessments or the application of credits returned to Member States that were approved by the General Assembly in late June.
However, the financial statements include such late-June transactions, and the new amounts due become part of the outstanding contributions from Member States shown as at 30 June 2004.
As a result, in such cases the amounts shown as contributions outstanding from Member States as at 30 June 2004 in the status of contributions report may be lower or higher than the corresponding amounts included in financial statements as at 30 June 2004.
Note 5
Peacekeeping special account fund summaries: income and expenditure and changes in reserves and fund balances (statement I); assets, liabilities, reserves and fund balances (statement II); and cash flow (statement III)
(a) Statements I, II and III contain financial results for all United Nations peacekeeping funds, which are broken down into three groups of related funds and consolidated into a grand total reflecting all individual peacekeeping accounts of the Organization.
This consolidated presentation should not be interpreted to mean that any of the individual funds can be used for any purpose other than that for which it is authorized.
The financial results of all peacekeeping operations are summarized in statements I, II and III.
These are categorized as all active peacekeeping missions (statements IV-XVIII), the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund (statement XIX), the support account for peacekeeping operations (statement XX), the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy (statement XXI) and completed peacekeeping missions (statements XXII-XLII).
(b) To comply with the uniform financial statement formats, statement I includes two calculations of the excess or shortfall of income relative to expenditure.
The first calculation is based on income and expenditure only for the current period.
The second calculation shown is a net one, which includes any prior-period adjustments to income or expenditure.
Note 6
United Nations Emergency Force 1973 and United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (statement V)
The General Assembly, on a number of occasions, has authorized the temporary suspension of financial regulations 3.2 (b), 3.2 (d), 5.3 and 5.4 in order to allow UNEF and UNDOF to retain certain amounts of surplus that otherwise would have been returned to Member States.
Under the terms of General Assembly resolution 50/83 of 15 December 1995, the authorized retained surplus of $64,931,001 was reduced proportionately by a total of $15,321,728 to offset in part the waiver of South Africa's unpaid contributions to various peacekeeping operations for the period from 30 September 1974 to 23 June 1994.
Under the terms of resolution 53/226 of 8 June 1999, followed by resolutions 54/266 of 15 June 2000 and 55/264 of 14 June 2001, the authorized retained surplus was further reduced by a total of $13,622,162, leaving a balance of $35,987,111 as at 30 June 2004.
This equals the amount held in the special account for unpaid assessed contributions pursuant to resolution 36/116 A (see note 4 (b)).
Note 7
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (statement VI)
The General Assembly, on a number of occasions, has authorized the temporary suspension of financial regulations 3.2 (b), 3.2 (d), 5.3 and 5.4 in order to allow UNIFIL to retain certain amounts of surplus that otherwise would have been returned to Member States.
Under the terms of General Assembly resolution 50/83, those authorized retained surpluses of $108,461,935 were reduced proportionately by a total of $25,583,986 to offset in part the waiver of South Africa's unpaid contributions to various peacekeeping operations for the period from 30 September 1974 to 23 June 1994.
Subsequently, under the terms of General Assembly resolution 58/307 of 18 June 2004, the authorized retained surplus was further reduced by $63,312,709 representing the net accumulated surplus in the account of the Force from 1978 to 1993, leaving a balance of $19,565,240 as at 30 June 2004.
This equals the amount held in the special account for unpaid assessed contributions pursuant to General Assembly resolution 36/116 A (see note 4 (c)).
Note 8
Authorized retained surplus
The General Assembly decided, in its resolution 57/323 of 18 June 2003, to suspend financial regulation 5.5 for certain missions in the light of the cash shortages in those missions.
Those missions are the Military Observer Group of the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (statement XXXI); the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (statement XXXV); the United Nations Operation in Somalia (statement XXXVI); the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti and the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (statement XXIV); the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (statement XXXVIII); and the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic (statement XXV).
Note 9
Surplus to be transferred for strategic deployment stocks
Under the terms of General Assembly resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002, amounts of $95,978,945 and $45,567,055 were authorized to be transferred from reserves and fund balances of UNPF (statement XXX) and UNMIH (statement XXXII), respectively, for strategic deployment stocks, to be held in the account of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy (statement XXI).
Member States had the option either to transfer their share in the surpluses directly to the Logistics Base or to have their shares returned to them upon settling a separate assessment for strategic deployment stocks.
Some Member States opted to transfer their share in the surpluses directly to the Logistics Base, and, accordingly, surpluses of $54,690,848 and $25,815,321 have been transferred directly from UNPF and UNMIH, respectively.
Some Member States opted to settle a separate assessment for strategic deployment stocks, and, accordingly, amounts of $11,649,854 and $5,639,962 from the surpluses of UNPF and UNMIH, respectively, have been returned to those Member States.
The remaining surpluses of $29,638,243 and $14,111,772 in UNPF and UNMIH, respectively, shall be returned to Member States upon their settlement of the separate assessment for strategic deployment stocks.
Currently, $13,581,780 remains outstanding from Member States.
Note 10
Strategic deployment stocks
Under the terms of General Assembly resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002, $141,546,000 was authorized for the purchase of strategic deployment stocks.
The report of the Secretary-General A/56/870 stated that once items have been deployed or rotated, the Secretariat will replenish them by charging the replacement costs to the budget of the mission that receives the stocks.
In order to account for the replenishment of strategic deployment stocks, a separate revolving fund has been established, where all such transactions are recorded.
The cumulative surplus at end of the financial period, which incorporates such items as prior-period savings and timing differences between the recording of income upon transfer and actual replenishment of strategic deployment stocks, is carried over, to be available in the next financial period.
Note 11
Ageing of assessed contributions receivable
Assessed contributions receivable from Member States have been outstanding for the periods indicated in table V.1 below.
On the basis of United Nations policy, no provision is made for delays in collection.
Table V.1
Outstanding contributions receivable
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Note 12
Non-expendable equipment
Table V.2 shows the value of non-expendable equipment, at historical cost, at peacekeeping missions, according to the cumulative inventory records of the United Nations as at 30 June 2004.
In accordance with United Nations accounting policies, non-expendable equipment is not included in the fixed assets of the Organization, but is charged against the current appropriations when acquired.
Table V.2
Value of non-expendable equipment
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Note 13
Liabilities for end-of-service and post-retirement benefits
(a) The United Nations has not specifically recognized in any of its financial accounts liabilities for after-service health insurance costs or liabilities for other types of end-of-service payments that will be owed when staff members leave the Organization.
Such payments are budgeted for in the regular budget and in peacekeeping operations, and the actual costs incurred in each financial period are reported as current expenditures.
(b) Staff members who separate from the Organization are entitled to be paid for any unused vacation days that they may have accrued up to a maximum of 60 days.
The Organization's liability for such unpaid accrued vacation compensation in respect of peacekeeping operations is estimated to be between $30 million and $35 million at 30 June 2004.
(c) Some staff members are entitled to repatriation grants and payment of expenditures related to relocation upon their termination from the Organization, based on the number of years of service.
The Organization's liability for such unpaid repatriation grant and relocation entitlements, in respect of peacekeeping operations is estimated to be between $13 million and $18 million at 30 June 2004.
The present report has not been amended to reflect the request of the General Assembly in resolution 59/264, paragraph 8, as the report was compiled prior to the adoption of that resolution.
Fund code in IMIS for strategic deployment stocks.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations commented that “when switching international calls through carriers and networks with different signalling protocols it is technically difficult to start the telephone billing only after the called party answers.
Furthermore, depending on the number of required hops to complete the call, the quality of the network and the time taken by the called party to answer the phone after it starts ringing, it may take between 20 and 80 seconds to establish an international telephone connection.
Therefore, a certain grace period before the billing system starts recording the duration of the international telephone call is not uncommon even among the commercial telephone service providers”.
A/59/5 (Vol. II)
viii
iii
x
xi
xii
xiii