# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
(ES) Mr President, we would like to express our satisfaction on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party at the approval of the Graça Moura report on the European Year of Languages 2001.
We believe that it is a magnificent initiative on a European level to dedicate a special year to languages in Europe, to knowledge of them and to the recognition throughout the whole of the European Union of the importance of languages as a reservoir of cultural and historical wealth and an expression of the very identity of the societies which make up the Union.
We have supported this report but there are two aspects which we are not happy with.
I am referring to some amendments which we have presented, both on behalf of the Liberal Group as well as the group of MEPs headed by Mrs Ferrer, in order to incorporate in a clear and specific way the official languages which are recognised in the Member States so that they may participate directly and in an institutional sense in the development of the European Year of Languages.
This amendment has not been taken up, and we regret the line followed by the European Commission, with the participation of the Member States, because it leaves aside, at risk of marginalising it, a form of participation which is particularly important in this field.
I would like to remind you that this Parliament recognised Catalan as a European language and gave it a specific personality.
It is this language, together with others, which must be taken into account in the application and celebration of this European Year of Languages.
Mr President, I voted for the establishment of the European Year of Languages 2001.
This is, without any doubt, a major, positive step, although, in my opinion, every year should be a year of languages.
It is of paramount importance for the European Union that the citizens of the 15 States learn to speak the languages of their fellow citizens of the European Union.
I would like to take this opportunity to call for language teaching for the elderly to receive just as much attention and funding as language teaching for young people, which receives an extensive amount of aid.
In this respect, the elderly are all too often forgotten and they would love to visit the other States of the European Union.
Mr President, I would like to give an explanation of my negative vote on the report on the European Year of Languages.
Firstly, language occupies an important place in European civilisation and culture, irrespective of numerical considerations regarding the size of the population.
This statement is thoroughly valid for lesser-used languages.
Secondly, the target year for this decision is 2001;
European citizens could become proficient in other languages as is shown by the fact that all people who speak minority languages, without exception, have in common an excellent training in this field.
All of them are already bilingual.
It is completely wrong to exclude minority languages from this initiative.
It is regrettable that this House has not accepted the important services that lesser-used languages could contribute to the success of this initiative.
I am glad the European Parliament and the Council have agreed to make 2001 the European Year of Languages.
In a European Union of fifteen Member States, committed to enlargement, with eleven official languages and a multitude of regional languages, it is actually very important to make the citizens of the Union aware of the advantages of understanding and speaking other languages and of the many opportunities that exist for learning to do so.
Speaking a language other than one' s mother tongue undoubtedly broadens the mind.
So, from primary school and kindergarten, children should be encouraged to start learning languages, as an instrument to raise awareness of cultural diversity.
Some European countries, especially the Scandinavian countries, already have very advanced policies in this field and the resulting advantages are evident.
This practice needs to be disseminated to the other Member States.
Of course, we must ensure that this knowledge is not confined only to the better off in society.
Boosting the learning of foreign languages will bring European citizens closer together by giving them the means to communicate, and thus get to know each other and forge the links to make the concept of European citizenship a reality.
Opening up to other cultures and finding out about the traditions of our European neighbours are essential ways of combating intolerance and racism engendered by fear of the unknown.
At the practical level, it needs to be made clear that the European Year of Languages is in fact a joint European Union/Council of Europe project.
To show that, it would be better for the two partners to use an identical logo and slogan.
The same concern for visibility and transparency leads me to support the creation of an interactive Internet site so that people can access useful information about the project.
I am in favour of people being multilingual, but I am sorry we are not trying to develop the teaching of Esperanto in parallel.
It is a language with European roots and easy to understand, but also rich and subtle.
As an auxiliary language, it can provide one means, amongst others, of facilitating communication between all European citizens.
I therefore regret that it is not mentioned in this proposal.
The undersigned members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left agree entirely with the point of view of both the Commission and the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport that language is a rather crucial component of human communication, whether it be the spoken or written language, sign language or body language.
There are people who prefer Esperanto as a form of communication across national borders.
There are also professional jargons, different dialects in one and the same country and minority languages which are now being recognised by democracies.
It is also important for posterity to carry out research into languages which are dying out.
In short, we believe that an understanding of the importance of language is invaluable and that the European Union ought to be acknowledging this beyond the mere one year of the present campaign.
We hope that this view of ours is also shared by the Council and by national parliaments both within and outside the Union.
The sums proposed by the Commission (EUR 8 million) and by the Committee (EUR 10 million) are too modest, in our opinion.
It ought to be possible to spend the proposed sums of money on other things, for which reason we are completely abstaining from voting.
- (NL) I am pleased with the report by Mr Graça Moura, the rapporteur, and I am grateful to him that my amendments have been adopted.
In the frame of this European Year, most of the amendments aim to establish closer cooperation with the Member States at all levels of policy, not only at national level but also at regional and even local policy level.
An essential requirement for this is that the Member States earmark sufficient funds to set up activities that can then be cofinanced by the European Union.
If not, the European Year of Languages is likely to remain a PR exercise, just a lot of hot air.
The second aim of my amendments was by means of the activities set up in the context of this European Year to pay special attention to socially vulnerable groups, migrants and semi-skilled and unskilled workers.
This is something very close to my heart: learning to have an active command of foreign languages should not become the umpteenth barrier to the integration of this target group, a privilege for the already privileged members of our society.
Foreign language learning is indeed the key to integration.
A third series of amendments that I have tabled concerns the availability of language courses and accessibility to them in the respective Member States.
It is an open secret that this situation differs greatly from one Member State to another.
Smaller Member States with a correspondingly small language area must ipso facto make much greater effort, whereas in the larger Member States and larger language areas respectively the economic incentive is not so great.
The Member States are therefore inherently asymmetrical in this regard.
I hope that the Council will endorse this initiative and that we shall be able to start the specific activities as soon as possible, because there is a lot to be done.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, giving Europeans the best training for the future, from their earliest youth, whatever their origin and level of education, above all means giving them the ability to speak languages other than their mother tongue.
Haute-Normandie has one of the youngest populations in France, but also one of the highest levels of youth unemployment.
Speaking another European language can clearly be a key to success for those young people.
Making 2001 European Year of Languages will make Europeans aware of the linguistic diversity of the European Union.
It is an excellent decision and has my full support.
But I do not think we should only devote one year to this aim.
Lasting commitment is needed.
Indeed, it is our duty to be ambitious and to demand that all our young people are able to speak another language fluently, offering them bilingual education whenever possible.
In this respect, IBIS (Institut Bilingue Interuniversitaire de la Seine), which first saw the light of day in Haute-Normandie, is most exemplary.
I am convinced that other operations of a similar nature should be massively encouraged and financially supported by the European Union.
Dary report (A5-0093/2000)
Maes (Verts/ALE).
(NL) Mr President, we not only voted with enthusiasm for this report, but also for the amendments that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development tabled.
We are sure that in our partner countries of the ACP, substantial investments are being made in order to be able to compete with regard to quality on the world market.
The problem, however, is the price.
Many of these countries are still battling with excessively high costs and I believe that a long transitional period, which I would insist on, is very important for these countries.
I think our ACP partners will also be pleased with the outcome of this vote.
- The British Labour members have a strong commitment to the producers in the Caribbean and wish to see an early settlement of the dispute within the WTO.
These are delicate negotiations and at this stage the UK does not rule out an eventual tariff only system.
This is the context in which we have supported the Dary report while being against Amendments Nos 6 and 7.
- (NL) It is clear from the debates once again that there is still considerable disagreement in the Union about the length of the transitional period, the level of the quotas and the system for granting licences.
The vote on the Dary report has demonstrated once again that the European Parliament does not respect the internationally agreed trading rules.
It is unacceptable that in the Dary report again a transitional period of ten years is proposed, without putting a definitive ruling first.
Taking account of the internationally agreed trading rules within the WTO, the GATT Agreement and the internal market strategy of the European Union, we should be arguing in favour of introducing a tariff only system as quickly as possible.
We could possibly agree provisionally on a tariff quota ruling that is WTO compliant, but on condition that a date is specified on which the tariff only system will be introduced.
Belgium has always argued in favour of the immediate adaptation of the banana regime to comply with the WTO, but with a concession to the ACP countries.
Preference should indeed be given to a tariff only system because this option respects the trading flows best and is most clearly WTO compliant.
The vote today is a sham because the real decisions have been taken in secret deals between the great capitalist groups of the United States and the European Union.
Their banana war is just one aspect and, like banana production, just one factor in a complex of conflicts of interest.
This war, which is presented as a conflict between producer countries, Latin American and dollar area countries against Lomé Convention countries and European overseas dependent territories, is actually a war between capitalist groups.
Three large American capitalist groups, including Chiquita, the new name for the notorious United Fruit, dominate the dollar banana and are supported by the American Government.
Behind the producer countries the European Union is claiming to protect, however, there are some large families of wealthy French-Creoles and, indeed, powerful English and French groups.
Our position is this: while we do not want to give the mighty dollar banana sharks any awards, neither do we have any intention of providing backing through our votes to the smaller sharks protected by the European Union.
However, it is essential to take measures to protect the small producers who work their own plantations without exploiting anyone, and for them to be guaranteed a decent minimum income, regardless of market fluctuations.
We demand protection for agricultural labourers, who should not be the victims of the commercial war raging on the world market.
If a guarantee fund is created, it must underwrite the wages of these workers and the incomes of small producers, and not allow banana magnates to increase their wealth just to invest it in other, more profitable, sectors.
- (FR) This report gives us the opportunity to welcome the European Parliament' s becoming aware of the need to defend the banana producers of, on the one hand, the ACP countries (to whom we have made commitments in the course of renewing the Lomé Convention) and, on the other hand, the outermost countries of the Community.
Although the WTO' s dispute settlement body condemned certain key elements in the competitivity of ACP operators, the validity of the principle of tariff quotas has not been challenged in any way.
The fact is that we are, as is often the case, witnessing the overzealousness of the Commission which, in the context of the negotiations initiated within the WTO, has gone too far.
In attempting to reconcile the contradictory interests of all parties, in the end it has not been able, or has not wished, to achieve this.
It therefore seems curious, to say the least, to note the paradox of acknowledging that operators are all in favour of a tariff quota system, while adopting the solution of a single rate system!
We therefore congratulate Mr Dary and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development who are attempting to restore a little order to the Commission proposal which we find simply unacceptable as it stands, because it is selling off Community interests for the benefit of American multinationals whose manufacturing standards are obviously not comparable with EU standards.
While it may, admittedly, be quite laudable to seek to obtain the most advantageous prices for consumers, we must still be able to compare like with like, particularly in terms of manufacturing conditions (social legislation, child protection).
We must therefore ensure that we do not tend towards harmonising these social conditions of manufacturing to the lowest common denominator, and, instead, let us pursue, as a priority, the objective of better product quality, without GMOs or pesticides or anything else.
Developing better quality products will cause a consequent increase in demand, and thus in the volume of production, with a concomitant reduction in prices!
After years of difficulty due to the economic crisis in industrialised countries and the decline in the economies of Eastern Europe, the Commission' s solution would be likely to cause the untimely disappearance of these producing countries whose economies would not, for want of time, be able to restructure and diversify production.
It is clear today that, without actively seeking confrontation, the EU must champion its own point of view, a position which is all the more tenable as present and future European consumers represent a major proportion of the banana market.
We are therefore satisfied with Mr Dary' s report, even if we feel it does not go far enough, particularly in terms of the ACP tariff system, the transition period extended beyond ten years, and the definition of a new system for the allocation of import licences, or additional European aid.
- (SV) The EU' s system for importing bananas - which the WTO panel declared to be discriminatory on 7 April 1999 - must be reformed.
There is justification for showing consideration for banana producers in the ACP States and in the extremely peripheral areas of the Union, but there is no reason for special treatment in the field of trade.
Import duties and production subsidies are incompatible with our liberal values.
In our view, it is only through a system of free trade that long-term, sustainable, global economic development can be created.
For that reason, the Commission' s proposal for a rapid transition to a system with fixed uniform rates of duty is a step in the right direction.
Lagendijk report (A5-0069/2000)
Fatuzzo (PPE-DE).
(IT) Mr President, it was with great pleasure that I voted for this measure on the communication from the Commission on the stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe.
This is one of the measures adopted in this Chamber which I have most appreciated, for I am sure we all remember the serious problems which arose in this area just over a year ago during the NATO military intervention.
I feel that the only way to prevent wars is precisely to be closely aware of the tangible problems of other peoples.
In all probability, it is only this initiative and those which will be approved and supported by the European Parliament which will truly succeed in preventing disasters in this region and any other regions that find themselves in a similar situation.
In this communication from the Commission, the European Union sets out its claim to impose itself as protector on the countries of South East Europe.
But throughout the century which has just ended, that region of Europe has known nothing but suffering because of that claim, whether made by rival European powers or by a Western Europe which likes to think it is united.
While it is easy for the rapporteur to denounce nationalism and local chauvinism, which are indeed intolerable, who can forget that the great European powers have always played on these nationalisms, setting them against each other according to their interests as great powers?
The economic and political rivalries between European powers have led to two world wars: the first started in that region and the second was particularly destructive there.
As to the newly united Europe, it has principally distinguished itself first by contributing to the carve-up of former Yugoslavia, and then by bombing Serbia and Kosovo.
As the entire current situation illustrates, that war has further aggravated the situation in the region, both in material terms and in terms of relations between communities.
Under the circumstances, entrusting the stability of this region to the European powers is the same as having the wolf look after the sheep.
Our vote against this report expresses our opposition to the past and present policies of the European powers.
I am delighted to welcome this report calling for the European Union to play a leading role in the context of the stability and association pact for the countries of South-Eastern Europe.
People are always saying that South-Eastern Europe is the European Union' s crisis-riven back yard.
The political context in this region is extremely sensitive and came to a climax in the Kosovo conflict.
That conflict demonstrated the potential political effects of instability on the neighbouring States, threatening to destabilise the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), Albania and Montenegro.
Other countries in the region like Bulgaria and Romania have also suffered serious economic repercussions.
It is easy to see that the European Union has every interest in the stabilisation of the region and that interest will grow with future enlargement.
The European Union was traumatised by its powerlessness in the face of the process of violent disintegration at work in the Balkans.
It was incapable of doing anything likely to stop that disintegration because it lacked a common political will for action, but it also lacked a political approach and appropriate instruments which would have allowed it to manage the crisis effectively at the international level.
It can be said that the Balkan crisis was a turning point which had the effect of stamping a decisive orientation on European defence and security policy.
The decisions of the European Councils of Cologne and Helsinki on creating military and civilian capabilities for independent European Union crisis management are proof of that.
The outcome of the Cologne Council was the establishment of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe on 10 June 1999, a pact involving not only the Member States of the European Union and, of course, the countries of the region, but also the United States and Russia.
The pact is part of the global stabilisation approach the European Union has been developing since 1996.
The stabilisation and association agreements to be signed by Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania are the keystone of that approach.
Negotiations are currently taking place with Macedonia.
Croatia, where positive political changes have recently occurred, should be involved in the near future.
These agreements constitute an entirely new contractual framework for the countries of the region; they draw great inspiration from the institutional arrangements and conditions attached to the European agreements linking the European Union with the CEECs.
These agreements are individually tailored to take account of the specific situation in each country.
They hold out the prospect of long-term integration into the European Union on the basis of the Treaty of Amsterdam and in compliance with the Copenhagen criteria.
Above all, they give the countries of this crisis-riven region an important political signal and a definite incentive.
These agreements also encourage stronger regional cooperation, which seems to me indispensable to the creation of an axis of stability in the region.
García-Margallo y Marfíl report (A5-0059/2000)
Fatuzzo (PPE-DE).
(IT) Mr President, I also voted for the measure on the Commission communication on implementing the framework for financial markets: Action Plan, because it is clearly important for the European Parliament, the Commission, the Union and the Council to make progress in terms of competition, using networks and electronic money, which are the latest forms of economic activity.
I would have been happier with my decision to vote for the measure if it had included the intention to present every pensioner with a computer when he draws out his first pension payment.
The elderly need to familiarise themselves with new commerce techniques as well as young people.
.
(PT) This report comments favourably on the Commission' s proposal for an action plan on financial markets, the objective of which is to liberalise capital markets.
It is also in line with the Lisbon Summit, which declared that this and other liberalisation programmes should be speeded up.
But the truth is that this process increases financial instability and encourages concentration of capital markets and financial institutions, and for this reason we are opposed both to the position adopted by the Commission and to the rapporteur' s position.
However, with a view to introducing specific measures to combat the volatility of capital markets and to control capital movements in the EU, especially those of a speculative nature, and also with a view to minimising the risk of financial crises, we attempted, by means of an amendment to this effect, to persuade the Commission to include in its action plan corresponding concrete measures.
These included, in particular, the presentation of a report on the introduction of a tax on capital movements, especially speculative movements.
We regret that our amendment was not approved.
The resolution tabled by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is certainly much better than the original version, and I want to thank the rapporteur, Mr García-Margallo y Marfil.
However, I have not been able to vote for it because it still contains inconsistencies after the plenary vote.
Thus, as regards the idea of the creation of a commission for stock exchange operations, I recommend a green paper on the establishment or gradual creation of such a commission, preceded by a feasibility study.
Moreover, the subsidiarity principle requires that, at a time of remarkable boom in the craze for cross-border investments in securities, we bear in mind that the interests of the issuing companies and investors will be better served by proximity of supervision and monitoring of international investments, with more efficient channels for cooperation between the monitoring authorities.
Supervision of the securities markets can be carried out better by people close to the markets and with in-depth knowledge of them.
In this context, comparison with the commission in place in the United States, the SEC, is particularly inappropriate, because the SEC is the corollary of a financial system resulting largely from a segmentation of the profession between commercial banks and investment banks, and in Europe we have chosen the universal bank model, which has strengthened the role of the banks in the European financial system.
It would be equally aberrant to include the stock exchange listing rules in the remit of such a commission, when at most it should ensure respect for them.
The establishment of a pan-European equity listing would also be aberrant.
Harmonised yet competitive listings guarantee a diversity of investment products.
A pan-European listing would make it impossible for national stock exchanges to concentrate on niche markets and would restrict opportunities for specialisation which may emerge from a competitive situation, even though it is convergent.
Instead of focusing on the listings - already largely harmonised anyway - to the detriment of diversity, we should emphasise rapprochement or even harmonisation of existing dealing systems and environments should be emphasised.
On prudential supervision, I made a direct appeal to the Commission and the Council yesterday not to cling to the crazy idea of entrusting supervision of all the credit establishments in the fifteen Member States to the European Central Bank.
Governments control banking activities, hence the need for financial sector supervision by government authorities, not the European Central Bank.
I have not voted for paragraph 26 which is mostly incomprehensible in French anyway.
Kuckelhorn report (A5-0053/2000)
Fatuzzo (PPE-DE).
(IT) Mr President, considering that we are discussing supplementary pensions, the representative of the Pensioners' Party could not let the occasion pass without explaining why he voted for this measure.
I am convinced that the future of pensioners can only lie in supplementary pensions.
These pensions should, however, be optional and replace compulsory State pensions, which are a veritable sieve and lose water from all sides.
When we cook spaghetti, which is a delicious Italian national dish, we use a colander, a container full of holes which drains the water off the spaghetti.
Well, instead of a colander, we could use the national State schemes, which, I am afraid, also lose water from all sides, except that, instead of water, it is the hard-earned money of all the working citizens which drains away.
For this reason, we must replace the national State pension schemes with private supplementary and alternative pension schemes.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I voted in favour of Amendment No 39 by mistake.
In fact I reject it for the following reasons: this amendment is based on the assumption that neither the Commission report nor the European Parliament' s Kuckelkorn report give any impetus towards structural reforms in the Member States of the European Union as regards reforming retirement pensions.
The opposite is true of course.
Right now there is a considerable need for reform in Member States' retirement pension systems.
I therefore believe that any impetus given by the European Union and by the European Parliament will assist debate in the Member States, where we still have more questions than answers.
.
(PT) We voted against this report because we consider that in content it differs little from the Commission' s proposal, which aims to put social security totally in the hands of the financial markets, thus weakening or even replacing state pension schemes by stock market speculation.
This makes it quite clear what the "modernisation of social protection" agreed at the Lisbon Summit is meant to be.
As we stated in the amendments we tabled, creating a single market for supplementary pension funds is not an adequate response to future demographic problems.
What we need are expansionist economic policies which help to create permanent jobs, thus expanding the pool of contributors to the state pension fund.
The state social security system, which is financed on a solid footing independent of commercial interests and financial profitability, and which is based on a spirit of solidarity between generations, is in a position to guarantee the right to a dignified retirement and to security in old age for workers who have paid contributions to state pension schemes.
I spoke yesterday on the Kuckelhorn report as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Women' s Rights.
The committee expressed an opinion on the outcome of the consultation on the Green Paper on supplementary pensions in the single market, just as it did on the Green Paper itself.
We believe this very broad consultation should rapidly conclude with a proposal for a framework directive to ensure the development of a genuine single market in supplementary pension funds, under the second and third pillars.
The first pillar, covering biometric risks, must still continue to be the cornerstone of social protection in the European Union.
The targeted directive we are seeking for the second pillar of supplementary pensions should, in particular, define the context for eliminating obstacles to free choice of pension fund, free movement of persons, free provision of services and double taxation.
As regards taxation, the only acceptable solution is one based on the principle that contributions should be tax deductible, at least up to a certain ceiling, and that supplementary pensions paid out should be taxable in accordance with the income tax legislation applying in the countries of residence.
As regards the controversial question of whether supplementary pension systems should cover biometric risks, I want to point out that, from the fiscal point of view, pension funds which do not cover these risks cannot be discriminated against as compared with those which do cover them, it being understood that the need to cover these risks depends on the extent of the first pillar in the various countries.
Subsidiarity and free choice require this.
Prudential rules must not be disproportionate to ensuring that the funds are secure.
They must be differentiated according to whether a scheme is internal or external to the enterprise.
They must allow managers to determine the best investment strategy.
In the absence of agreement on certain essential points, I am unable to vote for the general framework.
I regret this all the more as almost all the relevant conclusions from the Committee on Women' s Rights and my recommendations are included in the motion for a resolution, in particular those considering that
as regards supplementary pensions too, the preservation of acquired rights is essential when a spouse interrupts or abandons his or her work in order to devote himself or herself to his or her family or look after close relatives who are in need of assistance;
for the purpose of calculating pensions, certain periods devoted to the upbringing of children or care of family members ought to be taken into account;
it is desirable to provide for the possibility of continued voluntary or optional insurance to preserve and improve pension rights and guarantee a right to payment of the capital under certain conditions.
We should obviously take advantage of this opportunity to ask the Member States to implement more consistently the principle of equal pay for equal work, because wage discrimination against women has repercussions on women' s pension levels.
Any legal or contractual provisions infringing the principle of equality of treatment of men and women should be invalid.
Finally, I want to reiterate my long-standing demand - disregarded by the Commission for many years - for revision of the existing directives on equality of treatment of women and men in terms of social security, in the same way as it applies in legal and professional systems.
And let us not forget assisting spouses, those millions of invisible workers, the large majority women, on whose behalf this Parliament has demanded an upgrading of the half-hearted 1986 directive to give assisting spouses proper status and compulsory membership of social security schemes, especially pension schemes.
On 28 March President Prodi and seven of his colleagues met with members of the Committee on Women' s Rights, the European Women' s Lobby and the Equal Opportunities Consultative Committee.
I hope he and the committee responsible will now stop ignoring those demands of the European Parliament I have just mentioned.
Palacio Vallelersundi report (A5-0098/2000)
Mr President, I also voted for the Communication: "The strategy for Europe' s internal market" , despite the fact that the text did not include the opinion drafted by Mr Medina Ortega on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, page 20 of which states that from the point of view of social security, the ideal of supplementary pensions requires the creation of a genuine European social security system - and I repeat, European social security system - to replace the current approach, which is based on the harmonisation of national systems.
I am not, therefore, alone in hoping that, tomorrow, the 15 governments will at last decide to take social security and pensions in hand at European level, for this is the only way to prevent the current breakdown of the systems.
.
(EL) According to its communication, the Commission intends over the next five years to continue the same internal market strategy, but to apply it more strictly and extend it to new areas.
Not only does the European Parliament report support this approach, it also calls for the relevant measures to be speeded up.
The starting point for the proposed objectives are what are typically referred to as the 'enormous benefits' of the internal market.
However, no explanation is given as to who will benefit from, and who will suffer under, this procedure.
Without doubt, the only outcome of all the measures to implement the principles of free establishment and free provision of services, the measures to liberalise the markets, the measures to promote the free movement of goods and the numerous concomitant laws is to strengthen the huge multinationals whose potential to extend and mobilise on new markets at greatly reduced costs has been facilitated and which have benefited from deregulation measures.
These multinationals have seen their profits increase and their position consolidated.
Unfortunately, the same does not apply to small- or medium-sized businesses in small Member States, where much stiffer competition has resulted in an increase in the number of bankruptcies, shrinking business and job cuts.
The problem for these companies is not, of course, that they are 'hampered in exploiting the opportunities afforded by the internal market' ; their problem is precisely the measures used to implement the internal market, the principles which constitute the EU's competition legislation and the reduction in demand in the middle and lower classes as the result of anti-grass roots austerity policies.
And, of course, the solution does not lie in venture capital and the financial markets, which increase the risks for most small businesses, due to their limited resources, but in a different economic development policy which supports productive investment, increases demand and makes it easier for small businesses to trade.
The report calls for new, improved arrangements for companies by 'simplifying the legal, administrative and fiscal environment' and for 'laws... which do not involve costs and other burdens for businesses which would otherwise lose their competitive advantage over foreign competitors' .
In other words, even less accountable capital transactions and even fewer legislative specifications.
At the same time, there is not a word about workers' rights, about the fact that fewer obstacles mean less protection under labour legislation and less accountability during mass redundancies, mergers and transfers.
It is not by chance that neither the individual Commission proposals nor the European Council guidelines make any reference to the need to limit these phenomena, control speculative movements of capital and impose a tax and other measures on capital.
The report calls for greater liberalisation of sectors such as the pharmaceutical market and a reduction in the tax burden on employment, thereby proving that the measures being taken are paving the way for greater liberalisation of and less accountable capital transactions and profits with exceptionally dangerous consequences for the entire social protection system.
The report under discussion is fully in line with the anti-grass roots economic and social policy exercised within the framework of the single internal market and EMU and we shall, of course, be voting against it.
The sub-text of Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s report is recognition of the deadlock between national governments, which fail to transpose Community law when it does not serve their interests, and companies, normally the principal beneficiaries of the single market, which have to be convinced of the benefits through information campaigns and 'incentives' .
In the light of the success of earlier campaigns on the euro, the results of these are still to be established.
This is another illustration of the 'soviet-style' procedures of the Community institutions which are now trying to invent the new consumer and the new businessman, after the new citizen of the Ludford report.
So while the rapporteur supports companies, especially when faced with the difficulties SMEs encounter because of 'administrative obstacles' and complexities, I have considerable reservations about certain provisions in the final text.
The report underlines the vital importance of making infringement procedures faster and more efficient and 'welcomes the proposals to the Intergovernmental Conference' along those lines.
Because Community centralisation is failing to demonstrate its validity and its contribution, we are now forced to insist on repressive procedures, where cooperation would have made it possible to draw up flexible rules more easily acceptable to those involved.
Then, the Commission should, and I quote, 'pay special attention to creating internal-market mindedness' in national governments, 'while monitoring national implementing measures' .
When we know the political context surrounding officials in Community institutions, this desire to brainwash officials in our governments alarms me.
Finally, the report regrets that the advantage to businesses of treating the whole of the EU as a single market rather than as a collection of national markets is not always apparent to them.
To remedy this lack of awareness which is additional to administrative obstacles and consumer behaviour, the report envisages 'mass information campaigns similar to those conducted in the case of the euro and incentives to encourage the private sector not to treat partners from other Member States unfavourably' .
These points do not seem to undermine the confidence of this House in the chosen Community construction model.
People are going to be made happy, whether they like it or not.
That concludes the explanations of vote.
COM in milk
The next item is the report (A5-0081/2000) by Mr Pesälä, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1255/1999 on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products (COM(1999) 631 - C5-0339/1999 - 1999/0254(CNS)).
Mr President, Commissioner, this is indeed a matter of an amendment to a Regulation by means of which competence would be transferred from the Council to the Commission.
With this amendment to the Regulation, the Commission would be empowered to amend the list of goods not covered by Annex 1.
The Commission already has this power in the area of agricultural produce, such as grain, sugar, rice and eggs.
It would be logical if this power were extended to cover milk products.
This would be the case as a result of the amendment.
When we consider that funds set aside for aiding exports will dwindle in a couple of years from EUR 587 million to EUR 415 million, as a result of WTO agreements, it would be a good thing if the Commission had the power to examine the list of goods.
There are many goods for export that also contain substantial amounts of non-milk products, such as yoghurt containing sugar and fruit, and yet dairy products attract export subsidies.
This being the case, the question here is very much one of logic, allowing us to proceed in the same way as with grain, sugar, rice and eggs.
It is also very much a question of budgetary discipline, of being able to observe budgetary discipline consistently in the years to come, as appropriations for exports grow scarcer.
There has been some discussion that the transfer of power from the Council to the Commission might not be such a good thing.
My own view on this, and on such situations as this, is that it is what we call a zero-sum game.
We must be logical and adopt the right use of power and the right course to do our job as well and as consistently as possible.
This has nothing whatsoever to do with shifting the balance of interinstitutional power.
I think it is rooted in common sense, and a very far-reaching sense of consistency.
In my opinion, in the future, when prices and situations change rapidly in the world markets, this is the way we should be able to progress with regard to practical matters and react quickly.
I believe the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is also unanimous on this.
This amendment to the Regulation must be made.
It will be a very good and positive move for everyone, and agricultural and dairy producers in particular.
Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to start by very sincerely thanking Mr Pesälä for his statement, but I must say straight away that the thrust of my comments is somewhat different.
We have a slogan in German which says 'Milk cheers up tired chaps' .
But you can also just say 'Milk cheers you up' , because we now have some women in key positions in the Commission and that is why I would like to put on record my view that the Commission is now cheerfully planning to abolish export refunds for milk products too.
The Commission is empowered to delete goods eligible for export refunds under the COMs for cereals, sugar, rice and eggs, for example.
In the case of goods not covered by Annex I to the Treaty the list has been amended in this way.
My question is this: is the Commission now seeking carte blanche for other products?
I know that the Member States have taken widely differing views of this, not least in Council meetings.
Is this really what is intended for the entire milk sector?
I would be grateful if you could give me a couple of answers in a moment, when we consider whether this really is efficient.
The Commission text indicates that additional administrative options are to be created, so as to facilitate more precise selection of those goods for which export refunds are to be granted.
Would the Commission not agree that in this context the expression 'efficient use' is rather euphemistic?
What does 'efficient' mean in plain language?
In this case, "efficient" quite simply means abolishing export refunds for milk products.
In practice it means that, for example, no export refunds will be granted for the milk part of fruit yoghurt.
So I would like to ask if there is not a danger that without the milk export refund component export refunds for yoghurt will be reduced.
Do you have real calculations and reliable figures for this?
What will the situation be then?
The rapporteur, Mr Pesälä, has, of course, already pointed out that this will also hit other products.
There are also other export products, such as cakes and pastries, which contain milk components.
So it sounds rather crazy to me if, on the one hand, we say that we must reduce costs while, on the other, it is possible, because more milk will remain on the market,that additional costs will have to be met for storage and so on.
As I see it, excess production in the milk sector is likely to get worse rather than improve, and this gradual increase in minimum market access and the simultaneous reduction in the maximum export refund are rather contradictory.
I am sure that you will be able to explain this in your statement in a moment.
I believe that in terms of market policy there is no urgent need for this, and I can therefore see no reason why I should happily vote for this procedure or why it should be in the interests of the people I represent.
I think I might find it rather difficult to explain to the farmers at home.
So I would like to ask once more - is the abolition of these export refunds really unavoidable?
Of course we agreed at the Berlin Summit that savings would have to be made, but surely in the right place.
I am sure that you will be able to give us some answers in a moment.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to thank you very sincerely, Mr Pesälä, for your report.
So what is this all about?
The proposal is to transfer to the Commission the power to amend the list of processed products containing milk products which are eligible for refunds.
As the rapporteur has already explained, the Commission already has this power for cereals, sugar, rice and eggs.
Planned total expenditure for export refunds for goods not covered by Annex I to the Treaty have been reduced from EUR 610 million in budget year 1999 to EUR 551 million in budget year 2000.
Why?
This year, for the last time, we can exceed the WTO upper limit of EUR 475 million by the amounts not used in 1999.
In the next GATT year, total permissible expenditure will be limited to EUR 415 million by the WTO system, and it will no longer be possible to carry amounts forward.
Let us compare: last year we had EUR 610 million, and next year will only be able to spend EUR 415 million.
We believe that it would have been unwise to make this enormous change from 600 to 400 in one go.
So we have introduced an interim stage this year.
Our WTO commitments and budgetary discipline mean that we have to adopt a selective approach.
That means that we can no longer grant export refunds for products where this is not essential to maintain their competitiveness.
And that, Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert, is exactly what you were asking about.
We want to be in a position to adjust the list in accordance with destinations and sales opportunities, so that in future we can use the maximum permissible amount of budget appropriations to export a maximum volume of milk products.
You gave yoghurt as an example, and it is a good one, as it demonstrates how illogical a system can be.
At present, the situation is that if any sweeteners or other additives are added to a yoghurt, it is not covered by Annex I to the Treaty.
If it is a pure natural yoghurt, that is made from milk and nothing else, then it is a milk product and it is not classified as a good not covered by Annex I to the Treaty.
So we have not been paying export refunds any more for natural yoghurt for years, but we still have to grant them for flavoured yoghurts.
Is that logical?
Surely you can see that.
We really are not in the business of putting the thumbscrews on agriculture; this is about being able to react appropriately to short-term market requirements.
So this proposal will, in future, make it possible for the Commission to adapt the list of goods eligible for export refunds swiftly, but the Member States will be involved as it will come under the management committee procedure.
In conclusion, I would like to say that I find it discriminatory if milk only cheers up tired chaps.
Why not 'weary women' as well?
That concludes the debate.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
COM in milk
The next item is the report (A5-0074/2000) by Mr Maat, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1255/1999 on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products (COM (1999) 608 - C5-0047/2000 - 1999/0246(CNS)).
Mr President, during the two months I have been working on the report, I have discovered that feelings run high on the subject of school milk in Europe.
There have been many responses from schools throughout the European Union and also from school children.
I found that remarkable in itself.
There has also been much discussion because the Commission says let us go over to joint financing, which means reducing the European contribution.
Many schools reacted particularly to this point and I have also noticed among my supporters that people wondered whether things would turn out all right for school milk, whether it would keep going as an instrument?
In that regard I must say that I was very fortunate as a new Member of Parliament that, in dealing with the budget for 2001, Parliament in any case adopted my proposal to increase the school milk budget from EUR 53 to 83 million.
The proposal now before us in the report that was unanimously accepted in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - I would stress 'unanimously' - and it was particularly gratifying that all parties in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development support the report - boils down to the fact that more money is needed, EUR 96 million in fact.
That does not come entirely within the budget, but the reality is such that, in view of the change in the dairy market, this small difference could also perhaps be found in the dairy budget.
It is also for this reason that I would urge Parliament most strongly to support the report on school milk, because there is every reason to do so.
It is remarkable how casual we in Europe sometimes are about food.
It is always there and in itself is no problem.
But it is clear that school milk has an added value for the dietary pattern of children and contributes to a better diet, particularly in urban areas.
This has been borne out by studies.
The European Commission has also commissioned a study.
I did find it to be rather limited, on the basis of a desk study, but in view of the considerable interest in Europe there is every reason to continue the regulation.
There is extra money for education in the field of the Internet, the electronic superhighway and there is more attention paid to the environment and much attention to safe living and to social conditions and within this we should not neglect a sound policy on the proper use of food and undoubtedly on milk as well.
For these reasons, and to see whether this regulation could be brought more up to date, I am pleased that the report has also been accepted in this sense in the Committee and I hope it will also be in Parliament.
There is an expansion in the number of products that can be used in the school milk regulation.
I am thinking of drinking yoghurt, low-fat cheese, skimmed milk and in this regard valuable amendments have been tabled by my own Group, and also by the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, among others by Mr Pesl for Scandinavia.
Many specific proposals have been made and that means that in this way we can adapt the school milk regulation in a better way and integrate it better into the current dietary pattern.
That in itself makes for a stronger case.
Anyone who thinks that the school milk regulation will rescue the dietary pattern is wrong.
You must also be realistic.
If this report is accepted by this House, every year about EUR 12 will be spent per child on subsidies for school milk and that is peanuts in my view.
This can easily be justified socially within the budget and in respect of a sound nutritional policy.
Mr President, on the basis of the information provided I shall wholeheartedly recommend this report.
I should like to thank the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their unanimous support, that bodes well for the vote in this House.
I should also like to thank the Commission for its willingness to provide the necessary information and also for preparing the report.
I hope it will lead to a constructive position with regard to the implementation of this report.
I understand that in any case the Council of Ministers will meet next Monday.
It would therefore be an appropriate moment if Parliament were to approve this report and the school milk regulation.
Mr President, at the request of Mr Cunha I am presenting our statement on this debate on the school milk scheme.
For more than 20 years, the European Union has been financing the free distribution of milk in primary and secondary schools.
In recent years this action has amounted to an average annual expenditure of some EUR 90 million for more than 300 million litres of milk, benefiting around 10 million children and young people, or nearly 20% of eligible schoolchildren.
There are two main reasons justifying this measure and why it should continue.
The first is its social impact, as it ensures a minimum balanced diet for many children and young people who otherwise would not have access to one.
The main beneficiaries are children and young people from disadvantaged social classes and poorer districts in both rural and urban areas.
The second reason is that, as there is a structural surplus in the market for milk products, this measure also represents an incentive to dispose of milk in a far more useful and constructive way than by distributing it, denaturing it or exporting it to third countries at even greater cost.
It is a pity that the European Union does not have more actions of this kind for other products, instead of dumping them on international markets by means of subsidies which are sometimes twice their price on those markets, which makes it difficult to understand the alleged objective of budgetary savings.
The United States, which is famous for having a more individualist outlook with less solidarity, spends nearly 9 000 million dollars a year on distributing foods to schoolchildren, i.e. 100 times more than the European Union.
And the European Union is now proposing to move away from 100% financing and is proposing 50% cofinancing, which will especially penalise less wealthy countries like Portugal.
As a Portuguese national, I would be shocked if a measure of this kind were to be approved while my own country held the presidency of the European Union.
Mr President, Mr Maat has committed himself most impressively to the issue of school milk.
That is a good thing.
I myself am a great supporter of school milk.
In fact, I think that not only children but adults too should drink more milk.
I regret therefore that there is no fresh milk available at the Parliament building in Brussels.
I do hope that Mr Maat' s next battle will concentrate on making fresh milk available in Brussels.
Having said that, I do not support Mr Maat' s proposals.
In the evaluation report on the school milk regulation that the Commission itself quotes, it says that if you only take account of the explicitly stated objectives of the regulation particularly to maintain and increase the consumption of dairy products and promote the sale of surpluses, the positive effects are marginal.
Nevertheless, on 10 December, the Commission decided not to withdraw the measures but to halve the subsidy.
I have asked the Commission a number of questions in this regard.
I asked Commissioner Fischler to what extent this measure corresponded with the subsidiarity principle.
I believe that this measure could be implemented perfectly well by the national parliaments and that national MPs would be quite able to do so.
I am also not convinced about the scientific basis as far as certain aspects of public health are concerned.
Moreover, when dealing with public health, the Commission must make a proposal on the basis of the chapter on "Public Health" in the Treaty.
Nor is it clear to me in the school milk regulation how much will be spent on administration costs.
It is such a small proportion of the overall milk production that I feel that this weighs particularly heavily on the European Commission budget.
I am also not sure what the financial consequences will be after enlargement.
I am not an opponent of school milk as such but I do object to the way we are going about it.
I believe that the Commission must confine itself to the core tasks and leave other matters to the Member States.
I support the Commission proposal but not the proposals of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Maat for a good report and good cooperation, namely in his raising the issue of public health.
Until now the basis for pricing has favoured fattier products.
There was strong unanimity in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the need to change the basis for pricing so that less fatty products might benefit more from this aid.
It has been an excellent signal from the EU to the heart of the people for decades now, and we have been able to get it across via children, school pupils, schools and homes.
In that respect it has to continue, and, as Mr Maat said, be brought up to date and this issue, which is in the common good, should be promoted.
Amendments Nos 9 and 10 specifically move the proposal towards a direction where less fatty products would be treated along the same lines as fattier products.
Mr President, I am pleased to have the opportunity of speaking in the debate and I congratulate the rapporteur for his work.
One clear result, of course, of the proposal before us to curtail or remove this subsidy on school milk will be decreased availability of milk and a drop in the consumption of milk in schools.
I ask you sincerely: is that what you want to see happening?
The nutritional aspect is surely the central element here and the continuation of the consumption of milk by schoolchildren is what we should be working towards.
The proposals before us definitely militate against that.
Can I suggest to you what might happen as a result.
There are two possibilities.
Children will switch to consuming non-nutritional products or, God forbid, we will move closer towards a situation where children will have to pay for milk consumed, thus discriminating against poor children from deprived communities.
We all acknowledge the aim here.
It is to cut milk subsidies.
But to use schoolchildren as the means towards that end is a sinister way to go about it, especially in a world that is becoming far more health-conscious by the day.
This is the age of non-GM food and organic products, and the proposals before us represent a major step backwards.
Let us be clear.
Several Member States will not operate this scheme at all if the present subsidy is withdrawn or decreased.
That is the reality of the situation.
This would be a catastrophe, not only for the health of schoolchildren - our future citizens - but to the viability of communities also.
I come from a part of Wales, where GDP per head of the population is less than 75% of the European Union average, in other words, an Objective 1 area.
I am not proud of that.
It is an indication of our deprived status.
Cutting the subsidy, however, would make my community even poorer, a community whose farmers have lost 80% of their income in 2½ years.
This is not the European Union that I thought my nation had joined.
We were looking to a Europe of cohesion that seeks to bolster its deprived communities and help its poorest citizens.
There is also the misconception that Member States will somehow foot this bill and make up the deficit on the basis that it is their responsibility to deal with health and social policy.
Can I tell you that my Member State, the UK, is already prevaricating on the provision of additional money for Wales and for Scotland to match European funds, a point that I and my colleagues have already highlighted previously in this Chamber.
This is not unique to my nation.
Sadly, it affects other nations as well.
Farmers then are told to diversify, to become multifunctional.
These are the buzzwords now in the European Union.
Yet they have already diversified.
They have already become as multifunctional as humanly possible.
It is time we rewarded them, particularly in the peripheral and deprived communities of the European Union.
Cutting this subsidy would destroy an industry already on its knees.
We need to give a window of opportunity to these people and provide them with the assistance to sustain themselves as they undoubtedly face the most difficult period economically they have ever faced.
It is clear to me that the proposals before us are not merely a means to curtail the subsidy, but rather, in the event of a lack of participation by Member States in the wake of the subsidy cut, to terminate it entirely.
This continued erosion of the milk industry is, I am afraid, part of a general trend that we are witnessing throughout the agricultural industry.
Without people farming in our villages and communities, there will be no rural communities; nobody left to service the needs of those of us that sometimes visit rural areas for recreation.
The process of amalgamating farms and the buying-up of farm units by consortia pushing up prices unrealistically is already well advanced in my nation of Wales and is becoming the sad pattern in other regions and nations as well.
I believe we should call a halt to this general erosion of our rural communities.
At the present moment in time, that requirement transcends the need to cut milk subsidies.
Defending communities is far, far more important.
We must keep our milk farmers farming and the communities where they earn their living as viable entities.
The Agricultural Committee deserve every support in this regard.
Mr Maat has done well in a very difficult situation and I wish him every success.
Mr President, Mr Maat' s report quite properly defends the right of millions of European children to receive subsidised milk in school.
The Commission is proposing to reduce the level of Community aid, by amending the regulation on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products.
The choice of cofinancing involves the risk that certain Member States might be reticent about supporting the project, mainly because of financial constraints, and the effect would be to reduce the amount of the available budgetary appropriation and thus establish discrimination between European schoolchildren.
Milk distribution in schools contributes to the maintenance of consumption of milk products, and those same milk products are vital to healthy nutrition for children, so that they can grow up healthy.
Subsidising milk means teaching children balanced eating habits at an age when lifelong eating patterns and tastes are being formed.
That role finds particular resonance in this age of eating disorders and unhealthy diets.
For example, the increase in the number of obese children in Europe as a result of the culture of sweet, highly coloured fizzy drinks is alarming.
Must we remind people that milk provides a crucial part of our protein, calcium, vitamin and mineral requirements?
It strengthens the capacity of young children who drink it to protect themselves against diseases caused by nutritional anarchy.
Mr Maat rightly mentions the way eating patterns change with our changing lifestyle.
Increasingly young people go off to school without eating any breakfast or without having any milk in their morning meal.
Nor do we forget that some children from very deprived backgrounds skip breakfast for financial reasons.
These children are exposed to dietary deficiencies and have difficulty concentrating at school.
The Commission is washing its hands of all this, while heading up lots of other programmes that cost a great deal more.
Why undermine the very one which affects the health of European children?
At a time of upheaval in the role of our schools as a training workshop for life, the distribution of subsidised milk ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur for bringing forward a report that not only looks at the problem but puts forward new ideas for the future.
In many countries and areas - such as where I come from in Northern Ireland - young children might not have had the opportunity to have that nourishment and that nutritional support supplied by milk if it had not been for the milk provided to them in schools.
I also hope and trust that they will begin to appreciate and to continue to drink milk.
One thing which amazes me, especially when the agricultural community and dairy farmers are going through such difficult times, is that people are prepared to buy many other products and pay substantial amounts of money for them, but they are not prepared to pay the same amount of money for milk, either for themselves, or for their children.
Milk provides a very healthy and balanced diet, something we should all support.
The European Union should take that on board.
It is good value for money.
We do not always achieve that.
We are in a situation in Europe at the moment where we are pouring millions of euros into the agricultural industry, yet the farmers have never been worse off in their lives.
We have to go back to the drawing board and ask ourselves what our priorities are.
I want to thank Mr Maat.
He has challenged us to look to the future, not just in relation to milk itself, but also to milk products and ways in which we can encourage children to drink milk.
Mr President, for years I have been calling for the school milk scheme to be changed.
I think it is complete nonsense.
It is totally wrong from a nutritional point of view and it is impossible to administer.
Currently, full-cream milk is fully subsidised, semi-skimmed milk is semi-subsidised and skimmed milk receives no subsidy.
The aim of schemes such as this is to do away with surplus stocks, and since full-cream milk contains the most butterfat, it receives the highest subsidy.
We should instead award subsidies per pupil.
I would have preferred it if we had set milk prices lower so that we could abolish the bureaucratic milk quotas.
In the longer term we must change the EU's agricultural policy so that we can put an end to artificial excess prices and surplus stocks.
However, the school milk scheme is one of the better schemes.
It is not just beneficial to farmers.
The scheme is also to the advantage of children and their parents, especially if it is changed so that it offers subsidies to low-fat products.
Children do not need so much fat.
Furthermore, a scheme with subsidies per pupil would be much easier to administer.
There is an enormous amount of administration involved in the present scheme.
I have received many complaints from schools which cannot work out how to administer the scheme.
It is a real science calculating the fat percentages in milk and cheese.
The schools often end up having to pay back large sums.
It is not that they are out to cheat; they simply cannot work out how to administer the scheme.
I think, therefore, that we must vote for the amendments of my good colleague and friend, Niels Busk.
The scheme which he is recommending is administratively and nutritionally the only correct one.
Mr President, I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Maat, for his report, which I support in its entirety.
And thanks as ever for the usual good work of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.
I would also like to thank my good colleague and close friend, Freddy Blak, of the Socialist Group, for his support for my amendment.
The school milk scheme concerns health and nutrition.
Children and infants must learn healthy eating habits, and milk, with its protein and calcium content, is a very important part of this.
On behalf of the Liberal Group, Mr Pesälä and I put forward three amendments which basically aim to make the school milk scheme a lot easier to administer, but which also seek to make the scheme more flexible with regard to the products which are subsidised.
There are various traditions relating to which dairy products are consumed, and the scheme is simplified by awarding the subsidy on the basis of a quarter of a litre of milk per pupil per school-day.
For products other than full-cream milk, the subsidy should be calculated on the basis of low-fat solids or a maximum butterfat content of 50%.
In this way the scheme takes account of the differences in the milk traditions which exist in the different Member States.
Mr President, Commissioner, the Commission proposal to henceforth fund the school milk programme by means of 50% cofinancing has evoked a furious response in the Council and in Parliament.
As soon as the term cofinancing is mentioned in terms of agriculture, people' s hackles rise.
Many see cofinancing as the renationalisation of the common agricultural policy.
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is also against the Commission' s plans.
With such a viewpoint, Parliament can make the most of it.
Will we read in the newspaper tomorrow "European Parliament in favour of school milk subsidies - to the rescue of the dairy sector" ?
Are we not kidding ourselves and the sector with this attitude?
Is massive opposition to cofinancing in the interests of the sector in the long term?
I do not think so.
We shall have to make do with the financial package established in Agenda 2000 and to deal with the enlargement of the Union.
If agricultural policy is not changed we shall not be able to pay for it.
The Union should develop its policy within this context.
The main question here is, how can we operate as efficiently as possible with the limited resources of the European Union?
Must we continue to burden the agriculture budget with a school milk programme of about EUR 90 million a year?
Is it not more sensible to seek possibilities of financing such programmes elsewhere?
If we wish to guarantee the agricultural sector a reasonable level of support, then that is urgently required.
If we do not do that, then the Commission will undoubtedly try in other ways to remain below the agricultural ceiling.
What do you think about a reduction on the direct income supplements?
Those who are against cofinancing bring such painful economies a lot closer.
We do not wish to be part of that.
Relieving the EU budget by means of creative solutions, such as cofinancing, seems to us a better option for the agricultural sector itself.
Finally, I agree with the objection to the fact that school milk is distributed to people at meetings in this building who certainly do not need it.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first like to thank Mr Maat very sincerely for the effort he has made to present a balanced report on the Commission proposal.
You will have seen from the debate that the school milk scheme is a very sensitive issue indeed, on which there are many different shades of opinion, and that means that he certainly did not have an easy job.
Some of the amendments proposed in Mr Maat' s report in effect totally reject the Commission proposal.
I cannot therefore accept the amendments in question, which are Amendments Nos 1, 5, 6, 7, 10 and 12.
I am still convinced that the cofinancing proposed would promote the commitment of state and municipal authorities - and that of school authorities and the dairy industry - which is, in turn, a prerequisite for the success of all of these efforts.
It is quite simply wrong to say that the level of aid will drop from schoolchildren' s point of view.
The level of aid will remain the same, only the source of funding will change, and no one can seriously maintain that aid is only good if it comes totally from the Community budget.
I am also quite happy to concede that there are health, nutrition and social policy objectives here.
But there is one point I wish to make, and this is also the reason why a particular Treaty article has been taken as the legal basis here: in the field of agricultural policy, we can only justify aid that leads to additional sales.
If the real objective is to take social policy or health policy measures, then these should be financed under health and social policy and not, as it were, through the back door.
Amendments Nos 2, 4 and 9 are designed to cover a broader range of milk products under the scheme.
In this respect the Commission would like to maintain the existing scheme, in which the selection of subsidised products is a matter for the Commission.
Although I cannot therefore accept these amendments, I have no problems with the underlying message, which it is worth conveying, and that is that the current range of products needs to be reviewed, and I will ensure that this issue continues to be dealt with and discussed in the Management Committee for Milk and Milk Products.
Lastly, Amendment No 3 is in the form of a statement, so that I do not think it would be appropriate to incorporate the text into the regulation.
As regards the practical side of the proposal, I fear that this amendment would lead to varying levels of support in different Member States and to dramatic fluctuations in the level of aid within a short time.
And as I am sure that no one would want that, it would be better to keep the existing provision, which is clear, based on objective criteria and which guarantees general stability.
For the same reasons, I am unable to accept Amendments Nos 8 and 10, which are designed to link the level of aid to milk components other than fat.
Finally, Amendments Nos 8 and 9 are intended to make it clear that the aid will be paid for a fixed quantity of milk per schoolchild per day.
This would essentially mean maintaining the existing position, so that is in fact another argument as to why these amendments cannot be accepted.
Thank you for your attention.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Vertical Restraints
The next item is the report (A5-0077/2000) by Mrs Thyssen, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on draft guidelines on Vertical Restraints (C5-0009/2000 - 2000/2003(COS)).
Mr President, this debate on the guidelines on vertical restraints is the last in a series of four on an extremely technical subject, for now anyway.
Industry is all too aware of the importance of the Community competition policy for its operations, but let us also not forget that fair, enforceable and sound competition rules also affect the consumer.
I have the impression that for people who are not familiar with the competition policy, the whole question of vertical restraints between companies seems a rather strange business, but the fact is that a large proportion of daily distribution is made, managed and organised on the basis of the rules of vertical restraints.
I did intend, Mr President, to provide my colleagues with a bit more information on this subject, but I can now see how few people are in the Chamber and I think I should not waste your time and the interpreters' time on this.
The Commissioner knows the subject and the Members who are still to speak on this matter know at least as much as I do about it.
I shall therefore just say that I think that we as a Parliament, and as the rapporteur on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, can say that it is a good thing that the Commission draws up guidelines and that it publishes them.
The Commission is the European competition authority par excellence and everyone and certainly legal security will benefit if it explains its new policy in detail beforehand.
Secondly, I hope the Commission will incorporate the comments listed in the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, which I shall not repeat here, in the final version of the guidelines that will soon be published and I should also like to hear that from you personally, Commissioner.
I should now like to ask a few questions.
First of all, are we going to receive the evaluation which we asked for after three or four years of new policy in the sphere of vertical restraints?
Secondly, when can we expect the proposals for a new policy for the horizontal agreements, a new policy that has also been announced by the Commission?
Thirdly, the automobile distribution contracts for the time being fall outside the new policy, but the regulation for this sector expires in 2002.
We can expect an evaluation to be made this year by the Commission.
When will we receive it and has the Commission already consulted the automobile distribution sector and particularly the small distributors?
Fourthly, despite everything, we still have a very fundamental question, a question that we have repeatedly raised in vain and I must therefore repeat it again here; why has the Commission nevertheless opted to apply the new policy immediately also to those sectors where the competition policy, as it was hitherto organised, operated perfectly well?
In conclusion, Mr President, I should like to thank those Members - unfortunately they are not here in the Chamber - who also dealt with this subject in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, not only for this report, but also for the three reports that preceded it.
I wish to inform those who tabled amendments, that is, amendments tabled on behalf of the PSE Group, that I have unfortunately had to reject those amendments by reason of their content as I explained earlier in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and secondly, because these amendments had already been tabled at Committee level and rejected one by one.
Mr President, I should finally like to apologise for the fact that I cannot be present at the vote tomorrow morning, but Mr von Wogau will replace me here as rapporteur, if necessary.
Mr President, Commissioner, my colleague, Mrs Thyssen has produced some excellent work and I wish to congratulate her on it.
In this connection, I myself would like to comment just on the relevant production markets and the guidelines for interpretation regarding how market share is determined, especially from the point of view of cooperation agreements in the petrol station business.
These issues cause problems, at least in my home country of Finland, and in other small Member States.
Guidelines on vertical restraints should be designed to help us see clearly and accurately when the seller' s market share in the relevant product market exceeds the 30% threshold to be applied.
Regarding cooperation agreements in the petrol station business, the draft guidelines to be applied do not at present take sufficiently clear account of the special features of that industry' s market and delivery agreements.
The 30% market share limit provided for under the Block Exemption regulation will cause problems relating to equal treatment for existing petrol stations, at least in Finland.
Applying the new ruling might lead to situations where, for example, we will be inspecting in a different manner the contractual obligations regarding cooperation in the petrol station industry that are otherwise comparable in every respect with each other as far as their direct effects are concerned if the market share of one company exceeds the 30% threshold.
It is important to define unambiguously the relevant markets referred to in Article 3 of the Block Exemption regulation.
The guidelines have not defined sufficiently precisely how the market share of a manufacturer and a wholesaler should be determined.
I feel this is especially problematic.
As this is a matter of regulating the right of competition in an industry in which competition takes place among brand names, the guidelines should clearly state that calculating market shares should always involve studying each stage of delivery separately.
In addition, the guidelines should indicate unambiguously that the 30% threshold in the relevant market has been calculated to take account of sales of the supplier' s own brand to the retailer or distributor.
Mr President, I am pleased that you knew I was here and that I was going to speak.
You know that I do not usually speak too long.
I will simply explain the amendments presented by Mr Berenguer, who is unable to attend.
These are Amendments Nos 2, 3 and 4.
Amendment No 2 deals with the possibility of freeing the distributor by means of the return of contributions once the contract has finished.
The formula used is contained in section 147 of the Commission guidelines on this subject, which is known as the investment depreciation period.
The possibility should exist, in certain circumstances, of freeing the distributor by means of a reintegration of the investment.
In other words, the distributor should not be permanently bound by the initial investment of the producer.
Amendment No 3 refers to the setting of prices by the producer - the resale price - in certain cases, such as the launch of the product.
There are certain cases in which this setting of the resale price can be justified.
This is referred to in sections 38 and 39 of the Commission guidelines, but it is clear that, in certain cases, we have to provide flexibility and we are sure that the Commission will understand this.
Lastly, Amendment No 4 refers to the protection of producers against pressures applied by the distributor to force them to extend the contract.
We are talking about exclusive contracts, sections 131 et seq.
Finally, these amendments are simply intended to be a reminder of certain specific aspects, but it is clear that both the guidelines proposed by the Commission and Mrs Thyssen' s report move within boundaries which are reasonable and practical.
We hope that the Commission will administer these guidelines in a flexible way so that, on the one hand, market competition is guaranteed and, on the other, we do not create situations of enslavement or limitation of economic activity with regard to the distributors.
Mr President, as we are short of time I will make my statement telegram style.
First of all, many thanks to you, Mrs Thyssen, for your excellent report.
Second, my thanks also to the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for supporting this important reform project.
The draft is an important step in the reform of competition policy in respect of vertical restraints.
Since the Green Paper was published in 1997, the development of the institution of vertical distribution restraints has gone through various phases, including most recently the adoption of new Regulation 2790 on the application of Article 81(3) of the Treaty to categories of vertical agreements and concerted practices.
As you know, the Commission is taking this policy as a basis for a decisive switch from a traditional approach based on formal criteria to an approach based on the analysis of economic impacts.
The objective of this is to re-establish freedom of contract for the great majority of companies and to simultaneously improve the protection of fair competition for the benefit of consumers.
Furthermore, in answer to your question, Mrs Thyssen, as to whether there will be a review, the answer is yes, there will indeed be a review of the guidelines after four years.
With regard to your question about horizontal measures, the Commission is currently drawing up a set of guidelines relating to this horizontal cooperation agreement.
A first draft of these guidelines will then be transmitted to the European Parliament before it is published in the Official Journal.
It is very likely that this will happen before the end of April.
I am delighted to report that the European Parliament and the Commission have worked together closely and constructively on this issue.
Mrs Thyssen' s report demonstrates once more that this will to cooperate is making a valuable contribution to various relevant aspects of the reform process.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 8.20 p.m.)