# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 19 May 2000.
Tribute
We are very sad to hear of the death of Mrs Adelaide Aglietta on 20 May 2000 in Rome.
We all remember that throughout her intense political activity Mrs Aglietta was the political secretary of the Italian Radical Party.
She was Co-President of the Group of the Greens between 1990 and 1994.
She was tireless in leading a number of campaigns, particularly those promoting a federal Europe and human rights.
Mrs Adelaide Aglietta was a very courageous woman.
In the first place, she had the courage of her convictions and argued passionately in favour of them, but always with respect for the other party.
In spite of her long illness, she continued to pursue her political and parliamentary activities working tirelessly on her report on comitology and stubbornly continuing negotiations with the Commission and the Council until May 1999.
I may say that, for all of us, she will continue to be a model of courage and dedication to Parliament and to Europe, and I therefore ask you to observe a minute' s silence in her memory.
(The House rose and observed a minute' s silence)
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen, since our last part-session, the European Union has been hit by blind and brutal terrorism once again: in Greece, with the murder of Brigadier Stephen Saunders, military attaché at the British Embassy, killed by the terrorist group 'November 17' and in Spain, with the murder of Jesus Maria Pedrosa, a municipal councillor in the Basque Country.
In this way, for the third time in a few months, terrorism has once again attempted to silence the people in this region who continue to fight by democratic means to defend their freedom of expression and to work to promote the right to live in peace.
On the very day that these murders occurred, I felt bound, both in a personal capacity and on behalf of the European Parliament, to express our deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to the families of the victims.
I also assured the governments concerned of our utmost support in their fight against terrorism.
I am about to propose a minute' s silence as a tribute to the two victims but, as a stronger expression of our solidarity, I should like to tell you that I am quite prepared, if the Spanish authorities and the Spanish Members of the House deem it useful and appropriate, to visit the Basque Country to convey the constant message of this unanimous House, which is our utter condemnation of terrorism and our disgust at these barbarous and cowardly acts, and our support for all those who fight courageously, at the risk of their own lives, to ensure that peace and democracy finally triumph in the Spanish Basque Country.
(The House rose and observed a minute' s silence)
Madam President, I believe we must take good note of the fact that a representative of Euskal Herritarrok has expressed his regret at the murder of an honourable local councillor in the Basque Country.
All that remains in this case is for him to also condemn political methods such as shooting people in the back or in the back of the neck, because, Madam President, the Spanish Basque Country, which has the greatest degree of self-government of any Autonomous Region in the European Union, is unfortunately the only place in the European Union where this barbaric and condemnable political method still persists.
Madam President, on a point of order, on behalf of Euskal Herritarrok I would like to express my regrets at the death of Jesús María Pedrosa.
We should like to show our solidarity with the family and friends of the deceased.
Once again political confrontation shows its most dreadful aspect.
We are witnessing tragic moments, in human and political terms, that demand of all of us not to fall into uselessly reiterated condemnations which do not offer anything in the search for solutions.
We should remember that Nelson Mandela, winner of the Nobel Prize and of the Sakharov Prize, was imprisoned for 27 years because he refused to condemn the violent actions of the ANC.
The leaders of Sinn Fein have never condemned the IRA's violence.
This clear attitude has permitted a political breakthrough to a definitive settlement in the bloody conflicts in South Africa and Northern Ireland.
We in Euskal Herritarrok will stick to our commitment to work together with all those eager to find a democratic solution to the ongoing conflict in the Basque country.
Could we in this Parliament at last look for something new that will help a political dialogue in the Basque country, something similar to the Downing Street Declaration?
Madam President, I am grateful for your political will and for your willingness to go to the Basque Country so that the European Parliament' s anti-terrorist commitment may be clearly demonstrated to the Spanish, and particularly the Basque, public.
On the other hand, I believe that the words of the MEP from Euskal Herritarrok are a disgrace.
The MEP in question has no right to class himself alongside Mandela.
Nelson Mandela deserves a different kind of respect.
We heard Mandela in the European Parliament.
He fought against violence and represented the legitimate interests of his people.
The legitimate interests of the Basque people are represented by the people who have been democratically elected.
I must tell the whole of Parliament, as Mr Barón Crespo has already done, that Mr Gorostiaga' s party sometimes goes as far as to regret the deaths caused by terrorists, perhaps because it has no choice, but it does not condemn them.
This attitude has even led the democratic nationalist parties to break municipal coalitions with Euskal Herritarrok because it is not possible to accept and comprehend the shot in the back and continual violence as political methods.
Words are insufficient when it comes to condemning not only the murderers, but also those who give them political support.
Madam President, I would also like to add my voice to those who this morning do not wish the current conflict in the Basque Country to be misinterpreted, because, Madam President, words are also lethal weapons and also lead to deaths in the Basque Country.
There must be no such ambiguity, when it comes to analysing death, in a forum such as the European Parliament, which is the temple of democracy.
Madam President, you will be very welcome in the Basque Country.
You will speak for the enormous majority of this House, because the enormous majority of the Basque people are against those people who, while claiming to speak for the Basque people, ride rough-shod over freedoms and fundamental rights.
Mr Gorostiaga represents nobody but that minority which, showing a complete disregard for the best European democratic traditions, tramples upon fundamental rights.
Madam President, go to the Basque Country, speak for us and show that we are crying out - hopefully not in the wilderness - for this to be the final death.
Madam President, I would like to thank you for your words of condemnation and condolence.
Of course, we also very much welcome the fact that you are prepared to visit the Basque Country.
Madam President, murder and shootings in the back provide no solution for the problems of the Basque Country.
Nor does the failure to condemn those people who carry out the most vile acts in this Europe which we are trying to build day by day - the Europe of freedom, security and justice.
I am talking about the attacks on life, which is the most horrendous of all attacks on human rights.
Madam President, on behalf of the Basque Nationalist Party - which is the majority party in the Basque Autonomous Region - I wish to express our total condemnation and rejection of the death of Jesús María Pedrosa Urquiza, Municipal Councillor in Durango in Vizcaya, and our condemnation of any act of violence which takes place in the Basque Country or any other part of the world.
We have constantly rejected the use of violence in order to achieve political objectives.
I must also say that I regret having to take the floor in these circumstances, following this very recent act of violence.
Madam President, I am grateful for the fact that - as I said to you in my letter last week - in circumstances such as these, you are diligent enough to defend democratic principles, rejecting acts of terrorism on behalf of Parliament and expressing your support for the Spanish Government in the fight against this terrorism.
I reminded you that the Basque Government has spent 20 years working for peace in the Basque Country by democratic means and striving for a better future for all of us.
I believe that it is also fair to recognise the contribution, the action and activity of the Basque Government.
However, I must also point out that, over and above the terrorist acts and the violence which is and has been carried out in the Basque Country by ETA and also by the apparatus of the State - which we should not forget - there is a political conflict there which existed long before ETA.
There is a section of the Basque population which does not feel comfortable, which does not feel at ease with the current legal-political set-up in the Basque Country.
I believe that it is a good thing for all political parties with an open and democratic approach to sit down together to hold a dialogue so that we may, once and for all, find a way for all citizens in the Basque Country to feel at ease and to be able to live in peace, which is what we all wish to see.
Madam President, in my own name and on behalf of my political party, the Coalición Canaria [the Canary Islands Coalition], I would like to make public in this House my rejection and condemnation of the murder of Councillor Jesús María Pedrosa.
I would like secondly to make a call - an idealistic one perhaps - for peace and dialogue in that autonomous region.
Lastly, I think it is very positive and opportune that the President of this Parliament has announced this visit to the Basque Country.
Madam President, you have already mentioned the murder in Athens of the military attaché to the British embassy, Stephen Saunders.
I would like on behalf of the MEPs of the New Democracy party and our group to express our outright condemnation of these attacks, not only this specific attack, but all the attacks carried out over the last 25 years by this phantom terrorist organisation, and my deep regret that we have as yet been unable to find the murderers.
Not only is there no justification for these attacks, they also bear no relation to events in the Basque country, not that there is any justification for those events, but the circumstances are different; they are merely blind and unacceptable attacks, the basic aim of which is to damage Greece' s relations with the other countries.
I should like to repeat our outright condemnation and to thank you very much for putting this matter at the top of the agenda today because it is through you that the outright condemnation of the European Parliament will be conveyed to Greece.
I should like to express my deepest condolences to Stephen Saunders' wife and children, whom we have seen on television.
We have witnessed their pain and we have seen that terrorists do not of course only hurt those they attack; they also in essence murder all those around them.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to state on behalf of the Communist Party of Greece that we most strongly and categorically condemn the murder of the military attaché to the British embassy in Athens, Brigadier Stephen Saunders.
At the same time, we condemn the orchestrated plan being deployed against Greece and the attempt to establish a connection between this monstrous deed and the anti-imperialist sentiment of the Greek people.
We must not overlook the fact that the murder was carried out a few days after the report to the United States Congress describing Greece as a country which fails to cooperate fully in the fight against terrorism.
A few days after the Americans expressed their anxiety about security arrangements for the 2004 Olympic Games and just before the police cooperation agreement between Greece and the United States of America was due to be signed.
We have no choice but to conclude that certain parties are taking advantage of this provocative act in order to demand even more oppressive measures against the political and democratic freedoms of the Greek people and it is among them that the physical and moral perpetrators are to be found.
Madam President, I too should like to thank you for your statement in connection with the attack on and murder of the British military attaché.
The Socialist Group happened to be in session when the murder took place and I immediately took the opportunity, from the Socialist Party tribune, of expressing the condemnation of PASOK and of the Greek nation as a whole, which, of course, abhors such acts of terrorism, acts which are directed not only at the victims but at the security and political and economic welfare of Greece.
We cannot deny that a terrorist phenomenon has been a thorn in Greece' s side for many years.
We are taking and we shall continue to take all the measures needed to crush this organisation, but its greatest defeat, Madam President, is the fact that it is completely isolated within the Greek people, it does not strike the slightest political chord and these murders are simply tragic, abominable, monstrous deeds perpetrated by a group of fanatics which the Greek nation as a whole abhors and rejects.
Madam President, I too should like to express my outright condemnation of the murder of the British military attaché in Athens both in a personal capacity and on behalf of the party which I represent, the Social Democrat Movement.
At the same time, I should like to express our undivided support for his brave wife and remarkable children.
We feel the deepest regret and trust that, at long last, the authorities will succeed in cracking down on this terrorist organisation which has been a thorn in the side of Greece and its international relations for the past 25 years.
Madam President, I would like to draw your attention to something that has happened since our last part-session.
The German Foreign Minister, Joschka Fischer, made a speech about the future of European unification at the beginning of May.
Although some of the passages in this speech may have been contentious, it was important in as much as it provided food for thought as to how unification is to be accomplished with 25 or 30 Member States.
The reaction of Mr Chevènement, the French Minister for the Interior, was all the more astounding.
What he said in essence was that anyone advocating a European federation or European constitution must have failed to process our experiences under National Socialism properly.
I consider this to be a faux pas of the kind that should meet with protest on the part of the European Parliament.
Mr Chevènement endeavoured to qualify his statement, but what he did in essence was to repeat it, thereby reiterating the thrust of his argument.
We parliamentarians have repeatedly pronounced ourselves in favour of a European constitution and a federal Europe - from Spinelli to Herman through to the most recent reports.
I therefore feel that Mr Chevènement' s statement is an insult to Parliament' s work.
I call upon you to duly register the European Parliament' s protest.
As you perhaps are aware, immediately after Mr Chevènement made these remarks, I issued a press statement to express my personal outrage at such comments, which I considered quite out of order.
And, of course, even though I took the precaution of saying that this was my own personal opinion, since the European Parliament had not adopted any particular stance, I am sure that Mr Chevènement clearly understood that, in so saying, I was reflecting the opinion of a significant majority of the Members of the European Parliament.
Madam President, I carefully read your statement in response to the speech by the French Minister for Home Affairs.
I believe that the matter of nationhood is a concept that is far too complex to be dealt with like this, on a point of order, in a forum such as this.
This is a far-reaching debate, engaging all European Union Member States, not one that can be brushed aside.
I think that the words of the French Minister for Home Affairs were understood correctly in Germany, and that we should follow the example of the sensible way in which the authorities there reacted.
Madam President, we are indebted to Mr Leinen for reminding us about this incident.
However, I would expressly like to thank you for taking the stance you did, in your own name as our President.
I would like you to know that you have our full and unequivocal support, and that we owe you a debt of gratitude.
Incidentally, we should refrain from entering into debate on this issue at present.
Madam President, the final draft agenda is based on a part-session starting on Tuesday 13 June.
On 7 June, I sent you a letter regarding the proceedings for Monday 12 June, Whit Monday.
You granted the request a while back to cancel the parliamentary sitting due to take place on this Christian public holiday, and rightly so.
Later on, however, it was announced that the Members could sign the attendance register between 3 p.m. and 10 p.m.
It now looks as if we will need to be financially reimbursed for cancelling a working day.
Madam President, how will yesterday' s attendance register be published and what can still be done to prevent this attendance register from costing the European taxpayer any money?
The electorate expect us to extend their democratic rights, not to act in our own self-interest.
To reimburse a day' s expenses for a public holiday would result in the electorate staying at home in even greater numbers at the next elections.
I would ask you to give Parliament the opportunity, by no later than July, to state that Monday' s signatures should not lead to reimbursements of any kind.
An exception could possibly be made for those who can demonstrate that they were required to leave on Sunday on account of the remoteness of their homes, if, for example, they live in Finland or Greece.
Mr Meijer, I think that you have not got the information quite right.
The group meetings were indeed held yesterday, attended by a great many Members, and it would not be fair if these Members were penalised.
Madam President, I should like to say that this is a very great day for the Danes.
We too have now been successful in obtaining television in our own language here in Strasbourg.
I am sorry that Mrs Banotti is not here, for I had promised to thank her personally if the bid were successful, but I hope you can pass on to her what I have said.
I just want to say, 'Mary, you are fantastic.
A small country was successfully taken into account, even if it did take a hell of a long time for this to happen.'
Thank you, Mr Blak.
We shall pass your satisfaction and thanks on to Mrs Banotti.
Madam President, on a point of order.
I will ensure that Mrs Banotti gets that information.
I will also be pressuring her to have Irish television here too.
I rise on a slightly more serious matter although, of course, I welcome the extension of all the media to our proceedings.
Madam President, you will be aware that since we met here last the Northern Ireland Assembly has been reconstituted.
Could I, through you, on our behalf, request that our sincere good wishes be sent to all concerned and all parties?
Let us hope that we are on the road to something extremely successful in the north of Ireland.
I can see that the House approves of your proposal, and I shall gladly do so, Mrs Doyle.
Madam President, just now you had to announce some extremely sad news.
Here, however, is a happier piece of news, and I believe I can speak for us all in expressing our relief and joy at the release, at long last, of the French journalist, Brice Fleutiaux, after more than eight months of being held captive by Chechen kidnappers.
I should like to pay tribute to his courage, but also to his clear-sightedness, because, even in his initial statements, he drew a clear distinction between his kidnappers and the Chechen people as a whole.
Many of us had some concerns for developments over the next few weeks, since the forthcoming summer recess appeared likely to lead to a decline in the competent political authorities' interest in the matter, and a consequent decline in the efforts undertaken.
We therefore planned to invite Brice Fleutiaux' s brother to visit the European Parliament, and he was happy to do so, as well as the journalists' unions, who were, likewise, ready to do so, and indeed, Madam President, you gave your personal endorsement to ensure the success of this initiative.
I should like to thank you for that.
Fortunately we have no further need for this initiative, but I think we would be happy to welcome Brice Fleutiaux, should he wish to visit the European Parliament, this time as a free man and a man of honour.
Madam President, I am absolutely amazed that the Council does not wish to concern itself with the sanctions the Fourteen are taking against one Member State.
The European Parliament is best placed to know that refusing to engage in dialogue is not the way to solve problems.
Madam Chairman, what I want to speak about is the framework agreement between the Commission and Parliament which was approved by the Conference of Presidents last Thursday.
The agreement is still not available in Danish, it has still not been distributed to the majority of MEPs and it has not been discussed in any committee, and not at all in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs where I think we have the right and the duty to go through it.
It ought to be read and discussed among the Members before it is signed.
The text, which is available in French and which I obtained yesterday evening, is not, moreover, one and the same as that which was arrived at last Thursday as a result of the negotiations.
You will remember that, towards the end of the negotiations, Mr Prodi agreed that the word 'institutions' in the text should be changed to 'the Council and the Commission' , so that it will be possible, upon the President' s intervention, for documents which are issued by the Commission to recipients outside the Council and the Commission also to be issued to MEPs.
I have two criticisms of the framework agreement.
It does not solve those problems typically faced by MEPs.
One of the problems is that, when we sit in a Committee and discuss a bill, the representatives from the different Member States, including trainees from the permanent representations who sit behind us, have the 'restrained' editions of the documents which we are debating but which, as MEPs, we ourselves are not entitled to receive.
It is a humiliating situation when students are sent documents to which we ourselves do not have access.
Another typical problem, which the framework agreement does not solve either, is that we often find ourselves in a situation in which we are able to read in the daily newspaper about a document which has been leaked from the Commission.
We are then asked by journalists if we can comment on this, but we do not even have access to the document.
I have just one more sentence....
(The President cut the speaker off)
Contrary to what you tell me in your letter, this framework agreement will be tabled before the plenary part-session in July, not in the course of the present part-session.
You have made a mistake in this case.
The groups will naturally have adequate time to examine this document.
Madam President, I should like to apprise you and the House of the following incident: last Tuesday, 6 June, I travelled from Brussels to New York in order to attend the UN World Conference on Women.
The travel document which I used was the pass issued to all MEPs by the European Parliament.
However, at New York airport I encountered serious problems with the authorities because I did not have a visa.
That is because I am Greek and Greece is the only country in the European Union whose citizens need special permission to enter the USA.
I never realised, Madam President, that the special European Parliament pass was not valid for certain members because of their nationality and I spent two trying hours at New York airport until the authorities decided to grant me a visa so that I could attend the UN conference.
With all due respect for the laws and regulations under which a sovereign state is run, I consider that the problem which I encountered was more political than personal and I therefore ask that you give it your due attention.
Thank you.
I shall take note of your comments.
We shall look into what we can do to proceed as you suggest.
Madam President, I should like to draw Members' attention to a very disturbing recent report by Amnesty International.
Amnesty International is an organisation that Parliament has used on many occasions to highlight human rights abuses around the world.
The rogue states that Amnesty International points the finger at have always dismissed the reports by Amnesty International and it is very alarming that in this case the same thing is happening again.
The report in question is the report on the war in Kosovo.
Amnesty International has found that NATO was in breach of many international laws as regards human rights.
It is extremely important that the Member States do not dismiss Amnesty International's report, because its reports have always been balanced, they have always highlighted any human rights abuses that are occurring, irrespective of how the report will be received.
Javier Solana, who is now head of CFSP within the European Union, was Secretary-General of NATO at the time and because of this gross abuse of human rights, Parliament has to take Amnesty International's report seriously.
We cannot allow NATO or any other organisation around the world to abuse human rights, to ignore international law and to kill innocent civilians.
This is not acceptable.
Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of the sitting of Friday, 19 May have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Madam President, in Item 5 of the Minutes, on the "Readmission of third-country nationals" , after Mr Duff' s intervention on the verification of the quorum, it says: "The following spoke on this request: Mr Ribeiro Castro, Mr Knörr Borràs,... etc." .
However, if we read the verbatim report, we can see that Mr Knörr Borràs' intervention said: "Madam President, I should like to convey our support and sympathy for the people of Paraguay in the light of another attempted military coup.
That is all I wished to say.
I should like the position of this House to be made very clear" .
I must point out that what Mr Knörr Borràs said has nothing to do with the quorum, but with an important issue of international policy, i.e. an attempted coup in Paraguay.
There has been a declaration on this issue by the President of a political group - the Socialist Group - and we are also going to present a motion for a resolution on it, but I would like to ask the President, firstly, whether the Minutes should be corrected and, secondly, whether the Presidency has made any declaration, because I believe that it is important for us to show our solidarity with Paraguayan democracy.
Thank you, Mr Medina Ortega.
We shall check all this and correct the Minutes, if necessary.
Are there any other comments on the Minutes?
There are no further comments.
(The Minutes were approved)
Agenda
The next item is the final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
Relating to Thursday: Relating to Thursday, and the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance, I have received several requests for amendments.
Firstly, the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party and the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance have sent me a request to replace the item on "Fundamental freedoms in Serbia and Kosovo" with a new item on "Coups d' état in Fiji and the Solomon Islands" .
Who wishes to speak to propose this?
Madam President, naturally we are very concerned about the situation in Kosovo.
You will understand that we are keen to keep this text.
The European Union is spending an enormous amount of money on the situation in the Solomon Islands and Fiji, and even Papua New Guinea.
We hope that these countries will retain their political stability but unfortunately, the situation over there is taking a turn for the worse.
This is why we think, due to the topicality and not on account of the content per se, it is necessary for the European Parliament to send out a signal.
We have always stressed prevention.
The entire region is in a state of disarray, which requires the greatest care and concern from the entire European Parliament.
This is why I would like to call on the MEPs to continue caring about Kosovo and Serbia.
We can return to this at some later stage, but for the sake of topicality, let us focus on Fiji, the Solomon Islands and the Pacific Ocean region for now and say something of significance about them.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, if we are going to talk about topicality then all I can say is that you cannot get more topical than Kosovo and Serbia.
The Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy have just got back from a joint trip to Kosovo.
While we were there we promised that we would do our best to adopt a motion of this kind this week.
I urge the honourable members to support this motion for a resolution.
We must bring pressure to bear on Serbia, and also on the Albanians in Kosovo, so as to make them put things to rights.
We can only do this using the modest means at our disposal, namely a motion for a resolution.
The Balkans region is a little nearer to us than Fiji as matters stand, and if it is money we are worried about then I am bound to say that we are footing the bill rather a lot in Kosovo!
Mr Corrie, I am quite happy to give you the floor, but I should like to know whether you are speaking for or against the proposal.
We are not here to start a debate.
We followed the efforts undertaken by yourself and by Mrs Kinnock, and we supported you in your endeavours.
We were behind you all the way, and we were delighted with the successful outcome achieved.
Let me make that point.
Having said that, I should be grateful if you would stand down at present, and let us proceed to vote on the proposal from the Greens and the Liberal Group.
(Parliament rejected the proposal)
Still on the subject of the topical and urgent debate, I have received another request on Venezuela.
This is from the Group of the Party of European Socialists, to replace the item on 'Venezuela' with a new item on the 'Coup d' état in Paraguay' .
Madam President, there are two reasons as to why we are not debating the Venezuela issue.
Firstly, there is the respect we have for our own Rules of Procedure.
We are no longer in earnest about these debates on topical and urgent subjects of major importance, nor is our attitude to be taken seriously.
We decided in the AFET committee that we would adhere strictly to Rule 50 and Annex 3 of our Rules of Procedure, according to which an issue of this kind, i.e. an event that happened months ago, can no longer be dealt with as an urgent procedure, even if it is, of course, very important.
Secondly, demands are made in this motion that have been neither considered nor discussed in budgetary terms.
Hence we are calling for this issue to be withdrawn and replaced by an issue that is genuinely urgent and highly topical, i.e. the attempted coup in Paraguay and the arrest of the former rebel General Oviedo.
(Parliament approved the proposal)
(The order of business was adopted thus amended)
Madam President, I am astounded that there has been no mention of the request from my Group, which I sent you last night, on "Echelon" .
The fact is that, on 13 April, the Conference of Presidents gave an initial response to the request from 185 Members of Parliament for a committee of inquiry, with a majority in the Conference voting against the proposal.
Then, another proposal for a temporary committee of inquiry was tabled by our fellow Member, Mr Barón Crespo.
This is still under discussion, but although it looked initially as if the two proposals might be combined in such a way as to satisfy the requirements of the House as a whole, it now seems that the other request for a temporary committee of inquiry does not in any way agree with the proposal from 185 Members of Parliament.
Indeed, Parliament' s legal advisors have told us that it was impossible for any sort of investigation to be conducted, within the framework of a temporary committee of inquiry, into the involvement of Member States in the "Echelon" project and the role of the European institutions.
In short, no such inquiry is possible.
In my opinion, the logical course of events, although the Rules of Procedure are rather ambiguous, and Rule 151(3) is debatable, is that the decision by the Conference of Presidents should be followed up with a vote in plenary session on the Conference of Presidents' proposal not to set up a committee of inquiry.
My feeling is that the plenary assembly alone has the authority to make a decision on this matter or, if not, then we are falling short of the terms of the Treaty.
Article 193 of the Treaty clearly specifies that, potentially, this is Parliament' s responsibility.
Mr Lannoye, I did indeed receive your request yesterday at 10 p.m.
I have to tell you that, at the present time, I have some doubts as to the admissibility of this request.
I wish to look into the matter in depth rather than adopt a position in haste.
It is, however, true, as you yourself indeed pointed out, that it is not particularly clear how Rule 150(3) of the Rules of Procedure applies in this case.
As I say, I wish to look into the matter in greater detail, and I shall inform you tomorrow morning at the start of the sitting whether there are grounds for including your request in the agenda, in which case the matter would then be put to the vote at noon, which is in fact what you would like, I believe.
Nonetheless, I wish at this stage to reserve judgement on the admissibility of this amendment.
Even if I had worked on the matter solidly since 10 last night, I think this would not have been nearly enough.
Madam President, Mr Lannoye has referred to certain decisions of the Conference of Presidents which I believe he has not described correctly.
I am not going to go into the background to the issue.
In its meeting of 13 April, the Conference of Presidents decided by a majority to create a temporary committee.
According to the Rules of Procedure, that is a different option to the committee of inquiry.
I requested a report from the Legal Service which was received a week ago.
The issue was included in the agenda of last week' s Conference of Presidents.
Since the priority was to deal with other issues, it could not be discussed.
I understand that the final agreement reached was that we are going to discuss this issue at the Conference of Presidents.
Therefore, Madam President, I understand that the intention of Mr Lannoye and the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance will become legitimate when you present the Conference of Presidents' proposal to this House, which may be in July, but at the moment I believe that Mr Lannoye' s proposal is not appropriate.
I believe that a proposal by the Conference of Presidents can be objected to, but the Rules of Procedure are very clear: it is the Conference of Presidents which must make the proposal.
In my opinion, it would not be normal to deal with this issue tomorrow, but rather an objection can be raised when you present the Conference of Presidents' proposal to this House.
I understand that it will not be possible before July because the only possibility this month would be Friday, and I do not believe the President of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance wants it to be this Friday.
Madam President, it is not my intention to start a debate on the interpretation of the Rules of Procedure at this point, but since you are going to look into the matter, Madam President, I should like to draw your attention to the fact that if the Conference of Presidents rejects a request for a committee of inquiry, then the Conference will naturally not make any such proposals and its vote against the request therefore means that the matter cannot be referred to the opinion of the plenary assembly.
There is an obvious gap in the Rules of Procedure in this respect.
In my opinion, the plenary assembly should make the decision.
Proposing that a committee of inquiry should not be set up is effectively a decision as much as a proposal.
I think the House must decide.
The temporary committee of inquiry is a different problem, since this is not in response to a request by 185 Members of Parliament.
Mr Lannoye, I have taken note of your comments, and those of Mr Barón Crespo.
Request for the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of Mr Brie
The next item is the report (A5-0151/2000) by Mr MacCormick, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the request for waiver of the immunity of Andreas Brie.
Madam President, this is a request from the Generalstaatsanwalt of the Landgericht of Berlin to lift the immunity of Mr André Brie, a Member of this House.
The Legal Affairs Committee recommends to the House that we decide not to waive immunity in this case.
It would be helpful if I say a few brief words about the grounds for our recommendations.
The case concerns a demonstration mounted by Mr Brie and supporters in September 1998 when he, with eight others, unrolled and exhibited a placard at the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin protesting against the gap in society between the haves and the have-nots.
This was repeated on other occasions.
The local prosecutor characterised this as a breach of Article 26(2) of the German Assembly Law, because it was held to be an assembly conducted without prior authorisation by, or information to, the appropriate authorities.
This gives rise to a question of immunity because, as Members of the House are aware, they enjoy immunity in their own Member States on the same terms as if they were members of their own parliament.
Under Article 46(2) of the Basic Law of the Federal Republic, Members of the Bundestag may not be called to account or arrested for a punishable offence, except by permission of the Bundestag, unless they are apprehended in the course of committing the offence or on the following day.
Under these circumstances, it is clear that were Mr Brie a Member of the Bundestag he would enjoy immunity from prosecution which has been launched against him.
Therefore, under European law he, as a Member of this House, enjoys immunity but Parliament may choose to waive that immunity.
Our recommendation is that we should not waive immunity.
This is a case of the conduct of political activity and the expression of political opinion.
The tenor of decisions of Parliament in such cases has always been that immunity is not waived.
There has been only one exception to this, where speeches directly and deliberately express holocaust denial or other forms of xenophobic attack on persons.
This is by no means such a case and it follows all the precedents in which Parliament has held that political activity should be protected.
This is not a matter of a benefit conferred on individual Members as politicians.
It is a matter of sustaining the conditions of a democratic assembly with free, open and frank public debate.
I have great pleasure in proposing to the House the report of the Legal Affairs Committee.
Madam President, I would like to confirm what the rapporteur, Mr MacCormick, has said in relation to the request for the waiver of Mr Brie' s immunity.
As he has highlighted, it has now become normal for this Parliament to guarantee immunity with regard to acts which have been related in some political sense to parliamentary activity.
We believe that the displaying of a placard at 6.50 in the morning, opposite the Brandenburg Gate, an action which involved just the 6 or 8 people who unrolled it, does not really constitute a serious disturbance of civil peace.
As Mr MacCormick has pointed out, there have been cases where Parliament has decided to waive immunity.
These cases particularly relate to Mr Le Pen, where he has denied, for example, the existence of the holocaust or made statements of a racist nature.
This also involves those cases where words were accompanied by actions, such as when a stone was thrown and acid sprayed at the President of the United States.
In every other case, the judgement of this House has been to maintain immunity in the event that the political activity may have involved, at a low level, the violation of some administrative regulation, but this has never been put into practice.
I therefore agree with Mr MacCormick' s proposal not to waive Mr Brie' s immunity.
Madam President, it is possible that the rules concerning immunity which exist in many national parliaments, and also in our European Parliament, are in fact an historical remnant which is really not needed.
As long as these rules exist, however, they must apply equally to everyone.
In the case of Mr Brie' s crime, which we are now discussing, this clearly relates, in the first place, to political activity.
It is a matter of a demonstration.
What is more, his crime really only has to do with the administrative rules in the police regulation and of his not having sought and obtained prior permission in accordance with these.
This is, of course, not enough to justify waiving immunity for, in that case, serious offences need to have been committed, for example assault or some other crime or an action which puts other people' s lives and security in danger.
This case is concerned only with a purely administrative violation.
I understand that the same view has been expressed by members of different parties in Germany.
I therefore think that the matter is quite clear.
On behalf of my group, I would therefore express support for the draft decisions tabled by the rapporteur.
Request for the waiver of the parliamentary immunity of Mr Kronberger
The next item is the report (A5-0158/2000) by Mr Zimeray, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the request for the waiver of Mr Johann Kronberger's immunity.
Madam President, Mr Zimeray has asked me to defend this report by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market since he is unable to attend.
The situation in the case of Mr Kronberger is completely different from the last situation we dealt with.
In this case we are dealing with a mere traffic offence, which has nothing to do with politics.
Mr Kronberger was returning from his parliamentary work, he turned left and caused an accident which injured two people.
There is no political element, no element of fumus persecutionis.
Mr Kronberger himself accepts the waiver of his immunity and has no objection whatsoever.
The closest precedent to this case was more serious, since it involved not only a traffic offence but also the MEP fleeing the scene.
I therefore believe that it would set a bad example if we were to safeguard the immunity of an MEP in the case of a violation of a mere traffic regulation.
Therefore, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market' s proposal in this case is that Mr Kronberger' s parliamentary immunity be waived so that justice may be done in the normal way.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products
The next item is the report (A5-0156/2000) by Mr Maaten, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products (COM (1999) 594 - C5-0016/2000 - 1999/0244 (COD)).
Mr President, with regard to tobacco, many wonder what business it is of the European Parliament, the European Commission or our Health Ministers.
Tobacco is a natural stimulant.
You are supposed to enjoy it and politicians should not spoil this enjoyment.
But, Mr President, this is not how it is of course.
Needless to say, the element of freedom of choice and personal responsibility should be retained.
This is based on the premise that the decision is taken by an adult who knows all the facts, and therein lies the difficulty.
I believe that smokers are ill-informed on the effects of using tobacco and that they do not give their environment sufficient consideration.
This is our business.
And rightly so!
With a directive of this kind, the health aspects will inevitably be the focus of attention.
However, we are principally dealing with an internal market directive, which is why Article 95 of the Treaty has been taken as a legal basis.
There is doubt about this within the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, and their rapporteur has expressed this hesitation quite openly to us in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection.
This doubt is probably exacerbated by fact that the tobacco advertising directive case is now before the Court in Luxembourg.
I, however, do not share this doubt at all.
If it had been a public health directive, then other measures would have been proposed.
Then, we would have discussed points of sale, smoking at work, smoking in public places, possibly minimum age, which I personally do not support in any case.
We would certainly have mentioned the most effective policy against tobacco, namely a price policy.
We only need to look at the British and Swedish examples to see that this policy works.
What we are talking about here is the amalgamation and updating of three existing directives, two of which have already been assessed by the Court, where the legal basis was not commented on.
This draft directive has far too little in common with the one currently under discussion in Luxembourg to warrant a fair comparison.
However, we need to harmonise the internal market for tobacco products as a matter of urgency.
At the moment, we are entangled in national rules, which leads to barriers to trade and legal inequality among consumers.
Harmonisation, therefore, will benefit industry and public health.
For example, our discussions have led to the development of common testing methods and a positive list of additives, as is already in place in France, Germany and Belgium.
I would have liked to propose a list of this kind myself, but I believe that, at the moment, there is too much uncertainty surrounding such a list, to warrant such a proposal.
But the proposals made by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection could mean that such a list could be a reality as early as 2004.
In addition, this test procedure will bring about more openness regarding ingredients and additives, as well as prescribe conditions for the import to, sale within and of course - logically - the export from the European Union.
We, however, are keeping an open mind with regard to the problems which European industry could face in this respect, and so the committee has embraced the possibility of postponement until 2006.
We want to provide consumers with free choice based on more extensive information.
The best means of communication is the packet itself.
It has transpired that the current warnings which cover 4% of the front and back of the packet are completely ineffective and insultingly simplistic.
First and foremost, the information is misleading.
The terms 'light' , 'ultra light' , 'low-tar' and such like, are incorrect.
But indicating the different tar, nicotine and probably carbon monoxide yields also creates a false illusion - and young women, in particular, fall into the trap that certain cigarettes are less harmful than others.
This terminology should be withdrawn.
But in addition to this, we need more useful information, and this is what smokers want too.
They know that smoking is not good for you but they know precious little else.
I have tabled an amendment that tidies up the proposals made by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection in this respect.
The message on the packet should take up more space and should ideally be illustrated.
How much space, you may ask?
Well, enough space.
According to the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection, it should take up 40% or 50%.
I suggested 35% or 45% in a proposal which I re-submitted via my group.
But in any case, messages should not take up less than 30% of space on the packets, which is the proportion currently specified in Poland.
This is why, in my opinion, the 25% suggested by the European Commission is insufficient, although it is a huge step forward.
Finally, I would like to thank the delegates for their remarkable cooperation and I am also grateful to the European Commission and the President-in-Office of the Council.
This is bound to result in better policy.
Similarly, the dialogue with the health organisations and industry has been a positive step.
This Parliament has freedom of choice too and can now use it.
A choice between tinkering at the edges or taking forceful measures.
I call on Parliament to display the courage it takes to go far, because this will be to everyone' s benefit.
Mr President, unfortunately, I only have an unreasonably short amount of time to present my opinion of the legal basis, and that of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
This is not about having some kind of hidebound discussion for legal experts, an exercise in legal hair splitting as it were, but concerns an eminently political issue, namely that of competences and the demarcation thereof.
Even a court of law does not simply apply law on its own in such cases.
It creates and drafts law, and further develops it.
As co-legislators, we would do well to take part in this drafting process.
And we are doing just that in as much as we are performing this demarcation, this separating off, of our own accord.
Turning briefly to the points I would like to make: Article 152 of the Treaty expressly rules out approximation of laws in matters pertaining to health.
This may be regrettable - I also have every sympathy as to why this should be so - but that is how matters stand.
Article 95, the general clause on the internal market, as it were, serves as a legal basis as far as the strengthening of the internal market is concerned.
And we should not complain if health issues are acknowledged as a matter of priority in this context.
Demarcation and assessment cannot be undertaken on the basis of headings, nor can it be done by drafting a directive of the kind that the Commission puts forward in a markedly mechanical and often completely disjointed manner.
It cannot be accomplished in the way that it used to be either, particularly as the principle of subsidiarity has now been enshrined in the Treaties.
It can only be done on the basis of the factual content of a proposal, and when it comes to amendments, on the basis of the factual content of these amendments.
However, the decisive factor will not be whether it has any implications for the internal market.
This will always be the case, which is why any attempt at demarcation would actually be pointless.
All that ever matters is whether the main emphasis and aim of a directive serve to promote the internal market, to dismantle barriers to trade and to promote the free movement of goods, or whether the main emphasis is different.
Indeed no one has so much as mentioned yet whether that is the main emphasis of this proposal.
Therefore on a final note, I urge you to reject the committee' s proposal, the directive in its present form - and I stress, in its present form, not in any form - on account of its lacking a legal basis and transgressing the principle of subsidiarity.
Mr President, I too have only two minutes to present the position adopted by my committee.
Firstly, I have little to add to the points Mr Lechner made about the legal basis.
Had the legal basis been correct then it would have been for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market to handle this directive.
The Commission has made no reference to this effect.
The two obstacles to the internal market, i.e. different levels of taxation and derogations, in the case of Greece for example, remain unchanged.
Secondly, the draft directive proposes a restriction on exports.
As regards ingredients, the same values are to apply to exports from Europe to third countries as well.
We consider that to be wrong and excessive and believe that this proposal should be dropped.
Thirdly, the following wording has been proposed for the health warnings: 'smoking kills' .
'Smoking can kill' .
My committee takes the view that not only are such warnings misleading, they also discriminate against those who manufacture the legal luxury item or trade in it, particularly in view of the European Union' s highly ambivalent attitude in this respect.
Total tax revenue from tobacco is EUR 70 billion in the Member States and tobacco cultivation is subsidised to the tune of EUR 1 billion - none of this adds up.
Fourthly, as far as the size of the health warnings is concerned, we believe that the decisions taken by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection are completely immoderate and so we reject them.
My fifth point relates to the designations 'mild' and 'light' which we believe are used predominantly to describe taste and colour alone, and should stay that way.
Accordingly we propose that these designations continue to be modified.
My sixth point concerns the uniform measuring procedure, or rather, the Commission' s demand that comprehensive data be exacted from the companies themselves.
In this connection, we recommend that a scientific committee, in conjunction with the ISO, develop uniform measuring and testing procedures to be introduced on a pan-European basis.
It makes more sense to go down this route - even if industry has its doubts - than to go for the comprehensive compulsory registration proposed by the Commission.
We are aware that opinions will differ on this subject.
I would advocate that we keep our heads and a sense of perspective on this issue, at first reading, so as not to jeopardise the jobs we so badly need in Europe.
Mr President, smoking is bad for the health.
It is, however, naive to assume that we will manage to banish smoking altogether.
What matters most in our view is that we have a responsibility to make every effort to prevent people from taking up smoking at an increasingly young age.
With this in mind, Member States could consider increasing cigarette prices and prohibiting the sale to children under the age of 16.
I would like to make the following observations about the directive.
With regard to the legal basis, I welcome the fact that the directive will now be put to the vote.
The European Parliament has political responsibility in this respect, and we do not need to wait for legal procedures.
This would be a first, we have never done this before and there is always something being drawn up somewhere.
Moreover, the legal offices of the European Parliament and the European Commission have confirmed the correctness of the legal basis.
Secondly, I would like to touch upon health.
First of all, I am in favour of excluding yields from the packets, which seems to have a misleading effect.
Lower tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide yields are just as harmful to health and are, in fact, sometimes even more harmful.
It is sufficient to indicate that these products are in the packets and that they are harmful to health.
People should, however, be able to gain easy and free access to product information.
Strangely, this proposal facilitates export for health organisations and industry alike, and has a positive effect on the votes.
With regard to health warnings, Mr President, given the range of wishes regarding the warning size, I have now decided in favour of maintaining the percentages quoted by the European Commission, which can now be considered a compromise.
It is also important to point out the dangers of passive smoking.
So far, these have been underestimated, but the serious effects are becoming increasingly clear.
Other than that, I am of the view that warnings should be kept as brief and punchy as possible.
Longer texts render the warnings less forceful.
With regard to subsidies, I am in favour of phasing these out.
It is not credible to discourage smoking on the one hand and to stimulate the cultivation of tobacco on the other.
With regard to the market, Mr President, an open internal market entails developing equal starting positions for the industry in the different Member States.
This is why I am in favour of scrapping the ban on snuff.
This product is not healthy but not much worse than other products to warrant sole exclusion.
As for export, Mr President, I am of the opinion that the same health requirements should apply to sales within and outside the EU.
Concerning warnings, the rules of the importing countries could prevail.
In respect of the testing method, Mr President, it is important to arrive at a uniform testing method within the EU that has been established by an independent scientific body comprising experts from different related disciplines who would then be required to develop the testing methods.
Each Member State should then appoint a competent laboratory, either on their own territory or not, as the case may be, and tests carried out in these recognised laboratories should then have to be recognised across all Member States.
It would be a useless exercise if the same tests were to be carried out in all the Member States in accordance with uniform testing methods.
Finally, Mr President, I would like to point out the difference between cigarettes, pipes and cigars.
Smoking is bad for the health and all tobacco products are bad, but there are distinctions between the different products.
Everyone will agree that the target group of pipe and cigar smokers will be different to that of cigarette smokers.
Hence my proposal to draw a distinction in the directive between pipe and cigar tobacco with regard to the size (a smaller percentage) and colour of the warnings (namely not black and white but also to allow contrasting colours).
Cigar and pipe smokers are older, less frequent smokers in the main, and are mainly social smokers.
The product concerned is also more expensive.
If we mainly wish to discourage people from taking up smoking at a young age, this is not the target group.
Hence the distinction drawn.
Mr President, on the eve of the vote on this motion, I would like to focus on the problems raised by this directive and stress the responsibility we have had to display in order to iron them out.
Since the fight against smoking, which is the main cause of death in the Union, is the leading element in the fight to uphold of the right to health, it is important to be aware that this fight can only be won through dynamic but realistic consideration of the implications for production and employment.
I would argue that the balance achieved between these two elements of the text adopted by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy makes up for the hard work of the last few months, and, in connection with this, I would like to thank the rapporteur, who joined us in taking a flexible approach to the matter and liasing openly with both the health associations and the producers of tobacco and tobacco products.
With regard, briefly, to the contents of the draft, I would stress that the Commission' s proposal has not only been adhered to but also further consolidated in terms of public health protection.
Indeed, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy proposes to ban all terms such as light, ultralight or mild, since they are considered to be completely misleading for smokers, and eliminate any possibility of derogation for the States.
The Committee and my group have declared that they are in favour of harmonising the ingredients and additives of tobacco products, and have called upon the Commission to present a proposal for a list of authorised ingredients before the end of 2004.
The rules governing warnings have also been consolidated: we were not content simply to increase the amount of space dedicated to warnings but the messages have been made clearer and more personal as well so that they will be more effective in dissuading consumers from smoking.
As I said before, this reinforced line of health protection could not have been sustained if we had not found common ground with the requests for gradual phasing-out put forward by the tobacco and tobacco-related production industry.
The most problematic aspect of this directive may well be, in fact, that it lays down the same shorter time frames and the same maximum contents for all cigarettes produced in the Union, whether they are intended for sale within the Union or for export.
Nobody wants to deny the principle that cigarettes are bad for Europeans as well as for the citizens of third countries, but you cannot ask an entire sector to change overnight.
In order to take into account the requirements of the tobacco producers and industry, we propose, in accordance with the outcome of the vote of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, to introduce a new amendment, Amendment No 98, to uphold the position which keeps the objective of converting the sector to another activity unchanged but grants slightly longer time periods for this to be implemented, through the application of maximum content levels for internal production as of 2004 and for export as of 2006.
In this way, we do genuinely frustrate the attempts of those who, in the name of production, even reject the requirement to introduce maximum levels of tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide.
And that is what counts.
Another delicate point is the granting of the derogation to Greece to allow it to continue to produce strong cigarettes up until 2006.
In this context, having discussed the matter at great length in the Group, we considered that we should keep the situation as it is: that is, keep the derogation for Greece and refuse to extend it to nicotine and carbon monoxide.
Finally, I would like to mention that all the work put in during these last months has been carried out in close cooperation with the Council working party, and inform you that the Portuguese Presidency has placed the adoption of this directive high on the agenda of the 'Health' Council to take place on 29 June.
We are on the point of a major achievement - forgive me, Mr Langen - because in voting for the Maaten report and rejecting the amendments which challenge the validity of the legal basis of the directive, we have the chance to make our contribution to a more general anti-smoking strategy and, thus, to the improvement of our health.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, there is just one figure to remember and keep in mind throughout the debate and, particularly, during the voting: 500 000 deaths per annum within the European Community are due to tobacco, which is to say, more than AIDS, tuberculosis or other infectious diseases.
And if we were to issue a directive on the social costs or on public health, then it would have to be a discussion about simply banning this fatal poison outright.
This is not, however, the case.
Here we are presented with a directive intended to facilitate the free movement of goods throughout the European Union by approximating Member State laws, regulations and administrative provisions on the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products.
We must therefore concern ourselves not with prohibition but with establishing the same conditions for consumer information throughout all of the European Union regarding the content but also the potential risks they run in consuming these products.
In particular we must give thought to young people who do not have the necessary objectivity, and have only the image of young men and women smokers, and not the viewpoint that I was able to gain as a doctor on a respiratory medicine or cancer ward where I saw smokers dying in great pain from lung cancer.
This is not the future we want for our own children.
Let us also give a thought to other people' s future.
From this point of view, we must be pleased with Mr Maaten' s report and the amendments voted by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, which improve the proposed directive.
All these provisions, however, still fall short of what is necessary in the way of consumer information, and too often the determination to reach a compromise has prevailed.
We must not let the text be distorted by amendments direct from the headquarters of the tobacco industry.
We must remain vigilant as to the content, size and presentation of these warnings, which must not be changed.
Several contentious issues still remain.
The labelling of tobacco products other than cigarettes must be subject to the same conditions.
The difficulty of measuring values or the fact that these products are not targeted at young people must not be used as an excuse for forgetting that these products, such as cigars, rolling tobacco or snuff, are harmful and must be labelled as such, especially since some, like the cigar or the pipe, may occasionally prove more attractive to young people.
The maximum tar content of 10 mg is still excessive and does not take into consideration the real amount actually inhaled and the habits acquired.
Tar content must be limited still further.
More worrying is the fact that the Technical Committee set up includes specialists from the tobacco industry.
How is this body supposed to be neutral when it includes so-called experts that have spent their time deceiving public opinion, now supposed to become impartial judges of the harmfulness and toxicity of the products sold by their own employers?
I feel that one would have to be extremely naive, and not, one hopes, just corrupt, to believe that such a body might be truly objective.
Especially since these consultants to the industry are prepared to allow the introduction of ingredients not only to increase consumption but also to increase habituation.
In conclusion, confronted with 500 000 deaths annually, confronted with the money spent by the tobacco lobbies, infiltrating even this House, we must, ladies and gentlemen, make a choice in favour of life.
Mr President, the Commission proposal introduces a series of stricter regulations for the marketing of tobacco products.
Our group shares the concerns about the harmful effects of tobacco and, apart from a few reservations, generally approves the Commission' s proposals, together with many of the amendments in Mr Ìaaten' s report, although I do not know how effective they will be, especially those which go over the top, as other members have pointed out.
Be that as it may, we shall vote in favour of most of them, together with those approved by other jointly responsible parliamentary committees.
However, there are a number of proposals and amendments which either have no bearing on the matter or which will cause serious economic problems without solving the problems which they are supposedly addressing.
The problem has been raised, albeit indirectly, of reducing and abolishing production aids for tobacco.
Clearly such a move will not help to reduce smoking because I have not seen any of the members on their high horses proposing a ban on tobacco imports and such a move would therefore merely promote tobacco production in third countries.
As for the proposals which say that money saved by abolishing subsidies will be put to certain uses, the members making these proposals obviously have no idea how the budget works.
Ex ante commitments are worthless unless they constitute actual policy worked out by the relevant bodies, rather than just a statement made in a parliamentary committee.
Another amendment abolishes the derogation previously granted to the Greek tobacco industry for nicotine, tar and other yields.
In other words, it will upset the investment and production plans based on our decisions, based on the deadline previously granted.
And it will upset them retroactively.
What sort of law school did the people who approve such arbitrary reversals attend?
I should be most interested to hear the Commission' s comments on this.
Finally, industry is required to apply the same specifications to export products as it is to those marketed in the European Union, even if the importing countries require no such thing.
This measure is presented from a moral standpoint, which, however, does not prevent tobacco industries from moving outside the European Union and exporting their products throughout the world from third countries.
Multinationals are already doing just that.
Obviously, the rest will follow, with huge repercussions on economic activity and employment within the European Union.
Of course, the European Union could try - quite rightly - to impose its specifications on candidate and other countries with which it has close ties, perhaps even on the World Trade Organisation.
But instead of focusing on serious matters, we prefer a simple, or rather a highly simplistic and ineffectual solution.
I assume that the Commission, which has conducted a more in-depth analysis, will be able to enlighten us further so that, at the end of the day, we opt for a more balanced, more effective and more logical way forward.
Mr President, I must say it is rather paradoxical today to be discussing the intention to harmonise tobacco products and, at the same time, the intention to facilitate the free movement of what we all acknowledge to be a substance that is extremely harmful to health.
If the European Union sincerely believes that it can protect public health by covering cigarette packets with increasingly larger labels advertising the fact that "smoking kills" or "smoking causes cancer" , we are surely in the realm of the absurd.
Is harmonising these warnings a credible step when these toxic products are free to be distributed throughout the European Union, with the authorisation of the Union?
So let us leave the national states to deal with tobacco, with their own structures and their own cultural messages; let us leave them to engage in their own discussions with producers and consumers.
I refuse to believe that, in harmonising the warnings and labels, the European Union simply wishes to act for the common good.
I reject the idea that European citizens should feel reassured in a tobacconist' s in Lisbon or Paris, simply because the Europeanised, standardised product they will recognise there will be familiar to them.
As we all know, warnings serve no purpose, whether or not they are written in 'Helvetica' typeface.
Surely our duty is rather to increase consumers' responsibility rather than to make children of them by telling them what is good or bad for them.
Even if smokers have freedom of choice, we still have a duty to take preventative action, mainly with regard to younger generations.
We therefore support the amendments prioritising the protection of public health, particularly those prohibiting product descriptions for, whether it is "light" , "ultralight" or "mild" , tobacco, in the form of cigarettes, cigars or snuff tobacco, seriously damages one' s health.
Doctors in respiratory medicine, no doubt, but cardiologists too, are well aware of the fact, which they can observe every day, that tobacco is extremely harmful to health.
Calendar of part-sessions for 2001
I now have a brief announcement to make and would be grateful for your attention.
The President has just requested this of me.
The proposals of the Conference of Presidents that were drawn up in relation to the calendar of part-sessions for the year 2001 must be imparted orally here in plenary sitting.
All MEPs will already have received this in writing.
The deadline for tabling amendments is today at 12 noon.
The vote will take place tomorrow, Wednesday 14 June 2000.
The following dates are proposed:
15.1.
19.1.2001
31.1.
1.2.2001
12.2.
16.2.2001
28.2.
1.3.2001
12.3.
16.3.2001
2.4.
6.4.2001
2.5.
3.5.2001
14.5.
18.5.2001
30.5.
31.5.2001
11.6.
15.6.2001
2.7.
6.7.2001
3.9.
7.9.2001
19.9.
20.9.2001
1.10.
5.10.2001
22.10.
26.10.2001
12.11.
16.11.2001
28.11.
29.11.2001
10.12.
14.12.2001
Manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products (continuation)
Mr President, as far as debates go, Parliament is familiar with some absolute classics which crop up regularly: human rights, bananas, mad cows, and now tobacco.
We are here involved in revising three directives on the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco, cigarettes, snuff tobacco and other tobacco products.
And, at this point, we have yet another classic debate, the one which concerns the legal basis: is this a matter to do with the market, in which case Article 95 of the Treaty establishing the European Community applies, or the rules of operation or indeed health policy?
The matter has been referred to the Court of Justice of the European Communities.
The rapporteur from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market suggests kicking the ball into touch by referring the debate back.
Whatever the case, we are required to examine the content of the report before us.
Regarding the content of the report, then, an accurate observation is made and the rapporteur makes some sensible proposals but, in the final analysis, the sideways shift sets in.
As everyone recognises, the observation that tobacco causes disease and ultimately death is perfectly accurate, in the same way that the poverty generated by ultraliberalism is also ultimately harmful to health.
Cigarettes contain tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide, additives, citrates, tartrates, acetates, nitrates, sorbates, phosphates, even fungicides, and all these end up causing lung cancer, cardiovascular disease and cot death in infants, with 500 000 people dying every year.
Of course, many more people die too.
On the basis of these facts, then, some sensible proposals have been made.
Tar content must be limited to 10 mg per cigarette and nicotine content to 1 mg per cigarette.
There are even sensible suggestions to prohibit ammonia, which increases nicotine ingestion and thereby also dependence, and to earmark 2% of the profits made by tobacco multinationals for scientific research.
These are intelligent and reasonable suggestions.
There are also plans to provide information on the dangers of tobacco, and to protect children and even the infants at risk from sudden infant death syndrome.
This, however, is the start of the sideslip into lack of realism, self-righteousness and fundamentalism.
In other words, from an accurate observation and reasonable proposals, we move towards a problem that is even worse than tobacco itself.
What is this sideways shift?
In the first place, there is the bureaucratic sideslip with the business of the label.
We are putting labels on everything.
Indeed, the ecologist' s neurosis is revealed by the fact that the subject of labelling is raised.
We have labels on meat, wine, GM products, chocolate.
It is the trump card that beats any freedoms.
And now, labels on tobacco but, mark you, for labelling tobacco we are talking serious business.
The label must cover 30% of the packet surface, 35% if the wording is bilingual, and 12.5% of the outer surface of the wrapping for pipe tobacco.
The label must be printed in black on a white background and the borders must be at least 3 mm and at most 4 mm wide, an average of 3.5 mm.
The labels must feature text, but not just any old text, it must be printed in black Helvetica bold type, 100% intensity.
Thus proving that tobacco affects not only the lungs but also the brain.
The label must also feature a free telephone number for a body which the smoker can call to ask what dangers his habit involves.
There must also be a slogan like 'smoking kills' , 'smoking is harmful to those around you' , 'smoking impairs fertility' , and 'smoking causes impotence' .
So, seeing how impotent our governments are to deal with immigration, lack of security, tax problems, and unemployment, we can only conclude that they are heavy smokers.
This is clearly not, however, a sensible measure.
Let me give one example: tobacco was introduced into Europe at the same time as the potato.
Tobacco farming was started immediately but it took several centuries for the potato to catch on.
That is how irrational things can be.
Even if there had been a label on the apple to say that there was a risk of being thrown out of Eden, Eve would still have bitten into it!
What does that prove?
Well, it goes to show that slogans are not effective, just as a price increase would not be effective, as it would only increase smuggling and crime.
This is the sideslip into self-righteousness and hypocrisy.
We are told that there are social costs.
Yet the smoker pays excise duties of between 75 and 85% included in the price of tobacco.
In my own country, revenue from excise duties is greater than that from recording rights.
In other words, by smoking, the smoker is paying for the cost of his own cancer treatment.
People have said that it is inconsistent to allocate a billion to tobacco farming and then pay out for the campaign against tobacco.
True, but it is just as inconsistent to bomb Kosovo and then pay to rebuild it, or to eliminate internal borders and lose customs duties and then set up OLAF to defend the financial interests of the European Union.
In demographic terms, is it not inconsistent, ladies and gentlemen, to permit the loss of 5 million Europeans per annum due to abortions and then to weep over 500 000 deaths due to smoking?
Then there is the puritanical sideslip.
The rapporteur sends a shiver down my spine when he speaks of social aberrations, social instincts.
What I hear is: the Social Democratic Sweden of the 1960s sterilising fifteen year old adolescents because they were social misfits.
I hear: moral order, the Salem witches.
I hear: the Puritanism of northern Europe, these reformers desperate to reform everything, including the way we eat and drink.
I hear: northern Europe banning wine, on the pretext that wines are harmful to health, but not banning injecting oneself with all sorts of substances.
It is the same puritanical streak shared by Robespierre, Pol Pot, the Greens and the Quakers.
Our rapporteur is a Liberal and should not forget the lessons of laissez-faire Liberalism: let them live, let them be born, let them drink and let them smoke.
Mr President, we are right to be worried when ideology oversteps the limits of the law and merrily tramples individual freedoms underfoot to the point of advocating a tobacco-free Europe.
It is only totalitarian regimes that attempt to regulate the happiness of their citizens.
Nonetheless, the aim of this directive proposing to harmonise legislation on tobacco products is actually to oppose tobacco by every means possible, including those that are the most questionable on legal grounds.
The Commission is effectively misusing EC Treaty Article 95 which stipulates that the object of the single market may be sufficient justification to undertake approximation, but the Commission is justifying its action on the grounds of public health and consumer protection, which are covered by EC Treaty Article 152, and this authorises only encouragement and not actual harmonisation.
What are we to think of this crude misuse of Articles 95 and 152?
What are we to think of the rejection voted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market?
What then will be the use of this committee and, indeed, of the European Union' s legal consultants?
What are we to think of the unemployment unavoidably generated by this directive which, in eliminating all subsidies to production, will toll the knell for the tobacco sector?
This affects one million jobs in Europe.
In France, 40 000 small producers are scraping a living thanks to this additional activity which is extremely labour-intensive.
What are we to think of a Europe which, according to the power of lobbies and special interests, permits the addition of vegetable fats to chocolate, authorises the use of GMOs and imposes restrictions liable to jeopardise the sale of local products on the markets and now to threaten tobacco production, even though it is perfectly legal?
As you will have understood, we shall be voting against this directive.
Is it too much to ask that Articles 95 and 152 be respected?
All we are asking for is a minimum of subsidiarity and a modicum of tolerance.
Mr President, the actions of the European Union, the Commission and, in particular, Parliament, in their endeavour to regulate the tobacco industry, continue to give the impression that they are disregarding the needs of the workers and growers of the industry - and by the industry I mean the production, industrial and, in particular, tobacco-growing sections.
You are all aware of how heated the debate in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy was.
There have been a large number of amendments, including the one tabled by myself, attempting to defend the production sector and the tobacco-growing sector in particular.
In Europe, 135 000 families work in the tobacco industry and it employs as many as 800 000 workers, most of whom are seasonal workers hired at harvest time and during production periods.
This is a major industry which, moreover, hires more women than men to do seasonal work.
Furthermore, from a production perspective, it would be very hard to change from growing tobacco to another crop.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has adopted an amendment withdrawing subsidies for European tobacco production.
We are concerned as to whether this instrument will genuinely be an effective means of reducing tobacco consumption.
The most immediate effect will be to weaken the situation of European tobacco-growers to the benefit of production elsewhere in the world, and the price reduction will penalise the entire production system of the European continent.
Are we saying that, in order to reduce smoking in Europe, it is necessary to kill off European tobacco growers without even any guarantee that this will reduce cigarette consumption by a single cigarette?
From where I stand, a responsible smoking reduction policy needs to be based on an awareness and prevention campaign, especially in schools.
It should not penalise those who are contributing to Europe' s wealth.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, there seems to me to be no question as to the validity of the proposed directive on harmonisation of the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products.
Obviously, the proposal to tighten up standards for maximum nicotine, tar and carbon monoxide content in cigarettes must be considered one of the ways of ensuring better public health protection.
As a member of Parliament' s Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, I should particularly like to highlight the fact that tobacco producers are not opposed to the changes proposed by the Commission, insofar as these changes are justified on public health grounds.
Like them, however, I deplore the fact that the Commission has not carried out an impact study concerning the effect of the proposal on the production sector, as it did for a number of businesses, particularly small- and medium-sized businesses.
They thus failed to take account of the fact that, on the whole, European producers will not be capable of supplying products to the required quality by the deadline of 2003.
This leads me to advocate delaying the date when these new provisions come into force.
Let me remind you that the tobacco sector, involving 130 000 producers and 400 000 seasonal workers, is more often than not located in regions which present very few alternatives for farm production.
This is a social reality which must not be forgotten, especially since, in economic terms, European production accounts for less than 25% of European tobacco consumption.
In these circumstances, jeopardising the situation of European producers would only be of benefit to the multinationals involved in import and export.
I should not like to think that this might be our objective.
Mr President, I am keen to follow the line taken by our rapporteur, Mr Maaten, and would like to ask you, fellow-Members, to do the same.
Tobacco is no ordinary product of course.
We are familiar with the fatal risks associated with tobacco, we know the statistics which have already been quoted here today.
We also know about its addictive effect.
Typical use of cigarettes is extremely dangerous, life-threateningly so.
You can be unlucky and have a car crash, or abuse alcohol, but with tobacco, the life-threatening aspect is always there.
I very much welcome the emphasis which Mr Maaten placed on the dangers of passive smoking.
A tobacco ban would be inefficient and socially unattainable at present.
But it still remains clear that those who market cigarettes should not be allowed to do so.
The product is far too dangerous.
What can we do as regulators?
First of all, we need to realise that we are in an extremely absurd situation, straddling enormous state revenue on the one hand and enormous expenditure in health insurance on the other.
We should be able to admit to this.
European policy on tobacco is not very logical, to say the least.
We as regulators should at least try to practise damage limitation.
We should compel producers to make the warnings to users as clear as possible.
It may be bureaucratic, but if you see how producers deal with other requirements, then I have to say that it is necessary to spell out our regulations very clearly.
Later on this week, Parliament will be discussing phthalates and PVC softeners, and when I see how very circumspect we MEPs are, how very careful we are in dealing with these products, if I compare this with the little we are asking with regard to a dangerous product such as tobacco, I have to conclude that this Parliament can be very selective in its indignation.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I shall not go over the health aspects of the directive again, for indeed I support the rapporteur wholeheartedly as well as the amendments tabled by my fellow Member, Mrs Roth-Behrendt.
I should like briefly to mention the matter of the potential unemployment created by this directive.
The tobacco industry presents itself as the harbinger of employment in Europe and claims to defend jobs, but what has the management in the tobacco industry actually achieved between the late 1980s and the present?
Jobs in the industry have been "rationalised" by 50%.
Employment levels in tobacco production, which formerly stood at 120 000 people, now involves no more than 60 000 people.
A World Bank study shows that a reduction in tobacco consumption worldwide will lead to an increase in job creation: for if the money spent today on tobacco is spent in future on some other luxury product, for example, this will create more jobs because the tobacco industry is one that has been rationalised to the bone.
It is therefore not true that the directive will cause job losses.
To return to the question of exports to third world countries, is the health of an African worth less than the health of a European?
The speeches made by some Members of this House, who I sincerely believe to be inspired by the arguments of the tobacco industry, are reminiscent of the debate on chocolate.
As soon as certain industries and certain employers in Europe stand to gain something, the solidarity advocated in our speeches no longer seems to apply.
This is one more reason to support Mr Maaten' s report, and also the European Commission' s efforts to extend the directive to exports too.
Mr President, for a long time, we have held the belief that to many, tobacco is a harmless stimulant and that its production creates employment for farmers and workers, particularly in economically weak regions.
The production and consumption of tobacco increased dramatically in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
It was then thought that smoking was normal and that any self-respecting man should light up a cigarette.
In my language, which is Dutch, there are two expressions which illustrate how smoking was viewed then.
The first one is: 'het is geen man die niet roken kan' [he who does not smoke is not a man], whilst the second one reads: 'een tevreden roker is geen onruststoker' [a satisfied smoker does not cause any trouble].
Since then, the production and distribution of tobacco has increasingly ended up in the hands of large international chains in whose interest it is to keep successive new generations of consumers dependent on them on a permanent basis.
Their growth market lies with young people, women and people with little education, those on low incomes and with few prospects in life.
However, there are also many men, especially those who are well-educated, who are trying to kick the habit of smoking, but it is just as difficult as it is to abstain from alcohol or drugs.
Tobacco generates big bucks.
This is why there are stakeholders who would prefer to continue to keep everything as free as possible within this market.
Freedom of production, import and advertising, and freedom to mislead and sponsor events which attract large crowds of people.
Tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide make people ill, as a result of which they die prematurely of heart or lung diseases.
Non-smokers run risks too because they are obliged to inhale the smoke of those smoking around them.
Accordingly, tobacco is not just about economic interests, rather it is far more of a public health problem.
It makes little sense to remind people that it is their individual responsibility whether they smoke or not.
This is not about one case in isolation but about the responsibility of all of us together.
We cannot leave the market free and subsequently blame the victims of smoking for their bad health.
This is not how we treat consumers of heroin or cocaine.
It is necessary to ensure that tobacco products are hard to come by and to warn the rest of the users about the risks as best we can.
The norm should be that smoking is abnormal and that new generations must be protected from this addiction.
From the public health point of view it is necessary that we no longer take the interests of tobacco producers and sellers into account.
The situation would hugely improve if the packets were to display the largest possible warning sign and if advertising and sponsoring were banned altogether.
In addition, it should not be possible for people to buy cigarettes at supermarkets, cafés or petrol stations as an afterthought.
If you are 100% determined in your mind that you want to buy a tobacco product, you should have to visit an outlet which only sells this product.
This could best be achieved in the same way as in the Netherlands, where soft drugs can only be sold in a limited number of outlets which need to have a council permit.
Some opponents of the currently proposed measures blame the rapporteur for making outrageous proposals.
To those opponents, I would like to reveal that in the Netherlands, Mr Maaten belongs to the Liberal Party which adopts the most non-interventionist approach to industry' s interests and which has turned the free market principle into its cardinal ideology.
If even a representative of such a party proposes to further regulate the market, then this is all the more proof that public health is at serious risk.
As representative of the Socialist Party, I would even go further than Mr Maaten or the majority within the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection.
I represent the section of my group which denounces the idea that tobacco production could only fall or disappear altogether once people have kicked the habit of smoking largely or completely.
I believe it has to precede it.
We do, however, fully agree with the other opinions in our group that American chains should not be in a position, on account of free imports, to plug the gap which will emerge if European production drops, and that economically weaker regions in Southern Europe should be given support in order to create replacement employment when tobacco production disappears.
Mr President, the Maaten report on today' s agenda has lead to this interesting debate.
However, we must not forget that our business here is politics, which is quite a different matter from merely sitting here listening to technical arguments or pressure from the varies lobbies such as Philip Morris or the large multinationals: we should be thinking about the future of Europe!
In my opinion, the Maaten report, which is certainly technically sound and lays down appropriate parameters, represents a move towards the political will to protect the right to health, a right which must be protected and guaranteed for each and every European citizen.
It is, in effect, all part of the realisation throughout the world that smoking is harmful, and we have the figures to prove it.
Having established that, we can then discuss any other justifications we may wish to.
Smoking is harmful and we must use the Maaten report to regulate tax reductions, labelling and the other initiatives proposed in the report which are certainly, for the time being, important but not decisive measures.
I feel that the main point to be stressed is the need to create a 'non-smoking' culture.
Last century, smoking was part of the culture.
It was important and provided a sense of security.
Now, however, we have to turn that culture on its head.
Of course, we must also stress the freedom of each one of us, of all citizens, to choose, and in this case I hope that we will choose the freedom not to smoke, freedom which, however, does not hide the harmful results and dangers of smoking itself.
On the other hand, I also have to consider the 400 000 workers and the 150 000 or so tobacco growers of the tobacco industry.
In this past century, we have succeeded in changing nuclear energy into something different, into clean energy.
It would seem absurd not to be able to change or contribute to the transformation of such industries into equally productive industries which will develop economically and socially in the future.
It would be completely absurd, especially at the dawn of a new millennium, in an era in which man landed on the moon, if we do not manage to bring about a change in this industry or to provide accurate information regarding the genuine harm caused by smoking.
Well, in my opinion, we have two main tasks: we must endeavour to provide accurate information and give everybody the chance to choose whether to smoke or not, and I hope that they will choose not to - my own family has suffered bereavements through this - and, at the same time, we must bring about a change of culture in the relevant industries.
Mr President, smoking forms a serious threat to public health.
In the European Union, more than half a million people die each year as a result of smoking.
Due to the addictive effect, it appears very difficult to stop smoking.
Unfortunately, it is still the case that many young people take up smoking.
Tobacco manufacturers pursue a deliberate policy in this direction by lending cigarette smoking a sporty and macho image in advertising.
Once the tobacco industry has won over a young person, the industry is generally guaranteed another regular customer.
This policy of reeling in customers is helped by the fact that the addictive effect is enhanced by adding substances to cigarettes so that the nicotine is better absorbed.
In addition, with misleading messages such as "light" and "ultra light" , the tobacco industry is trying to create the impression that the relevant tobacco products are less harmful.
The European Commission' s proposal and Mr Maaten' s excellent report adequately address the above-mentioned problems.
I do, however, have two further remarks to make.
Firstly, European tobacco policy is not consistent, a point which has already been argued.
On the one hand, the use of tobacco is discouraged, but on the other hand more than EUR 1 billion is spent annually on subsidies for the tobacco industry.
It is high time that these subsidies were phased out gradually down to zero.
My second comment concerns labelling.
I am in favour of strict labelling i.e. 40% or 50% of the packaging for health warnings is a workable compromise.
As for the content of the warnings, I think that the text "als u rookt, bent u uzelf aan het doden" [if you smoke, you are killing yourself] has just crossed the boundary of what is reasonable.
Warnings should appeal to the smokers' own perception of the environment and should not be formulated such that their effect is like water off a duck' s back.
Mr President, today' s debate reminds me, word for word, of the debate we had at the second reading of the directive on the advertising of tobacco products.
The same legal arguments are being used as a scapegoat by the very same Members of Parliament who, under cover of a putative sacrosanct legal coherence, are in fact defending vast financial interests.
I am sorry to see that over the years there has been no development in their arguments.
I regret this all the more because now even the cigarette industry itself is tending to acknowledge the fact that this debate should be obsolete.
Those who are now hypocritically rehashing yesterday' s legal arguments are taking part in an outmoded rearguard debate.
From a legal point of view, the debate of the future is the one dealing with the court cases which we are starting to see in Europe.
How is it possible to weigh the financial interests of a number of industrialists against the devastating effects of tobacco consumption upon health?
Every year, tobacco kills more people.
And, in comparison with the restrictions we are subject to in the context of mad cow disease, how is it possible that we are doing nothing about the 500 000 smoking-related deaths every year in Europe?
How is it possible not to shudder when thinking of our young people, our young women and our young mothers?
On the specific subject of agricultural subsidies in favour of tobacco production, I should like to see the European Union at long last adopting a consistent policy.
It is not possible, on the one hand, to offer significant subsidies to tobacco production while, on the other hand, releasing ever inadequate funds to combat smoking and cancer.
For years the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has been denouncing these budget decisions.
In terms of the common agricultural policy, new plans must be thought up with a view to finding alternative solutions for farmers.
I should like to see this directive apply to all tobacco products, not just cigarettes but also cigars, rolling tobacco and pipe tobacco for, while consumption of such products does not cause the same diseases, tobacco for oral use causes equally terrible devastation.
This directive will not, unfortunately, solve all the problems related to tobacco consumption, but it does at least aim to attempt to inform the consumer.
Mr President, anyone who follows this debate will see that there is a kind of war going on between those who are trying to protect health and those who defend tobacco.
However, as Mrs Grossetête has pointed out, the problem stems from the fact that legal arguments have been given and that, by a small majority, the Committee on Legal Affairs decided that Article 95 was not the appropriate legal basis.
As a Socialist member and spokesperson in the Legal Affairs Committee, I would like to reiterate the objection to this point of view.
Article 95 is the article which takes up the former Article 100A of the Treaty, on the basis of which the three previous directives, which are now being remodelled in this new directive, had been adopted.
Therefore, to reject that legal basis now is to go against our previous tradition, to cast doubt upon what we had done, which seems to me to be above all very dangerous for the construction of a European legal system.
To speak of subsidiarity in this area, an area strictly relating to the internal market, which specifically involves the health of the citizens, regulated by Article 95, is a way of diverting the battle and, in my view, this is very dangerous because, while the defence of an economic sector seems to me to be important, and worthy of respect, it must not lead this Parliament to change the legal basis or, as is intended for example in another amendment, to suspend any decisions until the decision of the Court of Justice on the directive on tobacco advertising is adopted.
This directive which we are discussing today has nothing to do with the directive on tobacco advertising.
Therefore, Mr President, I believe that we must be consistent, maintain our previous attitude in this respect, maintain the legal basis proposed by the Commission and endorsed by the Legal Services of the three institutions and refuse to accept this abuse of the subsidiarity theory which would truly put an end to the existence of the European Union and the competences of this Parliament.
Mr President, as I was coming to Parliament this morning I remembered the night I sat by my father's bedside looking at his wasted body as the lung cancer finally claimed him.
I am sure I am not the only person in this Parliament to have lost friends or family through smoking.
The fact is that if the laws on drugs which apply in most countries across the European Union were applied consistently, then tobacco manufacturers would all be locked up behind bars and condemned as murderers for deliberately making their products addictive.
Yet when it comes to the greatest killer drug of all, we apply different rules.
There is no consistency and we say that people should be allowed to choose for themselves.
As a Liberal, I agree with that position: people should be allowed to choose for themselves.
However, everything possible must be done to ensure that those decisions are made with full knowledge of the consequences.
The manufacturers say that everyone knows the risks already; that there is no need to increase the size of the health warnings, and that they certainly should not adopt the sort of proposal I am putting forward, to supplement the health warnings with some hard-hitting pictures to drive home the consequences.
Frankly, the manufacturers have an addiction of their own: an addiction to trying to mislead us.
If the rules on advertising were changed, manufacturers would grasp the opportunity to promote their products in every possible way, because they believe that advertising works.
And we should accept that fact: advertising does work.
We should seek to turn the tables on them.
We should seek to ensure that the cigarette packs themselves are turned into instruments to promote health, not death.
We should follow the Canadian example and ensure that advertising is used effectively.
And the bigger the better.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to start by congratulating Mr Jules Maaten on his first-class report.
Smoking is a dangerous habit which even harms non-smokers, but at the end of the day, I am liberal enough to say that everyone should decide for themselves whether they smoke cigarettes, use dope, drink alcohol, or whatever.
But it is up to the government to point out the harmful effects to addicts and other citizens.
The tiny label of 10% which we have at present is not effective then.
We need warnings which are much bigger.
But 80% of new smokers are young people under the age of 18.
The traditional warning that smoking harms your health cuts no ice with them.
The warning that smoking causes impotence could possibly work, especially if it is illustrated, as young people take a great interest in sex.
I would like to add one other point.
Anyone who has seen the film "The Insider" knows that the cigarette industry adds ammonia and other substances in order to encourage addiction.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has endorsed the green amendment in order to rule this out.
Fellow MEPs, I would like to call on you to back Jules Maaten' s excellent report.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, one cannot fail to notice the confusion - we hope not deliberate confusion - in the report by the Committee on the Environment, which is turning the campaign against smoking into a campaign against tobacco producers.
We do not dispute the fact that smoking damages your health and we therefore agree with the spirit of the directive proposed by the European Commission.
However, we must not forget that very little, in fact just under 30%, of the tobacco consumed in the European Union is produced in the European Union.
Most of it is imported.
Consequently, measures to reduce tobacco production will do nothing to reduce consumption; they will merely boost imports.
We need to take measures against imports and, once consumption has fallen to production levels, we shall have no objection to discussing production cut-backs.
I should like to concentrate on three separate points: first, we are categorically opposed to Amendment No 17 by the Committee on the Environment, which recommends a gradual reduction in production aids for tobacco.
This would spell financial disaster for hundreds of thousands of tobacco producers in Greece and other southern countries of the European Union, at no benefit to public health, for the reasons already stated.
Secondly, we are also categorically opposed to Amendment No 21 in the report, which abolishes the European Commission' s proposal to extend the date of application for tar yields by Greece to the end of 2006.
This extension was proposed because of the special nature of certain varieties of tobacco cultivated in Greece and abolishing it will hit tobacco production in Greece extremely hard.
Thirdly, we agree with the view that reductions in the amounts of harmful substances should apply both to cigarettes consumed in the European Union and to cigarettes produced for export.
It would be absurd to maintain that people from countries outside the European Union have greater resistance to harmful substances.
Mr President, I am satisfied that there is general consensus within the fifteen Member States that legislation governing the sale, presentation and advertising of tobacco products must be fundamentally changed.
The protection of the general public health of the citizens of the Union, must be a central priority for all European Union legislators at any time.
As a result of the Amsterdam Treaty we now have an equal say with the EU governments in the area of legislation on public health matters.
Let us use it intelligently.
The issue of cigarette smoking and the damage which cigarettes do to the health of the citizens of the Union is a very serious public health matter indeed.
For the most part I support the key amendments which were passed by the Committee on the Environment last month, in their call for the warnings on cigarette packets to be larger than proposed by the Commission.
The warning about the public health risk of cigarette smoking should cover 40% of the front of every packet and 60% of the back of every cigarette packet sold within the Union.
Labelling requirements in general should be stricter and include fuller health warnings and the list of ingredients should also be available on request.
Descriptions such as low tar, mild and light must in future be banned.
I support the elimination of such descriptions because they give the impression that smoking such cigarettes does not damage the health of individuals as badly as other cigarettes: this is clearly misleading.
Such slick advertising by tobacco manufacturers must not be permitted.
The Committee on the Environment has also called for warnings to be printed only in black on a white background, so as to give such warnings more impact.
The committee members also consider that general warnings such as smoking kills are inadequate and I agree with this analysis.
Messages such as "Smoking kills half a million persons each year in the European Union", or "85% of lung cancers are caused by tobacco" should be the messages printed on cigarette boxes in the future.
Mr President, I suspect that in my group as in most others there is a wide range of views, from people who think that smoking is a matter for consenting adults, largely but not necessarily in private, to those who think that sellers of tobacco should suffer capital punishment and that those who smoke should be incarcerated in secure hospitals.
But all of us would agree that the primary purpose of this measure is to protect children and to deter them from a habit that may kill them.
The best way is not to worry about maximum levels of content but to worry about minimum levels, so that the first taste for a child is so foul that they do not seek to repeat the experience.
Certainly we should support the ban on the use of labels such as mild and light or anything that suggests that the product is safer.
The truth is that people inhale more deeply to get the taste and so can actually damage themselves more.
Such labels are deceptive and dangerous and should be banned.
Otherwise labelling is of marginal and temporary impact, whatever the picture, whatever the words, and there is some danger of a cigarette card mentality emerging, with the different messages becoming collector's items.
The export issue is probably the most difficult.
It is one for balanced judgment: on the one hand, it is odd to say that what is not good for our citizens is okay to export to other countries; but on the other hand, it is presumptuous of us to say what standards other countries should adopt and on balance I come down in favour of the second approach.
Lastly, we have the issue of subsidies for growing tobacco, paid by our taxpayers to people in our Europe.
It is immoral and obscene that we allow subsidies for growing something that we know will kill and will cost us billions of euros in health care for smokers.
Our governments must stop this and we must stop them supporting it.
Mr President, this was a highly controversial report within the Industry Committee which only approved its opinion by 29 votes to 26.
The division in the Environment Committee was overcome as the major groups managed to agree a compromise.
On behalf of the Socialist Group, we support this compromise.
We reject the view that the legal basis of the report is wrong.
We support the creation within the EU of a single market in cigarette and tobacco products.
At the same time, within the limits of Community law, we would like to use the opportunity of maintaining and strengthening public health protection within the EU.
We believe that nicotine and tar levels need to be further limited and new limits should be imposed on carbon monoxide levels.
We believe that health warnings should be bolder, clearer and larger.
Nevertheless, my concern is that in some areas, our good intentions are in advance of common sense.
If we are to have a single market, surely we should have mutual recognition of the common procedures for testing.
It would be absurd to make each Member State test separately.
Secondly, I hope that countries outside the EU will follow our lead in cutting limits on nicotine, tar and carbon monoxide.
It seems absurd that we insist on exporting jobs from the EU to applicant countries and others to produce cigarettes that will be legal to import for personal consumption within the European Union.
Thirdly, I accept that the latest research indicates that smokers compensate for lower tar levels by smoking light cigarettes differently.
Nevertheless, banning such terms as "mild", "light" and "low" threatens to make illegal long-established extra-European brands like "Mild Seven" with all the consequences for the WTO rules and it will merely increase sales of thesauruses to the tobacco industry.
If I were to be mischievous, I would recommend "Organic Green" or "One" as appropriate substitutes.
Despite these reservations, I hope the general thrust of the report will receive strong support from Parliament.
Mr President, allow me to adopt a rather Swedish and personal tone.
Swedish snuff is most certainly not good for you and is not to be confused with any sort of 'health food' .
It is a very addictive drug, and I most certainly would not want the tobacco industry, by which I here mean Swedish snuff manufacturers, to be given the opportunity to market snuff in the rest of Europe as something healthy.
That would be devastating.
In spite of these misgivings of mine, I cannot quite understand our allowing all other forms of tobacco product - cigarettes, cigars and pipes - which are in themselves more dangerous for the individual who uses them.
These tobacco products are most certainly and without any doubt harmful to health.
The fact that snuff is less dangerous to people who use it is, in actual fact, less important.
What gives snuff an advantage is the fact that nicotine addicts can use it without affecting the environment.
Passive smoking is probably the most insidious effect of tobacco.
We can experience this on a daily basis, both in this Assembly and in this House too.
There is smoking going on everywhere, something which sometimes causes acute difficulty in breathing for those who are allergic to smoke, among fellow Members of Parliament too.
One ought not perhaps to refer to one' s own experience in this Assembly, but I myself took up smoking when I was very young.
At that time, it was not only cool to smoke, but it was even useful.
Rather tubby young ladies, in particular, were extremely well served by cigarettes.
Fifteen years ago, my husband contracted a serious lung disease.
Then, if not before, I painfully learned the cost in terms of suffering of the smoke produced by myself and all smokers.
I now regard myself as a nicotine addict.
But I am not bothering anyone else.
Mr President, smoking kills!
Tobacco is the only product that when used as directed, kills its consumers.
Yet we have the absurd situation where additives used in Gummibärs, for example, are better labelled than the additives in tobacco products.
It is preposterous that it is unclear, for example, as to whether ammonia, which increases addiction, has to be labelled or not.
It is also absolutely grotesque that we are going to carry on allowing advertisers to use such misleading descriptions as light or ultramild.
I feel people should be left in no doubt as to the fact that there should be a ban on this.
It is also hypocritical that many people lament the risks smoking poses to health on the one hand - from hardening of the arteries in the leg to cancer - and the associated costs incurred by the national economy, yet they are against the risks being stated in large and clear lettering on the packet.
I believe it has become evident - and this is borne out by experiences in Canada - that the larger the health warning on the packet, the greater the deterrent effect.
As a Parliament, we have really nailed our colours to the mast where the ban on tobacco advertising is concerned.
I make no bones about the fact that I think it is disgraceful how the Red-Green Federal Government followed the former Federal Government' s example in lodging a complaint against this at the European court of Justice.
However, I hope we really succeed in nailing our colours to the mast this week, as in the case of the ban on tobacco advertising, and that we do not bow to the pressure of industry but are able to make it clear that everything possible must be done to protect children and young people, in particular, from taking up smoking.
Mr President, I welcome the Commission' s initiative because I feel that the old directive on the regulation of tobacco products in Europe is out-of-date.
Several years ago, we dealt with the BSE crisis here in Europe and left no stone unturned in terms of health and consumer policy.
We brought about a great deal of change, and rightly so.
When you consider how much was spent in connection with BSE, it is shocking to note how lacking in courage the European Union is when it comes to actually doing something for health on the tobacco front.
There are four or five key points at issue here, to my mind.
We must reflect on the subsidisation of tobacco growing in Europe.
We must pluck up the courage to do more to promote transparency where health policy is concerned.
We must provide the citizens with more information, which is not a matter of whether the logo should cover 15% or 45% of the surface area of the packet, but of bringing about a change of mentality in society.
I believe it is vital that we do all we can to get the message across to young people that they must not take up smoking.
God knows, at my age it probably does not matter if I carry on smoking or not.
But our children must not start smoking.
That is what this directive should aim to achieve.
It is absolutely scandalous that we are subsidising the tobacco industry.
We allocate enormous sums of money for the production of tobacco that we in Europe should not smoke on account of a pathetic set of standards.
We are going one step forwards and two steps back.
What we must aim to do is to help farmers not to grow tobacco.
Supporting non-production, that is the goal.
I would like to see less tobacco overall in Europe.
Permit me to say a few words about the legal basis.
It is not for me to decide who is right.
Nor is it for this House to decide.
Let the courts decide.
What we need is a directive that makes sound recommendations, so that we can be sure to reduce tobacco consumption in Europe in the future.
Mr President, the right to health should be enjoyed by all citizens of the European Union, which is why we consider the draft directive on the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products to be extremely important.
It has been proven that certain types of cancer and cardiovascular and lung diseases are directly related to smoking.
It is our duty to provide proper and adequate information on what smoking does to your health.
It is our duty to promote health through a public awareness, information and behaviour modification programme, especially for the most easily swayed section of the population, i.e. the young.
The Commission proposal is based on Article 95 of the Treaty, taking account of a high level of protection of public health by harmonising the internal market in tobacco products and we agree wholeheartedly with this.
We also agree that tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide yields should be reduced and that the terms 'light' and 'ultra light' should be abolished because they create the erroneous impression that smokers are at less risk.
We would also like to have a positive list of additives.
As far as the form and content of the message are concerned, it is important that it should be clear, comprehensible and brief if it is to be noticed at once, and we therefore consider it imperative to increase the surface area covered.
However, I should like, Mr President, to touch on what I consider to be another important matter.
It is idealistic to believe that we will stop smokers smoking if we abolish production aids for tobacco in Europe.
Those who have still not been persuaded that smoking damages your health will continue to smoke cigarettes imported from third countries, thereby undermining agricultural production in certain areas of the Union.
I think that a fundamental study of the financial and social fallout is needed if we are to avoid hitting tobacco producers.
Mr President, 500 000 EU citizens die each year from smoking - that is 1 400 a day.
Even if a small number of people stop, it will have huge health implications, not only for smokers but for passive smokers as well.
It is important that we fight delaying tactics today.
The EU already regulates health warnings and tar yields.
Smokers also have a right to know that there are more than 600 additives licensed for use in tobacco products.
They have a right to know that "light" and "mild" branding is misleading.
People inhale more if they have a light cigarette than any other cigarette.
The health warning should be large and explicit.
We must warn of the dangers of smoking, the dangers of lung cancer and also the danger of bronchitis and asthma.
People must know that it is not just lung cancer but other lung diseases and other diseases as well.
We must warn of the dangers of passive smoking.
I know the dangers of smoking and the dangers of passive smoking.
I started smoking when I was 11 years old.
I ended up smoking 40 a day.
I had chronic bronchitis and I was told by the doctor that I had to give up as otherwise my life would be in danger.
My health has been damaged by smoking.
There was no warning when I took up smoking.
Maybe I would not have taken it up if there had been.
Now I am the victim of passive smoking.
I just have to pass a cigarette and I have an asthma attack, especially in this building.
I have asthma attack after asthma attack.
I am a good example of why we should adopt this report now.
Even if one person stops smoking as a result of this, or does not take it up; even if one person is not inconsiderate any more; even if it stops one person being hospitalised because of other people's smoke, it is worth it.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, smoking is unhealthy and smokers should be aware of this.
Sound and clear warnings about all kinds of diseases and disorders are therefore, in our opinion, a matter of greatest importance.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur on the dynamism and perseverance he has displayed in this connection.
The European Union too, should know that smoking is unhealthy.
In fact, it should put its money where its mouth is.
The Tobacco Directive is a good opportunity to demonstrate that the internal market is not just about the free movement of goods.
We have to attach clear health requirements to the goods within the internal market.
It is not just the tar and nicotine yields which are at issue here, but also mainly additives.
Additives which encourage addiction should be banned at the earliest opportunity, as far as I am concerned.
The other aspect of the Union policy is the issue of tobacco subsidies.
It would indicate a lack of consistency if we continued subsidising tobacco products in the knowledge that smoking is unhealthy.
If phasing out subsidies has social and financial implications for the tobacco growers in the poorest regions, we are all jointly responsible for finding a solution.
Smoking is unhealthy.
We are all agreed on this, but should we be sharing this with the entire world?
This is one of the most interesting and principle questions in today' s debate.
It would be a considerable change in policy if we were to impose European standards on other countries.
If this change were extended to other fields, it could mean that European companies would only produce for the European market.
This would, as such, lead to a certain degree of regionalisation of the world economy, a regionalisation which, in the case of the tobacco industry, would be at the expense of the position of Europe-based companies.
The question is whether we want this.
To impose standards on other countries can come across as presumptuous, moralistic or patronising.
After all, other countries can set their own standards which industry has to comply with.
A sound approach, however, would be to make the European standard compulsory in the case of export to countries where such standards are lacking.
In this way, we would at least avoid other countries, especially Third-World countries, being lumbered with second-rate cigarettes.
Mr President, although I value the work of rapporteur Maaten, I have to say that I am greatly disturbed by the European Parliament' s inconsistent line with regard to tobacco.
The report once again reflects the ambivalence of the European Union - as has been highlighted in this debate - which subsidises the tobacco cultivation by more than EUR one billion and collects more than EUR 70 billion in tax money annually on the one hand and which curbs the sale of tobacco products on the other.
I would also like to emphasise that it is not up to the European Parliament to deny tobacco products, which are legally available on the market, a fair chance of commercialisation.
What strikes me in the debate is that we seem to overlook the objective of this directive.
It aims to reinforce the internal market by promoting better harmonisation and by removing barriers to trade.
In this respect, I notice an imbalance in the present report, an imbalance between the need for harmonisation and the aim of protecting the consumer.
I take exception to the fact that the consumer is considered as someone who cannot judge for himself what he should or should not do.
The proposed warnings on the packet completely miss the point.
Whatever the dimensions, the information will remain ineffective.
Information on the dangers of smoking will need to be conveyed in a more effective way if we want to achieve the objective.
Above all, we should not forget that it is - and should remain - up to the citizens to decide for themselves how they wish to conduct their lives and they should be able to continue to do so.
Mr President, I believe that the objective of achieving greater protection for the consumer in relation to tobacco consumption is absolutely shared by all of us.
To this end, it also seems to me to be fair and beyond all doubt that the tobacco industry will have to adapt to stricter conditions of manufacture, presentation and sale, such as those proposed by this directive.
In this respect, I congratulate Mr Maaten on his work.
Nevertheless, we cannot put the cart before the horse if we want this work to succeed.
The reality is that Europe produces and exports tobacco and, furthermore, its cultivation is subject to significant subsidies.
As has been pointed out, this does not just involve the interests of the large multinationals.
It involves the legitimate and fair way of life of hundreds of modest families.
If we wish to prohibit these subsidies, let us prohibit them, but not without truly seeking alternatives which are proven to be viable.
With regard to exports, it seems logical that the European Union should apply the same levels of content for cigarettes for consumption within the internal market as for those intended for exports.
In this respect, a proposal of time limits may seem logical.
However, we cannot deny or forget the authority of each state to manage the risks within its own society.
If we believe that we can and must teach someone something, we must do so firstly - and this has been said here - through education and increasing awareness and not through an imposition which has dubious results as an instrument for reducing the consumption of tobacco.
Mr President, I should like to begin by thanking Commissioner Byrne, something which has not been done today, for I do in fact think that it is a good proposal that the Commission has come up with, a proposal which I should really like to have voted for without changes.
It is a good contribution to reducing the poison content of cigarettes and to providing far better information about the damaging effects on health of cigarette smoking.
I find it sad that there are MEPs who are trying to weaken the Commission' s proposal.
I am thinking, for instance, of the discussion about the legal base.
In my opinion, this is a ridiculous discussion.
The legal services have agreed that the legal base is in order, and I must say, as a lawyer, that I am rather embarrassed about the fact that the majority of members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market are so unqualified and frivolous and completely confuse the law with their own political wishes.
On the question of when the proposed legislation is to come into effect, I would say that I do not think that there is any argument, either technological or industrial, in favour of postponing the date when the lower limit values are to come into force.
I should like us to decide on the end of 2003 as the time when the legislation is to come into effect but, as a compromise, we could agree to the end of 2004, if necessary.
In my opinion, what is at issue here is an unnecessary impairment of public health.
Turning finally to the question of exports outside the EU, I wish to say that, in my view, it would be immoral if we were to allow the export of cigarettes which, on health grounds, we prohibit our own citizens from smoking.
Under those conditions, I simply do not think that we can allow ourselves to export more cigarettes which are a danger to health.
I could live with a compromise in the form of the year 2006, but I could not compromise any further on this point.
I hope that, in the voting tomorrow too, we shall arrive at a result here in Parliament which does not significantly weaken the Commission' s proposal.
Mr President, tobacco use is the single most preventable cause of ill health and premature death throughout most of the world.
In Scotland, which I represent, one in five people will die of smoking-related diseases.
We have an opportunity of doing something about that this week.
We must pass this report into law and thus save lives.
The reality that smoking kills is not getting across at the moment.
We need a bigger, bolder and clearer health message to make smokers more aware.
If the size of the health warning directly reflected the risk to health, the label would cover the whole cigarette packet.
Half of all long-term smokers will eventually be killed by tobacco and of these half will die during middle age, losing 20 to 25 years of their lives.
This directive will save lives because it is going to alter the content of cigarettes by reducing tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide yields and do away with misleading descriptions, such as "light" and mild".
Consumers, especially young women, are being sold the idea that so-called "light" or "mild" cigarettes are better for them, as if they were the tobacco equivalent of low-fat yoghurt.
However, low-fat yoghurt does not rot your teeth, blacken your lungs or put you on a ventilator.
Yet smokers of mild cigarettes smoke more deeply to get the same nicotine hit as smokers of other products and receive the same level of damage.
I want to make health warnings bigger, better and bolder: 40% on the front, 50% on the back.
Health Canada recently carried out research on the effects of increasing the size of the area occupied by health warnings on cigarette packets.
The result proved that larger warning messages better encouraged smokers to stop.
Adoption of the directive would open the possibility for the improvement of health for millions.
We have the opportunity and responsibility to act positively on this today.
Mr President, we are talking about a directive which attempts to harmonise marketing, manufacture, the different ingredients of tobacco (nicotine and tar content etc.), as well as their presentation to potential consumers.
I believe that nobody can rationally oppose this.
This harmonisation directive is necessary, and it is necessary that we carry out this harmonisation in all respects, without leaving significant gaps, with regard to the possible use or non-use of certain terms, such as "light" or "ultra-light" , to the discretion of the Member States.
If we are going to harmonise, let us harmonise and not be fainthearted about it, within the technological possibilities which may be available to us.
However, to ask in passing for the removal of aid to tobacco growers is to hijack a different debate: that attitude is, 'while we are on the subject of tobacco, let us ask for the removal of aid to the growers' .
I believe that it is truly hypocritical to ask, within this harmonisation directive, for the removal of aid to tobacco growers.
Why not simply talk about the processing of tobacco?
Why not talk about the multinationals established in some Member States who tear their hair out when we discuss the production and consumption of tobacco?
Why not talk about this processing?
There is no way that I can accept this request for the removal of aid to tobacco.
When the proposed amendment of the COM in tobacco is presented to us, then we will either discuss it or not and we will reach an appropriate agreement.
However, this harmonisation directive should be restricted to harmonising.
Commissioner, you have the responsibility for harmonising, and harmonising in the real sense, and to this end I believe you have the support of the majority of this House.
Mr President, it is very difficult to find new things to say at the end of this kind of debate.
Allow me therefore to say something slightly provocative, which I relish doing: when I listen attentively and hear confirmed what I have known to be the case for thirty years, i.e. that smoking is dangerous - we all know that is the case and have done for thirty years - then I ask myself why we do not actually ban the production of cigarettes.
It would be very much the logical thing to do and perhaps the Commission could give some thought to the matter.
But I would not wish to overdo being provocative and will become a little more serious.
I have this to say to the Commission: if we are serious, not just about creating transparency and informing people, but above all, about trying to make a harmful product as tolerable as possible - assuming we can - then surely one of the first things we need to do is to clarify the issue of additives.
I ask myself, and would like to know from the Commission, why there is still no harmonisation, no approximation of permitted additives?
Why does the European Union not have a list of permitted additives, or a regulation specifying permitted amounts?
What is stopping us from drawing up a positive list and labelling accordingly?
We should put our money where our mouth is.
That is not what is happening here.
There is another point I would like to add: why are we not being consistent in our approach and harmonising taxation, if we are convinced that cigarettes are harmful?
Why are you doing nothing in this respect?
I, for one, would support you if you did.
Why are we not going to harmonise taxation, preferably at a high level?
I urge all the honourable members who have spoken today to support this.
Harmonisation of taxation at a high level within the European Union.
If we know that smoking is dangerous then we cannot have a situation where tobacco is being used and consumed in one Member State at a high rate of taxation, and at a very low rate in another Member State.
Do something about this please, Mr Byrne, and put your money where your mouth is in this respect as well.
In my next point I would like to raise the issue of subsidies.
Even if this point does not belong here, I know that we must raise it nonetheless, Mr Byrne.
If you are serious about protecting people' s health, then when it comes to the budget, I would like to see you fight to have subsidies spent on something other than tobacco cultivation!
Mr President, may I start by declaring an interest in this debate: I am a passionate non-smoker and I wish to share my passion with other Members of the House.
But I am also passionate about something else, that is, deregulation in the field of employment and the opportunity for Member States to become increasingly competitive in the global market place.
The idea that we should ban not only the marketing of certain types of cigarette and tobacco products, but also their manufacture, in other words, that we ban the possibility to export, is wrong in principle and absurd in practice, given that those markets exist and flourish elsewhere.
I should like to quote two brief articles from today's Financial Times for those who have not seen them.
One is in the letters page and is headed "Tobacco proposal would be a slap in the face for workers".
One paragraph says that if exports are banned, it will deeply affect our competitiveness in world export markets and may cost hundreds of jobs in Germany alone, maybe even cause the regional closure of plants.
That is a comment from one of the leading trade unions in Germany.
On the facing page is an article written jointly by the prime ministers of the UK and Spain, not about the tobacco directive but about market liberalisation, which says: "It is so important to avoid the sort of heavy-handed regulation that could drive investment and jobs out of Europe".
That, Mr President, is what we are in danger of doing - we are not just stopping exports of cigarettes we are actually promoting the export of jobs.
We have an opportunity today to send two signals - first, that we care very much about health, but also that we care very much about jobs, employment and deregulation.
The final point I would make is a little plea to the Commissioner.
We have had this conversation before, but when we vote today on the labels, can we please have a larger-scale version as posters and spread them throughout the institutions so that we are not just talking to others but also addressing ourselves.
If his support cannot be strong, it can at least be mild!
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, as a Bavarian delegate I would like to highlight a point in this draft directive which has a crucial bearing on my homeland Bavaria.
It is undoubtedly right to make people aware of how damaging cigarettes are to health.
The citizens of the EU are entitled to a high level of health protection, as enshrined in the Article on the internal market in the Treaty.
However, the present draft fails to differentiate between cigarettes and other tobacco products such as pipe and fine cut tobacco, cigars, cigarillos, mouth and chewing tobacco, as well as the traditional European snuff.
In this connection, I would like to refer to the market shares of the various tobacco products.
Cigarettes have a share of approximately 91%.
Pipe tobacco, cigars and snuff account for 9%.
These products are manufactured by small and medium-sized enterprises.
Many types of tobacco reflect the cultural characteristics of the region where they are produced.
For example, snuff is a crucial component of the Bavarian culture and way of life.
For over 400 years, taking snuff has been the healthiest and most environmentally friendly way to enjoy tobacco.
This is precisely what led to the Commission stating, in its explanatory statement in the draft directive, that scientists are no longer insisting on a strict health warning in the case of tobacco products not intended for smoking, snuff for example.
Therefore, in comparison with all other tobacco products, snuff is the least harmful to health.
This has been scientifically proven beyond doubt.
That being the case, it is both unnecessary and factually wrong to apply a health warning, as provided for in current Amendments Nos 48 and 120.
For this reason, I would urge you to vote against Amendments Nos 48 and 120 and to accept the original text of the Commission' s proposal as it is.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first like to express my heartfelt thanks to Mr Maaten for his report, particularly for the way it focuses on the protection of public health but also for the way it deals with the issues affecting tobacco growers and producers.
At last, we have an institutional, comprehensive text on tobacco products which will ensure that, in the future, we work together with the other institutions towards regulating tobacco products at world-wide level.
Until such legislation to regulate tobacco products is introduced, we will have to ensure that we keep a balance in responding to the challenge facing us, for, on the one hand, we must provide for improved consumer information and more intense awareness-raising to dissuade consumers from smoking tobacco, and, on the other, we have to safeguard the rights of producers and growers.
We cannot, therefore, include the idea of eliminating production subsidies even as an aim in the recitals.
In fact, this approach does not take into consideration the fact that the problem cannot be resolved by terminating our own production, for that would just prompt the citizens to use tobacco produced outside the Union.
Rather, we need to raise awareness and adopt global directives, directives with world-wide scope.
It is only in this context that there would be any point in providing incentives to our tobacco growers to change the type of crop they grow.
Moreover, we cannot disregard the concerns which weaken the solution adopted in the area of production for export.
The directive governing the matter, which is the product of a partly successful compromise, has a clear, acceptable moral basis.
Indeed, it is immoral to produce for consumption by others that which we retain to be too harmful for our own consumption, but one wonders: will the health of tobacco consumers from outside the Union genuinely benefit from this decision, or will they just smoke non-European tobacco?
Do we not therefore risk penalising our industry, which would have to convert entire sections of production for export, without achieving an appreciable result in terms of health?
In conclusion, the moral principle is acceptable but the solution is unsatisfactory.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products: this is where the Commission wants to combine the three existing internal market directives.
The simplification of regulations as such, is only to be welcomed, yet the debate about tobacco has certainly taken on a very biased tone in many quarters.
There is no doubt about it: our citizens must be protected against the damaging effects of tobacco consumption and given the appropriate warnings.
I say that as a confirmed - but hopefully very tolerant - non-smoker and am wholeheartedly in support of this.
However, the debate about labelling is completely over the top to my mind.
Every smoker is aware of the risks tobacco consumption poses to health.
If people do not have the willpower themselves to give up cigarettes then as I see it, a statement covering a large area of the packet is not going to deter them from smoking either.
Overdoing the statements will do neither the consumer nor the industry any favours.
The death' s head on the packet has no real bearing on whether or not someone decides to take up smoking.
We need to hit the consumer where it hurts the most, which is the wallet in my view.
Temptation is best tackled with a lack of money.
If we do not want to drive the industry to take up the habit as well, then we must support an extension of the deadline for reducing the tar and nicotine content of tobacco products until December 2006.
The limit values proposed by the Commission for the year 2003 are not workable in our view.
The tobacco industry in Europe constitutes a highly significant economic factor.
I am therefore against putting companies at a disadvantage competitively, especially small and medium-sized enterprises.
The Commission talks about harmonisation of internal market regulations, yet these small enterprises will be the ones to suffer the most from the stranglehold of special conditions and measuring procedures.
Mr President, I shall not repeat what our fellow Members have already said, but I believe that all Members of Parliament would agree that overall, culturally appropriate solutions must be found for consumer health.
We have a duty to take action.
The problems will not, however, be solved by adopting puritanical positions and eliminating aid to producers.
Ladies and gentlemen, the consumer and his health must be protected, but this must be achieved logically, by implementing coordinated policies rather than by eliminating the premium for producers.
Reducing consumption will cause a decrease in production.
Health problems will not be solved tomorrow by importing 100% of our tobacco.
On behalf of tobacco producers I would urge the European Parliament, a responsible body, that an overall alternative be proposed to protect consumer health.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am concerned about the health of my daughter, Elisabetta, who has been elected a regional councillor in Lombardy in Italy where I was a councillor for five years.
Unlike in the European Parliament, all the councillors smoked like chimneys during committee meetings.
I was very happy when I arrived at the European Parliament and found that here, hardly anybody, or rather nobody at all smokes in committee meetings.
This is just to emphasise the fact that passive smoking is harmful for everyone, even Members of the European Parliament.
I totally agree with Mr Martinez who spoke earlier.
There is no point in us writing 'Smoking kills' on cigarette packets if all the young people then sit down in front of the television at 3 o' clock on a Sunday afternoon and watch Hakkinen or Schumacher, who drive like maniacs on the race track, are idolised, especially by young people, and whose clothes, helmets and cars are covered in advertising for different brands of cigarettes.
I support anyone who protects health.
I am in favour of this report but I do not agree with its hypocrisy.
We must be more courageous!
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we have had heated discussions about this directive in the committees.
The question remains as to whether this proposal should be viewed as a health policy initiative.
For the fact is that it will mean a massive tightening up of provisions, not based on internal market criteria.
Obstacles to trade will not be dismantled, which is what the main aim of the legal act should be, rather they will actually be preordained for when the directive comes into force.
The directive would weaken the position of EU manufacturers on third country markets.
That would lead to manufacturers pulling out of the European Union.
We must make a clear assessment of the consequences.
We cannot afford to lose jobs and tax revenue.
The small and medium-sized companies acting as suppliers would also experience considerable difficulties.
However, I would also like to raise the issue of tobacco cultivation in the EU.
The subsidies for this are part of structural aid.
They should be cancelled without offering the farmers an alternative.
Even now, 80% of the tobacco requirement is imported.
Therefore, if we are talking about scrapping subsidies then we are going to have to think in global terms, otherwise our tobacco farmers in the EU will be the only ones to suffer.
Jobs will be lost and cultural landscapes will decline.
Yet this will not mean a decrease in smoking.
We must strive for international regulations here.
The consumers are not innocents abroad.
They are aware of the risks of smoking.
Even reducing the maximum tar content will not give us healthy cigarettes.
Putting health warnings resembling obituary notices on the packet instead of factual information - which I am emphatically in favour of - is intended to have an impact on people' s emotions.
Consumers will have no truck with that, for that is not far short of discriminatory authoritarian control.
Public health is an issue of major concern to us all.
That is why we need unambiguous and reasonable conditions and laws that tie in with the objectives of the health authorities and create stable framework conditions at the same time.
When I think of the science fiction film 'The Year 2036' that was shown on Sunday evening - cigarettes are prohibited, as are meat, chocolate, sweets and wine of course - I ask myself if this is the shape of things to come.
Mr President, the European Union spends EUR 1 billion each year subsidising tobacco production - EUR 1 billion.
That kills over 500,000 EU citizens - half a million of our citizens.
It would be cheaper to go out and shoot them.
It would save money on health services.
How many billion euros are spent on health services trying to save the lives of people who try to kill themselves with cigarettes?
As you have gathered, I am an intolerant non-smoker.
I do care, and I am extremely concerned about the increasing number of people, particularly young girls, who are starting to smoke.
We can write off those of my age and older who have been at it virtually all their lives but young people are missing the message.
Surely, it is not beyond the best brains of the political world, the medical and scientific world and the marketing world to get the message right so that our young people do not start to smoke.
That is my plea.
Can we not get the marketing message to them?
We would have to protect the tobacco farmers.
There would have to be alternatives, but surely it can be done.
It is immoral to spend EU taxpayers' money on subsidising a product that kills half a million of our people.
We must find alternatives.
In my country, and I suspect in all the other 14 Member States, you can have drink rehabilitation paid for by the public health medical system, you can have hard drug rehabilitation paid for by the public health medical system, but anyone trying to come off cigarettes gets no help from state public health services.
We must correct that anomaly.
In my country nicotine replacement therapy is only available by medical prescription.
Madness!
It should be available next to where all cigarettes and tobacco products are sold.
You can opt to buy replacement therapy rather than overdose on cigarettes.
What is the difference?
The general medical services systems, which in Ireland is our public health care system, should fund those who want to come off cigarettes and provide nicotine replacement therapy prescriptions free.
The state should fund it.
Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Maaten, for his valuable work.
After all the secretive work carried out by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, the compromise reached in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy is a very good one.
Plenary should adopt the report in the form presented in that Committee.
The fact is that tobacco kills.
Anyone who claims otherwise is either completely ignorant or, for one reason or another, a puppet of the tobacco industry.
Everyone knows that we cannot change the centuries old tobacco culture merely through legislation.
Our most important task is to ensure that consumers receive objective information on the dangers of smoking.
It is foolish to claim that the miserably small warnings on cigarette packets are enough to inform consumers of just what sort of product they are actually using.
The tobacco companies use clever image marketing on their cigarette packaging, targeted precisely at different consumer groups - generally the young.
We have to fight the tobacco companies using their own weapons.
About half of the surface area of a cigarette packet should be reserved for health information, to weaken the supremacy of the tobacco companies.
For many, smoking is not a question of choice or pleasure.
Tobacco gets you in its grip, just like any other drug, on account of the fact that it contains nicotine.
It is tremendously important that the maximum quantities of the poisons contained in tobacco - not only nicotine, but tar and carbon monoxide as well - become harmonised at the lowest possible level.
This will also be important in the prevention of harm caused by passive smoking.
In future, greater consideration should also be given in EU legislation to the rights of non-smokers, who suffer from the effects of tobacco smoke.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, when you are one of the last to speak in such a debate you may appear to be at a disadvantage.
However, I actually see it as a definite advantage, because, firstly, I am in a position to take up some of the comments made by previous speakers, and secondly, the Commissioner has no chance whatsoever of ignoring the questions I put to him, because he cannot forget them that quickly.
It is not possible to cover all the issues in a long debate but I would like to put several specific questions to the Commissioner and would appreciate some specific answers.
I believe the Commission has come up with a proposal containing many sound ideas.
The document affords many excellent initiatives but there is definitely plenty of room for improvement.
One aspect which the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has improved on is that of the compulsory health warning in connection with passive smoking.
It is just as important to work far harder to get the message across to consumers - indeed it should be made compulsory - that when they smoke, it is not just themselves they are harming but also their fellow human beings.
It has been scientifically proven that the risk of cot death increases five-fold when the parents smoke twenty cigarettes per day, not just during pregnancy but also during the child's first year of life.
The environmental authorities in the United States calculated that every year, 5 000 people die of cancer caused by passive smoking.
In other words, the number of deaths due to passive smoking is far higher than the number of fatalities that can be traced back to environmental pollutants, which is something we discuss on a very regular basis in Parliament.
The second point that I think needs to be improved on is the so-called hotline.
It certainly is not possible to include all the necessary information on cigarette packets, but consumers should be given the opportunity to obtain more information from a source independent of industry.
I would be very interested to hear what the Commission thinks to this idea.
Firstly, does it agree with the content of this proposal?
Secondly, how might the proposal be reformulated in legal terms with a view to making it fit for adoption?
The third point is surely the most controversial, and is the one that the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has made drastic changes to in my view, i.e. the point relating to tobacco subsidies.
I know it is a difficult issue.
Nevertheless, I have tabled the proposed amendment, which the committee adopted, in this form.
At the same time though, I also gave some serious thought to what would become of the farmers that currently make a living from growing tobacco.
As Mrs Klaß rightly said, this is structural aid.
But surely structural aid does not necessarily have to go towards tobacco cultivation?
Commissioner Flynn - I am actually addressing you as Commissioner Flynn because your predecessor had major difficulties on this very subject!
Commissioner Byrne, you are Commissioner Flynn' s successor and I hope you prove to be more successful - perhaps you will raise this argument in discussion with Mr Fischler.
If our strategy for stopping people from smoking tobacco is successful then it will be even more of an uphill struggle for the tobacco farmers to eke out an existence growing tobacco.
That is why we need alternatives and why we should not cut subsidies but restructure them for the same recipients.
Mr President, allow me to start by saying that I agree with many of the proposals and amendments because, as we all know, smoking is a scourge, it is a threat, it causes thousands of deaths and we have no choice but to take steps to help the anti-smoking campaign.
However, this does not mean that we should want to use the powers granted to us by this act to intervene where it would, I think, be highly unfortunate to do so.
To start with, I shall not endorse the attempt by certain members to use this act to stop production aids for tobacco because, as you know, first of all, the European Union has a deficit and imports tobacco from abroad and, consequently, the only outcome would be to penalise poor Greek farmers and benefit producers of imported tobacco.
This is not the way to solve the problem of smoking.
On the contrary, we need to engage in an anti-smoking campaign.
Consequently, I shall not vote in favour of this proposal.
On the contrary, I should like to see a logical programme which will really help tobacco producers to gradually restructure their crops and they cannot do so overnight.
We must not create unemployment and underemployment in poor regions of the European Union.
The second point with which I disagree is this: it is wrong and it is inconsistent and incoherent on the part of the European Union to use this directive to repeal previous directives and timetables granted to the Greek tobacco industry and used as the basis for its business plans.
Now we want to repeal them.
It is wrong; we need to be consistent and coherent.
I am very pleased to note the continued wide support in Parliament for this legislative initiative which builds on three existing directives dating from the late 1980s.
The Valverde Lopez report which Parliament adopted in 1997 called on the Commission to bring forward this proposal as a matter of urgency - a call which has been repeated by the Health Council.
The proposal consolidates the existing internal market rules on product regulation, including tar content of cigarettes and the use of health warning labels.
It proposes reducing the level of tar in cigarettes, their main carcinogenic component.
It also proposes increasing substantially the size of the health warnings and bringing them up-to-date in line with scientific advice.
It introduces harmonising rules for nicotine, the addictive agent in cigarettes, and for carbon monoxide, the agent associated with cardiovascular disease.
It also limits the use of misleading descriptions which could lead people to assume that light cigarettes are safer, while the opposite seems to be the case.
I am aware that some in Parliament would prefer to ban such descriptions immediately.
However, I do not consider that this is appropriate.
Instead, in future, these terms would have to be subject to Member States authorisation and the Commission could act to rectify any internal market distortions.
The proposal imposes an obligation to declare additives in tobacco products which results in making the products easier to smoke or perhaps reinforce the impact of the nicotine by increasing addiction.
The Commission has decided in this proposal, as was the case with the existing directives from 1989, 1990 and 1992, that the correct legal basis for action is Article 95 of the Treaty.
This is clearly so because the differences in national rules between the Member States on a product so widely traded as tobacco can lead to very real problems in the internal market and public health protection is potentially put at risk.
Even if the national rules were fully applied this would lead to unequal treatment of economic operators as the content of present national laws is very different.
By adopting Community-level rules, as has been done since the late 1980s, we ensure that certain basic standards are set and respected for all European citizens.
I should now like to refer to the report presented on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
The amendments proposed in this report are of a very high quality.
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Maaten, for the contribution he has made in preparing these amendments in such a positive and constructive manner.
I should now like to set out the Commission's position on the amendments proposed.
A total of 48 amendments have been proposed in this report.
Of these, I am pleased to inform you, the Commission can accept 38, either totally or partially.
It cannot, however, accept Amendments Nos 9, 17, 20, 21, 34, 36, 37, 40, 42 or 46.
The accepted amendments include the proposal to increase the size of labels.
However, we need to be very careful not to stray from consumer information to the area of consumer harassment which would be counterproductive.
Banning certain additives is premature until further information on their use and effects is available.
The industry has not in fact provided the relevant information to Member States and it is my belief that the establishment of a law to enable Member States to request the tobacco industry and individual companies to provide this information is the first necessary step.
This would lead to the situation which people have called for this morning with a positive list being established, but first we must get the accurate information to enable us to do so.
In this connection the cooperation of the tobacco industry will be essential.
We need to bring their experience and knowledge of the tobacco products sector into the process of regulation and revision.
Dealing with the common agricultural policy is also inappropriate in an internal market text, as is mentioning warnings on vending machines which are not covered in this proposal.
All in all, therefore, the majority of the amendments which the Commission has accepted will make this a much improved text, whilst several of those rejected can also be taken into account outside this text but within the framework of other initiatives.
I should now like to turn to the other 71 amendments submitted last Thursday.
Of these the Commission can accept a further 34 - either totally or in part.
However, the Commission considers that Amendment Nos 49 and 50, 52, 54, 56, 59 to 61, 64, 65, 68 to 73, 77, 79, 80, 82 to 85, 89, 93, 94, 96, 99, 101, 104 to 106, 110 to 112, 114 and 117 are not compatible with the proposal's scope, intention and legal basis and should not be accepted.
In particular, I would mention that this proposal is a recasting of three existing internal market directives.
Amendments undermining that legal basis, which has been considered valid for over ten years, would not be considered constructive and would ignore the advice of the legal services of all three of the legislative institutions of the European Union, namely the Commission, the Council and indeed the European Parliament itself.
Similarly, amendments which would seek to totally exclude exports from the scope of the directive are not considered acceptable since we need to cover all products manufactured in the Union in order to ensure that products finally consumed here respect the rules.
However, a transition period for exports can be justified in order to allow firms to change brand formulae as appropriate and to modify their marketing strategies.
This extension must also be viewed in conjunction with the upcoming WHO negotiations of a Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.
This convention aims to put in place worldwide tobacco product standards.
If we succeed in this respect, there will be no need to distinguish between tobacco products for domestic consumption and those for export.
On the issue of additives, the Commission will report under Article 10 of the Proposal concerning the use of additives in tobacco products, a subject of great concern to consumers.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to introduce immediate harmonisation of additives as some in Parliament would like.
In order to ensure a full and detailed report, the proposal envisages a declaration of these additives by the manufacturers and importers.
This is a necessary first step before we can go any further.
It would be premature at this stage to introduce bans on particular substances.
I would hope that a constructive dialogue can be built with industry experts in order to develop Community legislation in full knowledge of technical data.
The Commission recognises the complex issues covered in this proposed directive; particularly, the need to ensure that in drawing up the reports provided for in Article 10 and any accompanying proposals, full scientific, technical and other data are taken into account.
In order to provide advice on a long-term basis, the Commission intends to create a Multidisciplinary Tobacco Group, the first meeting of which will take place before the end of this year.
Finally, the Commission does not consider that cigars and pipe tobacco should be treated as if they were made of something other than tobacco.
Consumers of all tobacco products, regardless of their age or social class, must be informed on an appropriate basis.
I would like to thank Members for their positive contributions and the rapporteur, Mr Maaten, for his excellent work and note that this is yet another example of our two institutions working closely together to good effect.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Accidental or deliberate marine pollution
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0148/2000) on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council decision setting up a Community framework for cooperation in the field of accidental or deliberate marine pollution (12612/1/1999/Rev1 - C5-0101/2000 - 1998/0350(COD) (Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy) (Rapporteur: Mrs McKenna).
Mr President, marine pollution, accidental and deliberate, is one of the major threats to the marine environment in western Europe.
This region represents one of the most intensely industrialised areas of the world, where chemical, radioactive and hydrocarbon materials are routinely discharged into the marine environment and carried by cargo ships.
The region also contains one of the highest concentrations of shipping and includes several of the busiest shipping lanes in the world.
There are several tragic examples of accidental pollution from tankers and from other ships carrying other forms of dangerous cargoes.
The recent example of the Erika shows what can happen from an environmental, human and economic point of view.
It is a catastrophe.
More by good fortune than good planning there has not yet been a major accident with a ship carrying radioactive materials that has resulted in a major spillage.
However, it must be said that there have been a number of incidents.
In 1973 a cobalt 60 source was lost in the North Sea, never to be found again.
In 1984, the Mont Louis sank in the English Channel with 375 tonnes of uranium hexafluoride.
Also, in relation to releases into the sea, in 1983 Sellafield leaked high-level waste into the sea.
In 1985, there was a leak into the sea at Hinkley Point.
In 1986, 135 cubic metres of radioactive water was released into the sea at Wylfa.
The Commission's refusal to take on board and include explicitly radioactive materials, is not acceptable and it will have to revise its position on that.
Historically the marine environment has been used as the ultimate dumping ground for much of our industrial waste.
Although industrial and radioactive discharges continue from a range of sources, the practice of direct dumping with little thought for the future is now widely regarded as unacceptable.
However, the legacy of the years when materials were simply dumped remains and sometimes comes back to haunt us, with severe consequences.
It is a lesson which shows that we cannot just throw things away: that is not possible, as they are still there in some shape or form.
This report acknowledges the need for establishing cooperation in the field of accidental marine pollution.
Furthermore, there is a need to broaden the definition of accidental marine pollution to include both operational, historical, radioactive and other harmful substances.
Although much attention is rightly paid to the impacts of marine accidents in terms of chronic pollution, it is the operational spills and discharges of hydrocarbons, radioactive materials and other harmful substances which, because they go largely unnoticed, are a cause of major concern.
In terms of the environment, whether a substance is accidentally or deliberately discharged is irrelevant.
Furthermore, although the direct dumping of industrial materials, including military dumping of redundant munitions, is largely a practice abandoned by Member States, the sites of such dumps continue to present a real threat to fisheries and, in some cases, to human safety.
Often fishermen's lives are at risk, as is the health and welfare of the public who either visit the coast or live by the sea.
Furthermore, as the sea is the ultimate sink for industrial materials from the shores and rivers, these sources should be included within the definition.
The transboundary nature of the marine environment, which means that pollution in one area can impact on a wider region, leads to the need for a Community-wide framework for cooperation in the field of accidental marine pollution.
Sharing information regarding hydrocarbons, radioactive substances and other harmful substances carried at sea, discharged into the sea or which have been dumped as part of historical dumping regimes, is a vital prerequisite in facilitating the preparation and coordination of any response necessary to mitigate the impact of pollution incidents on the environment and human health.
Effective mitigation requires a rapid response: the longer an accident is allowed to go unchecked, the wider the impact.
Hence, it is too late to start trying to get information after a serious pollution problem has occurred.
Knowledge about the type and extent of potential pollution problems is also a prerequisite for correct preparation in terms of techniques, personnel and equipment at appropriate locations.
It is also necessary to be clear about the risks to the public and the environment and to alleviate justifiable public concern, with accurate assessment of the risks.
The public's trust in the authorities is important to ensure adequate response.
Furthermore, the public has a right to know what preparations are being made, what types of materials are threatening and what impacts can be expected.
To this end, the publication of information is a vital component as it establishes a route through which the general public can obtain information, e.g. emergency phones and contact numbers.
Such information can easily be made available and updated on the Internet as well as through established channels.
Finally, once the marine environment has been contaminated or polluted, it is impossible to fully clean up and repair the damage.
The Erika is a good example of that.
However, a rapid, efficient, adequate and effective response coordinated across national boundaries is needed to mitigate the impacts on the environment and public health in the case of pollution incidents.
This is a prerequisite in the necessary information sharing with all parties.
Mr President, like you I am going to welcome the work carried out by our fellow Member, Mrs McKenna, on this Community framework for cooperation in the field of marine pollution.
This should prove to be an instrument of particular interest, as is perfectly illustrated by the latest marine disaster to hit the coasts of France.
In January, this Parliament adopted a resolution, following the oil pollution related to the sinking of the Erika.
What is the situation today?
Fuel oil is still leaking out of the hull, which is lying at a depth of around 100 metres, and, contrary to the statements made six months before, this oil is continuing to pollute our coasts and to poison the marine environment.
Implications for the environment and for animal life have been tragic, and there are still serious threats.
Serious social consequences are expected in future: fishermen, hotel owners and all the people involved in tourism are going to suffer for years from the effects of this oil slick.
The International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund, or IOPCF, seems extremely reluctant to provide compensation for the victims and, in any case, the amounts it is prepared to release would not be at all adequate.
This proves, once again, that the principle of 'polluter pays' is not being applied.
I should like to see real cooperation being established in order to guarantee, pursuant to this principle, repair of the damage caused.
This framework for cooperation will, therefore, make it possible to improve existing local or national resources, particularly by creating better conditions for intervention in the event not only of accidental pollution but also of deliberate pollution.
This would therefore make it possible to include illegal degassing and any other source of pollution.
We must also stress the importance of research.
This winter, on the Atlantic coasts of France, effective techniques to combat the oil slick in Brittany were seriously lacking.
Cooperation and the exchange of know-how must be encouraged and supported in this highly technical field.
Regarding the extension of this cooperation to the countries of the Mediterranean and to the countries of central and eastern Europe as well as to TACIS programme countries, I should like to inform Mrs McKenna that I do not entirely agree with her, and this is perhaps one of the few points with which I do actually disagree.
There are international conventions on the Mediterranean and the Baltic, which already fulfil this purpose.
Mrs McKenna' s idea may seem perfectly generous, but the appropriations and the staff allocated to this framework for cooperation, with appropriations of EUR 7 million for a period of 7 years, seem much too little to me.
On the same grounds, I do not think there is any point in providing for a management committee.
In its resolution on the oil slick in January, the European Parliament requested that this framework for cooperation might come into force as quickly as possible.
Let me today stress the fact that the 5 compromise amendments should be adopted and that we should not delay the establishment of Community cooperation which will prove an excellent instrument, one that European citizens are awaiting impatiently, out of concern for the protection of our marine environment.
Mr President, first of all, I too should like to thank Mrs McKenna for the work she has done on this matter as rapporteur.
Enormous destruction is caused by oil spills and discharges into the sea of other substances which are damaging to health and to the environment.
It is destruction which spreads far and wide.
We see before our very eyes the destroyed coastal areas, birds covered in oil, and fish floating on top of the water, and we also hear the reports about the polar bears which have become hermaphrodite because of hormone-affecting substances also supplied through the sea.
Sometimes, the pollution occurs by accident, sometimes through indefensible conduct and, at other times, through the deliberate actions of a variety of individuals and companies.
But, however it has occurred, the damage to animal life and the environment is equally disastrous and, very often, it of course cuts across national borders.
I therefore think it is important that, by means of this proposal, we create the basis for close cooperation between the Member States, with a good information and warning system and with a guarantee of mutual assistance when needed, so that harmful spillages can be prevented or combated effectively.
I am able to support the report with the amendments that have been tabled, and I shall only single out a few of the latter.
I think it is good that radioactive substances have been included in the report.
I also think it is good that pollution due to dumping and to used ammunition has been included.
Like Mrs Grôssetete, I think it is important that we establish the polluter-pays principle and, in this regard, I can support the rapporteur, as well as Mrs Grôssetete' s amendment.
Finally, I think it is good that we can get the neighbouring coastal countries involved, both in the Baltic area and in the Mediterranean.
I hope that, by means of the compromise amendments that have just now been tabled, we can achieve a result that can be translated into effect very quickly and so with no need for any Conciliation Committee procedure.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to say a few words on accidents at sea.
The accident involving the Erika off the French coast is just one of the many accidents which have occurred involving a ship.
It is also often the case that cargo goes overboard.
Either way, the marine environment is polluted.
This directive only contributes in a small way towards cross-border cooperation in order to prevent this type of accident.
A far greater contribution would be if a piece of EU legislation governing environmental liability with regard to dangerous cargo were to be laid down.
Unfortunately, we still only have a communication and a White Paper, not a bill.
Moving on to accidents involving radioactive cargo, it is unfortunate that the Environmental Ministers did not expressly acknowledge this problem and dealt with it accordingly in the common position.
According to European Commission officials, radioactive cargo is implicitly covered in the text.
I would invite Commissioner Wallström to take a stand on this issue, explicitly so.
Let us, as a European Parliament, have the courage to include radioactivity explicitly in the text too.
When the Drinking Water Directive was reviewed a couple of years ago, the European Parliament insisted on a tough limit for radioactive substances.
Thanks to the European Parliament' s perseverance, this was also included in legislation.
There is a well-known Dutch expression 'Goed voorbeeld doet goed volgen' [Example is better than precept] which captures the above.
Mr President, now more than ever it is necessary to tackle the matter of a Community framework for cooperation in the field of accidental or deliberate marine pollution, at a time when the preliminary work for pumping the fuel oil is just starting off the coasts of Brittany.
Whether deliberate or accidental, even if we cannot equate illegal degassing and the use of obsolete vessels and flags of convenience, it is still the same rationale of maximum short-term profit which is adopted by oil companies such as Total, Elf and Fina, for example.
This is why we must, at every level - French, European and international - support any restrictive legislation concerning contractor liability, for either civilian or military contractors, by enforcing the principle of 'polluter pays' .
It is scandalous, moreover, than no serious penalty has yet been considered following the wreck of the Erika.
Quite clearly, risk prevention measures must be stepped up by improving vessel design and construction standards, one such measure being mandatory double hulls.
This also requires establishing an independent system of classification societies, increasing the number of inspectors in European Union ports, and also banning oil tankers that are more than 20 years old from European waters.
Naturally, tipping harmful substances from the shore must be prohibited and, of course, radioactive substances must be specifically included in the list of toxic substances.
Finally, the fact that many States tolerate over a hundred flags of convenience, offering guarantees that are more than dubious, is a serious threat to the safety, the working conditions and even the lives of many sailors.
The European Union will have to take action on this issue to and work towards establishing international standards.
The McKenna report represents a move in the right direction, and we shall therefore vote in favour of it.
We must, however, remain vigilant to ensure that the fine resolutions adopted by the European Parliament and the Council take the form of directives and mandatory regulations in the near future.
Mr President, I can assure you that the victims of the Erika disaster were expecting something more than the extremely insipid text before us for second reading.
Admittedly, the proposed Commission Decision dates from December 1998 and the wreck of the Erika took place in December 1999, yet the inconsistency of this proposal, in spite of the repeated oil slicks occurring well before the Erika disaster, testifies to an extremely disturbing lack of resolve.
In such a clear area of common interest, the main priority should have been to do everything possible in order to prevent the recurrence of similar disasters and to finalise, as a matter of urgency, a preventative mechanism that was effective and dissuasive.
The few measures before us today, however, presented as the elements of a Community framework for cooperation, deal only with managing the effects of pollution, principally in terms of the transmission of information, and say nothing about prevention.
Furthermore, the slim size of this text betrays the inflexibility and inertia of Community procedures which are incapable, while in progress, of taking account of the effects of new events as significant as the sinking of the Erika, which did, however, reveal the serious implications of the lack of transparency in the chain of operators, the lack of polluter liability, the absence of deterrent penalties and the inadequate compensation schemes.
The text before us does not deal with any of these key issues and continues to be inspired by a philosophy which prioritises freedom of movement above any other considerations, particularly those concerning the security of our territories, our seas, and the citizens that live there and make their living from them.
Six months after the Erika disaster, with the entire Atlantic coastline suffering greatly, there has been no real progress.
If a disaster similar to that involving the Erika were to take place today, then everything would happen in just the same way, because nothing has changed, and this mild text is not about to provide any significant help for the victims, who are now struggling with insurmountable problems.
We are told that, by the end of the year perhaps, there will be legislative proposals.
It is high time.
When will the matter finally be referred to Parliament?
For the time being, Mr President, there are a few amendments which attempt to introduce the principle of 'polluter pays' into the common position.
We shall, of course, support these.
Mr President, at the very least, the Erika disaster will have enabled us to highlight the importance of European cooperation on accidental marine pollution.
France did not have enough anti-pollution vessels to deal with this oil slick.
Fortunately, the British, Germans, Dutch and Norwegians spontaneously came to our assistance.
This goes to show that it is time to establish a new regulatory framework in order to optimise this cooperation, enabling reciprocal assistance.
We therefore agree with the philosophy behind this report.
Exchanging information and know-how between Member States will make it possible to make faster and possibly better decisions, particularly during clean-up operations, where there is a certain amount of disorder.
Stress must be placed on transparency with regard to the public, particularly in the event of health risks related to the nature of the pollutant.
It is inconceivable that the risk of cancer should be kept from volunteers, as was the case in the Erika disaster.
We are also in favour of extending the definition of accidental marine pollution to include radioactive pollution, arms and degassing.
We think that extending cooperation to neighbouring maritime countries is a good idea.
The sea is our international heritage, and protecting it is a matter for international responsibility.
Recognition of the principle of 'polluter pays' is essential.
At the present time, the owner of the potentially polluting products is not held accountable for the pollution.
In practice, only the carrier is accused.
This is not acceptable, and our hope is that the Member States will ensure that the principle of economic responsibility extended to the owners of the cargoes will be applied.
The proposed budget of EUR 7 million is, in our opinion, however, much too little to fulfil these objectives properly.
Mr President, as speakers have already pointed out, when the Erika sank last year it released an oil slick into the waters along the French Atlantic coastline, threatening wildlife and the local tourist and fishing industries.
Regrettably, however, this was yet another in a catalogue of marine environmental disasters which included the Braer spill off Shetland and the Sea Empress off Wales.
Recently in Ireland we were fortunate to escape a similar disaster when an oil spillage some 88 miles west of the Aran Islands threatened to engulf the Irish coastline.
Thankfully the danger passed.
An added difficulty with marine pollution is that because of the nature of the sea it can rapidly spread to the coastlines of many Member States at once.
Hence the need for a coordinated, effective EU response rather than simply leaving it in the hands of the Member State initially affected.
I welcome Ms McKenna's report.
I would like to pay tribute to her for her work.
But the real question is how we implement the legislation and what sort of action we take.
The ability to respond quickly with sufficient resources is an essential element of any strategy that must be put into place immediately in the wake of a disaster to minimise environmental damage.
It is doubtful that this could be adequately provided at a national level, which is why it must be done at a Europe-wide level.
The most effective way of achieving this is by establishing an EU coastguard which, as well as having responsibility for pollution control, could also undertake responsibilities for policing the high seas, enforcing the common fisheries policy and also marine rescue.
I believe this is an issue which should be tabled for discussion at the forthcoming IGC.
Commissioner, Mr President, it is indeed an ill wind that blows nobody any good, and Mrs McKenna' s report comes at an opportune moment, even if she did start to work on it before the Erika disaster.
How many times have we expressed our feelings, within this chamber, regarding the implications of this disaster, and how many times have we debated the issue of the European Union and the Member States' inability to respond quickly to the expectations of victims and to react to the ecological damage?
Parliament cannot today fail to respond to public opinion, which is continually urging us to issue a strong, positive message.
Let us not miss the opportunity which this report affords.
The problems caused six months ago by the Erika, for example, have still not been even partially solved.
Apparently, nothing has yet been solved, and this is the lesson we must learn from this disaster.
We are aware, moreover, that containers loaded with radioactive materials are sailing the seas from The Hague to Japan.
Let us not wait until a fresh disaster occurs, this time a nuclear one, before doing something, because we know how oil reacts but we do not yet know how radioactive waste reacts when it is spilt into the depths.
Mrs McKenna' s report offers us an opportunity to include radioactive substances.
Let us please, ladies and gentlemen, not hesitate for even a moment.
Let us avoid a disaster and vote in favour of the amendment to include nuclear substances.
Mr President, there is an important meeting on 26 June of the OSPAR commission in Copenhagen.
Let us recall for a moment that the central objective of the OSPAR Convention is to reduce marine pollution to close to zero and to historic levels by the year 2020.
From an Irish perspective we know that marine pollution in the Irish Sea has been on the increase in recent years and this is a direct result of the go-ahead given to the Thorp nuclear reprocessing plant in December 1993.
Surveys carried out in the Irish Sea have clearly shown that levels of a particular nuclear product, technetium-99 have increased 15-fold in the last seven years alone.
To date the British Government has only given broad general outlines as to the strategies it intends to take to comply with the provisions of the OSPAR Convention.
This is simply not good enough and the people of Ireland and the people of Europe have a right to receive the real answers to many questions from the British Government.
For years the British Government has tried to fob off many politicians and environmental groups in Ireland with reassurances about the Sellafield and Thorp nuclear plants.
They cannot do this any longer because of the startling revelations this year about the wholly inadequate safety and quality control standards in operation at these plants.
The Irish Government has tabled a draft decision for the OSPAR meeting calling on the contracting parties to an agreed acceleration of implementation of the OSPAR strategy.
This will include the cessation of nuclear reprocessing and associated activities at the Sellafield and Thorp plants.
This in turn will play a key role in reducing marine pollution in the Irish Sea.
If the British Government wants to comply with its legal obligations under the OSPAR Convention it should state on 26 June in Copenhagen that it will outline a time framework for the closure of the Sellafield and Thorp plants.
I would like to compliment Mrs McKenna on her excellent report.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I want to begin by thanking the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and, above all, the rapporteur, Mrs McKenna, for their work on this important issue of how we in the European Union can become better at combating both accidental and deliberate pollution of the sea.
The purpose of the Commission' s proposal is to reinforce and further develop the various Community measures which have been taken in this area during the last twenty years, as well as to combine them within a solid legal framework.
Since the European Parliament' s first reading of this proposal, the Erika disaster has occurred in France, which is probably the accident involving marine pollution which has caused more damage than absolutely any other.
I was at the scene of the disaster myself in January and was able to see the drastic consequences for human beings, animals and the environment.
I also saw the considerable efforts made by hundreds of volunteers who arrived to help with the cleaning up operation.
These people, I think, deserve our special appreciation.
Where preventive measures are concerned, the Commission responded directly in the shape of my fellow Commissioner, Mrs De Palacio and, on 21 March, adopted a communication concerning safety when transporting oil at sea.
This report proposes a range of different measures for improving the safety of marine transport.
Even if the best preventive measures are taken, there will never be no risk at all of accidents.
We therefore also need to improve cooperation within the EU when an accident does, in fact, occur.
We require an effective framework of cooperation as a way of supporting and supplementing the measures taken by the Member States and of making these measures still more effective.
The Erika disaster and its consequences show that we still have a very great deal to learn when it comes to dealing with major pollution accidents.
Following the first reading of this proposal in Parliament, the Commission approved or reformulated 20 of the 29 amendments you proposed.
The Council has included most of these amendments in its common position.
These changes have meant that the text has been improved.
Above all, it has been explained what type of accidental pollution is included in the decision, for instance operational spills.
The need for appropriate coordination with current international conventions and agreements relating to Europe' s seas has also been made clear.
Where the amendments tabled for the second reading are concerned, the Commission is able, wholly or in part, to approve seven of these.
Amendment 16 acknowledges the important role played by non-governmental environmental organisations in this area.
The Erika disaster has been important in this respect, too, and shown how crucial it is for these organisations to be involved, something we also saw when birds injured by the oil had to be taken care of.
Parts of Amendments 6, 24 and 25 make the scope of the directive clear.
Parts of Amendments 17 and 19 are completely in accordance with the Commission' s proposal concerning the most appropriate committee procedure.
Amendment 22 introduces an important reference to the polluter-pays principle.
The remaining amendments are problematic for the following reasons.
Amendment 2 and parts of Amendments 6, 10 and 24 introduce a specific reference to pollution caused by radioactive substances.
Naturally, radioactive substances too are included in, and covered by, the cooperation elucidated here in this proposal.
The Commission nonetheless believes that there is no justification for introducing a reference to specific substances, for this is not done in other international conventions that exist to protect the Mediterranean, the Baltic and the North Sea and to which the Community is a party.
An express reference to radioactive substances would also mean complicating the legal situation because of the link to the Euratom Treaty and consequently delaying adoption of the decision.
The Commission cannot therefore approve these amendments.
So what kind of protection is there?
There are two directives and an information system used in the event of accidents involving radioactive substances.
There is Directive 96/29/Euratom on the establishment of basic safety standards.
It is in accordance with this Directive, which specifies what is required in terms of joint operations in the event of a radiation accident, that the Member States are to establish action plans and develop networks and forms of cooperation.
The Ecurie system is a system for the rapid exchange of information in the event of a possible radiation accident.
It is a system which operates 24 hours a day.
There is also Directive 89/618/Euroatom on the provision of information to the general public about measures for protecting their health in the event of a radiation accident.
We therefore already have a number of different tools and regulations which have bearing upon a possible accident involving a ship carrying radioactive materials.
Including a specific reference in this proposal is not only unnecessary but would also lead to an unclear legal situation.
Why delay this proposed legislation, which really ought already to have been in place?
Several amendments, namely 5, 6, 9, 10, 12, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27, deal with the question of dumped ammunition.
On this issue, the Commission supported the European Parliament at first reading.
The Commission nonetheless believes that the text of the common position constitutes a reasonable solution.
A number of Members of the Council were not prepared to accept that reference should be made to this issue other than in a recital.
It is only because I insisted on it that a reference was finally introduced in Article 1.2(b) of the common position.
Amendments 5 and 9 introduce a definition of accidental marine pollution.
This question has been discussed at length in the Council, which finally came to the view that the scope of the proposed decision should not extend to include constant streams of pollution from sources on land.
The Commission concurred in this, because it has never been its intention to allow this decision to embrace this type of pollution, with which we deal in various other proposals.
Amendments 5 and 9 cannot, therefore, be approved.
Amendment 14 and parts of Amendment 17 are aimed at improved cooperation with those countries which participate in the PHARE, TACIS and MEDA programmes.
There is already a certain degree of coordination with the countries concerned within the framework of current international agreements concerning protection of the Mediterranean and the Baltic.
Enlarging the proposed framework for cooperation would unfortunately lead to a number of administrative and resource problems.
Amendments 11, 20 and 21 go far beyond the framework of the proposal and, in preference to these, the Commission supports Amendment 22 regarding the reference to the polluter-pays principle.
Other amendments are aimed, like Amendment 15, at increasing the participation of the bodies affected or, like Amendment 1, concern the need to take account of international conventions for protecting certain regional seas.
The Commission considers that the common position constitutes an acceptable way of meeting these justified requirements.
To summarise, the Commission can accept Amendments 16, 19, and 22 in full and Amendments 6, 17, 24 and 25 in part.
Other amendments cannot be approved.
Finally, I want to thank the European Parliament for the two resolutions it adopted earlier this year in connection with the consequences of the investigations into the loss of the Erika.
In these resolutions, Parliament urged that this decision be adopted swiftly.
It is my hope that your contribution and support today will confirm this commitment and will lead to our being able to reach a rapid decision on this issue which is so crucial to the marine environment.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
(The sitting was suspended at 1.06 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
Substances that deplete the ozone layer
The next item is the report (A5-0161/2000) by Ms Hulthén, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council regulation on substances that deplete the ozone layer [C5-0156/2000 - 1998/0228(COD)].
Mr President, Commissioner, we know that this question, in connection with which the third and final reading is about to take place, is a major problem for humanity.
What is at issue here is the vital ozone layer which is getting thinner by the day.
Perhaps we notice it most in the northern hemisphere, but it nevertheless affects every living thing right across the globe.
We also know how we can escape from this problem.
It sounds like an easy equation, but it is unfortunately more complicated than that.
There are so many interested parties involved in a question like this.
What we now finally have to adopt a position on in this Chamber is a regulation which would give us tougher rules but also acceptable margins within which industry could successfully complete the changeover.
I consider that we have succeeded in producing draft legislation which provides sound incentives to change and which also encourages ecological foresight.
Our task has been to produce an acceptable plan for the way development should look.
By means of this regulation, we want to show that we can go one up on the time-frame under the Montreal protocol, and we know that industry within the Union will manage the adjustment required, even if certain parts of industry have done their utmost to ensure that this directive should never come about.
At second reading, Parliament adopted ten amendments to the Council' s common position.
The Council was able to accept seven of these amendments without any problems.
The remaining amendments, namely 14, 15 and 21, were not accepted, and we therefore began informal negotiations with the Council at the beginning of the year.
Both the Council' s and Parliament' s intention was to reach an agreement without embarking upon the formal conciliation process, so avoiding possible delays to the regulation' s coming into effect.
The first amendment concerns HCFCs in certain forms of air conditioning equipment which Parliament had proposed should be removed.
These were reintroduced as a result of our negotiations, but with a stricter phasing-out date.
The second concerns a total ban on HCFCs in refrigeration and air conditioning equipment which the Council was not as interested in arranging.
In the negotiations, we agreed to postpone the phasing-out until 2015 by means of a review clause.
I consider that this was one of the most important changes which Parliament contributed in its negotiations with the Council.
The third amendment concerns an extension to certain time limits where, too, Parliament and the Council together arrived at an acceptable solution.
If we now decide to approve the Conciliation Committee' s proposal, we should have hoped to have seen everything signed, sealed and delivered.
There are nonetheless still three outstanding problems.
At the final stage, three mistakes were discovered in the proposed wording of the Act.
By mistake, the export of inhalers for asthma sufferers and of pain-relieving cancer pumps had been banned.
Moreover, the text relating to certain companies' imports of CFCs contained a wrong base year.
The Commission will now be tabling supplementary proposals which, in accordance with the timetable and with a view to correcting these errors, will be dealt with during the plenary session in July.
It was never the intention to ban exports of this kind or to have an out-of-date base year as the basis for companies' import quotas.
In spite of this, I should still like the Commission to comment on how these things could happen and should like to know whether the Commission considers that we are now solving the issue in the best way.
I want to conclude by thanking the Commission and the Portuguese Presidency, as well as Parliament' s Conciliation Committee, for their extremely constructive cooperation.
Everyone has done their utmost to come up with a sound regulation and also recognised how important it is for this to come into effect as quickly as possible.
I believe we have found a compromise of benefit to all parties.
It will not repair the hole in the ozone layer, but it is a step in the right direction.
My hope is that, today or tomorrow, Parliament will adopt the proposal and that, by no later than October of this year, the Union will have new and better legislation governing substances that deplete the ozone layer.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the first warning call about the reduction in the ozone layer was sounded in 1970.
In 1985, with the revelation that there was a hole in the stratospheric ozone layer, the media began to take a real interest in the problem.
After numerous attempts to reach agreement, the countries that are the main producers and users of chlorofluorocarbons, the famous CFCs, with the exception of the Eastern European countries, China and India, signed the Montreal Protocol in 1987.
This was a truly historic protocol, because, for the first time, people understood the global scale of the profound climatic imbalances that could threaten survival, people' s health and even their lives.
It has therefore been held up as exemplary.
The recent report by the European Environment Agency, entitled "Environmental signals" , was curiously alert, not only to the increase in ozone concentrations in surface layers, but also to the fact that the ozone layer that protects the upper atmosphere above Europe has decreased noticeably since the beginning of the 1980s, at a rate of 8% per decade.
This is extremely worrying.
This factor has occurred in spite of the decrease in chlorine compounds and despite the fact that other gases affecting the ozone layer and the troposphere have decreased as a result of international agreements, which have proven to be reasonably efficient.
The production and sales of compounds that attack the ozone in the atmosphere' s upper layers have in fact decreased since 1989.
According to the European Environment Agency report, however, the lasting effects of these products, given their long life cycles, means that the ozone layer will not fully recover until the year 2050.
That is precisely why any action that the European Union can take, any measures that it can adopt to protect the ozone layer, are crucial, compared to which the controversies about global warming and the 'greenhouse effect' for example, are insignificant.
Whilst there may still be doubts as to the scale of these changes, there can be no doubt in the case of ozone.
Saving the ozone layer is crucial to saving the lives of human beings, plants and bio-diversity itself.
The amendments to the Montreal Protocol that are now being proposed go some way towards improving protection for the ozone layer, this filter which is so precious to life on earth, and to improving the apparatus for monitoring the trade in substances that degrade the ozone layer.
The rapporteur deserves our applause and gratitude for her speedy work on this report because, where this issue is concerned, speed is of the essence.
Mr President, for many years now we have constantly been receiving new reports describing the depletion of the vital ozone layer.
At first, the hole in the ozone layer started getting bigger over the southern hemisphere, i.e. a long way away, and for some time now we have had to face the fact that the ozone layer is also changing over Europe.
Since 1976, the ozone layer over Europe has been contracting continuously, and is now depleted by 15%.
The Commission only informed us about this recently and warned against a rise in skin cancer ailments, allergies and eye disease.
People knew as early as the eighties which substances led to depletion of the ozone layer and continue to do so.
According to estimates, for every one per cent less of ozone, the earth is exposed to 2% more UV, which means that people are at greater risk of contracting skin cancer.
I am therefore delighted that a decision has at last been reached on such an urgent matter, which we will use to transpose the Montreal Protocol at Community level and to go even further in some respects than the demands that were raised there.
Although I endorse the outcome of the conciliation procedure, I make no bones about the fact that I am not satisfied.
I am referring to the issues that have been controversial to the last, concerning the ban on partially halogenated hydrochlorofluorocarbons, which are mainly used in refrigeration and air conditioning plants.
If we are going to opt for a ban on the use of these substances on the basis of definite findings pointing to the damaging effect they have on the ozone layer, then I would have hoped for a more consistent approach on the part of the Council as regards transitional periods and exemptions, particularly as ecofriendly alternative substances are available for all types of application.
I would remind you that the ban on using virgin HCFCs in refrigeration and air conditioning plants will not take effect until the year 2010, whereas the European Parliament had called for it to be 2005.
And in the case of recycled HCFCs, the full ban will not take effect until 2015, rather than 2007, which is what the European Parliament wanted.
But cleverly, a transitional clause was incorporated which allows for a modification of the phase-out date of recycled HCFCs.
I believe that reports on further damage to the ozone layer and also new scientific findings as regards alternative substances will soon show the present compromise up as having fallen too short.
Time will tell, and if my prognosis is right then the European Parliament will soon be raising the issue of the phase-out dates for partially halogenated HCFCs again, and will be in a position to deal with this matter in the interests of the environment and public health.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I welcome the good result which the European Parliament and the Council have achieved on this important issue.
I want to congratulate both institutions on the major efforts they have made to reach agreement concerning the many technical questions which characterise this complex regulation.
We have both worked hard to find compromises and to ensure that we obtain effective environmental legislation in this area.
I want to take the opportunity to express special thanks to the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, the European Parliament' s delegation to the Conciliation Committee and, especially, the rapporteur, Mrs Hulthén, for the thorough and constructive work they have done.
This new regulation envisages a range of measures to minimise discharges of ozone-depleting substances.
The most important of these are further measures to reduce the production and use of HCFCs, the phasing-out of the production and consumption of methyl bromide by the year 2004, a ban on the use of substances such as CFCs and halogens, the production of which is already banned, stricter requirements for the handling of ozone-depleting substances, new staff training requirements, compulsory recycling and disposal and improved supervision and licensing requirements.
Adopting this regulation will lead to a more rapid phasing-out of all ozone-depleting substances within the European Union than is possible under the Montreal Protocol.
This will not only lead to clear improvements in the health of EU citizens but will also mean the European Union' s accepting the political leadership of the world on this important issue.
I should also like to respond to the question put earlier.
I shall reply in English.
The Commission is in the process of agreeing the two proposals for amending the new regulation on ozone-depleting substances - one for the metered done inhalers (MDIs) and the other for the allocations of quotas for HCFCs.
Thank you, Commissioner Liikanen.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Digital television in the European Union
The next item is the report (A5-0143/2000) by Ms Thors, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy on the Commission communication to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on 'The development of the Market for Digital Television in the European Union - Report in the context of Directive 95/47/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the use of standards for the transmission of television signals' [COM(1999) 540 - C5-114/2000 - 2000/2074(COS)].
Mr President, it is an absolute thrill for me to be able to start this debate in the absence of the rapporteur.
You will have seen my look of desperation as I was scanning the room for Mrs Thors, but I am nonetheless pleased to do the honours.
I wanted to begin by extending warm thanks to her for the excellent cooperation and the sterling work she has done.
This is still the case, of course.
But I am still sorry that she is unable to attend.
Convergence plays a huge role across the globe and naturally relates to both the Internet and the mobile sector, which will soon be closely interwoven.
This is one of Europe' s great opportunities, but digital television also plays an important role.
There is enormous potential there too, provided we meet three pre-conditions which I will briefly outline for you.
My first pre-condition is that we need to do more in the field of standardisation and interoperability.
What do I mean by that?
Interoperability of the set-top boxes is intended to avoid a situation where before long, users are having to place a whole assortment of boxes on top of their digital TVs in order to continue to watch the various programmes.
We need to avoid this at all costs.
I therefore welcome with open arms the DVB group' s recommendation of the Multimedia Home Platform as a possible standard.
This is a step in the right direction.
It has to come from the industry.
I think that we can guide this process along to some extent, but the initiative has to come from the industry.
Given the developments in the DVB group, it looks as if the industry has made good progress.
I therefore hope that the industry will continue to seek open standards, because there are all kinds of exciting developments underway which we do not want to sabotage.
But if the industry cannot achieve an open standard or interoperability, the politicians can and must speak out.
A solution must then be found on a political plane as a last resort.
My second remark concerns open access.
It is of utmost importance that open access be established and that the current must carry rules remain in place, because Europe is more than just a digital economy.
It is also a cultural Europe.
This is why I think that the amendment tabled by Mrs Thors with regard to her own report is sound.
The must carry rules must continue to exist as long as they are proportionate and restricted to those stations which are intended to fall within the scope of Protocol 32 annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Finally, it is absolutely vital that the directive on television without frontiers be reviewed.
I hope that our Commissioner will be able to include this when he presents the new telecom legislation relatively soon, because a total package is desperately needed in order to eventually move convergence along much further in Europe, both in terms of telecomms and digital TV, and I hope that this package will enable Europe to take a leading role, which is what we called for in Lisbon.
Mr President, Commissioner, it seems as if I am forever subject to Murphy' s law where this report is concerned, because I myself was in Romania when we voted on it in the Committee.
I want to thank Mr van Velzen for his work in introducing the debate during my absence.
I think it is important that we remember how matters stood when the directive was adopted.
It was believed on that occasion that it was conditional access which would present the worst bottleneck when it came to our obtaining open TV.
That is perhaps not the case now, but it is other parts of television' s distribution network which will become bottlenecks or gatekeepers if we do not watch out.
Not only must it be possible to use different types of technical apparatus in combination with one another, but different computer programs must also be required to understand each other.
At the same time, consumers have a great need for easily accessible information and can reasonably demand that the market should also be predictable.
I think that, where TV is concerned, we shall, in the future, have a situation where digital TV will be a part of ever more integrated electronic functions in the home.
It is therefore important that we should have an API, an Applications Programme Interface, which can be used as part of this integrated environment.
This is also crucial when it comes to the electronic program guides.
It is these two factors which the forthcoming provisions should especially concentrate on.
I would also draw my fellow MEPs' attention to the fact that these electronic program guides will be important in, for example, enabling parents to protect young children from material they do not wish them to see.
Neither the decoders' operating systems nor the electronic program values are at present mutually compatible.
The parliamentary committee shares the view, as did the Commission, that the markets and techniques within the field of digital television have been developed beyond the scope of the directive.
The regulations in the special directive we are now discussing ought therefore to be revised and can usefully be incorporated into those clusters of proposed modifications to directives governing the communications sector which we can expect from the Commission in a few weeks' time.
The rapporteur' s conclusion is that open standards are now needed.
We are now seeing the second and third generation of equipment for digital television.
The work being done on creating that kind of open standard for home multi-media equipment is well advanced, and the European Telecommunications Standardisation Institute, ETSI, will hopefully adopt the MHP standard.
There are good reasons for accepting that this standard will form a basis for the future.
Nonetheless, we cannot exclude the possibility that political decisions concerning standards will be needed in the future if the market cannot reach an agreement.
Digital TV is distributed in a number of different ways which are technically not quite the same.
Like traditional TV, digital TV can be broadcast across terrestrial networks, by cable and via satellite.
These distribution systems at present have different degrees of penetration, but satellite distribution is the dominant system.
Tomorrow, distribution by cable may, however, gain ground.
With distribution by cable, there is an inbuilt return channel which provides direct access to interactive services on the network.
I believe that access to interactive services is the sine qua non of digital TV' s becoming one of the important gateways to the information society.
The different distribution systems mean that digital TV can also become a particularly important way for sparsely populated areas to access the Internet.
An end to analogue TV broadcasts and a total changeover to digital TV are important if we are to be able to exploit the limited resource of the radio spectrum in an effective way.
No one has yet been able to define under which conditions analogue broadcasts can cease.
Digitalisation means that there will be challenges, especially perhaps for public service broadcasters which cannot subsidise the extra equipment required in the same way that conventional broadcasters can.
How are licence fees to be collected in countries which finance broadcasting in this way and have a free-to-air tradition?
I would also point out that the rapporteur vigorously supports the 'must carry' principle, or obligation on the part of cable operators to broadcast certain channels, and believes that this must continue.
On the other hand, we ought not to make such demands as would impede the development of the very interactive services in question.
Nor ought we to jeopardise the will to invest in upgrading the network.
Even public service companies which previously broadcast their programmes free of charge are now in the process of setting up boundaries and making it more difficult to broadcast across national borders.
In the background are issues of copyright.
The TV companies' copyright organisations ought to make the most of new opportunities to give those who want to watch digital programmes the right also to do so beyond the borders of the broadcasting country.
That is a goal which we are already committed to achieve by the Treaty and by the 'Television Without Frontiers' Directive.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as the President pointed out in his introduction, it has taken five years for the basis of the October 1995 report to evolve into the report we are dealing with now.
This can be attributed to the fact that the market development of digital television has been much slower than anticipated.
However, digital television has become increasingly important over the last few months and years, in the wake of media convergence.
The Internet and home banking via digital television are examples of how the range of services has widened.
This report will form the basis of a draft directive.
Our group has two demands to make of the framework regulation for digital TV.
Firstly, the framework must not restrict the meteoric technological development in this sector, and it must not be too rigid.
Secondly, the framework must, however, safeguard the European internal market and consumer interests.
We want to, and must, work within these two parameters.
This entails the following: firstly, the transmission obligations are still an important means of meeting social requirements, for example minority language programmes or the important role of the public broadcasting sector.
Secondly, there is the interoperability of the access systems to digital TV at subscriber level, as mentioned by the previous speaker Mr van Velzen.
It is unacceptable for subscribers to need several receptor boxes in order to receive programmes.
It should be one box per subscriber and no more.
Thirdly, technical interoperability must not be compromised or undermined on account of national monopoly formation or abuse of a dominant position.
As I see it, our aim is to create a European internal market, promote technical development and bring about television without frontiers - something the two previous speakers touched on - and that includes making sure that in future, citizens of other countries who are resident in the European Union are able to receive their pay TV services.
I am delighted with the report by Mrs Thors.
We adopted a very well balanced report in committee.
Unfortunately, I am unable to endorse the two proposed amendments tabled by Mrs Thors, on behalf of our group, for the same reasons advanced by Mr van Velzen.
We intend to vote against both proposed amendments.
Apart from that, we congratulate you on this report and hope that in the course of the next few days and weeks, the Commission will present a sound basis for a directive.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would, of course, first of all like to congratulate Mrs Thors on her report, which she had to complete in a very short space of time and which looks excellent.
Ladies and gentlemen, digital TV will be one of the key access roads leading towards the digital highway and will help in the distribution of high-capacity networks throughout Europe, including the more remote areas.
As such, this means of communication will grant many more Europeans access to all kinds of information.
It is therefore of utmost importance that a favourable investment climate be created for digital television within Europe.
After all, we are at the dawn of a new era.
Traditional boundaries between telecom companies, entertainment industry and journalistic media are becoming increasingly blurred.
These industries are being replaced by multinational cable media giants which are created by mergers.
This is a pattern which is emerging throughout the industry.
Infrastructure and content industry are coming together.
This means that two aspects should be monitored effectively.
Firstly, we should look out for unwanted media concentrations, because otherwise consumer prices will as yet spiral out of control.
Moreover, we must guarantee - and this is directly linked to this - journalistic neutrality, which is so important to our democracy.
In this respect, technological developments naturally affect the legislative framework and vice versa.
Legislation should not hinder the interoperability of different technologies and should, therefore, be laid down at European level, as a minimum, and preferably worldwide.
We have noticed that in many Member States, media policy, in particular, is still all too often being adopted at national level.
My final point, Mr President, concerns the transmission rights which are currently still being sold purely on a national basis.
As a result of this, people outside a certain country cannot subscribe to television services from another Member State, whether this relates to free or pay-TV programmes.
This is an unwanted development.
It should be possible for all citizens to subscribe to television services from another Member State.
This means digital television but also television without frontiers.
Mr President, in common with all the previous speakers, I too would like to congratulate Mrs Thors on her report.
It is a very sound and important report.
Digital television is one of the most important contributors to convergence, and will become one of the primary means of accessing the data highways.
Digital television will afford increased and wider access, also for the more remote regions.
Therefore, it is important to make operators' lives easier, rather than introducing far too many regulations.
But this balancing act between investment, development and minimal regulation gets particularly difficult when there is a need to safeguard cultural diversity and general information.
This is where we need to look for ideal solutions within the new framework conditions, with all due respect for quality.
Accordingly, Mrs Thors' report meets with our approval.
We echo her demand for separation of content and infrastructure and for the obligation to transmit on particular channels.
We are calling for decoder parts to be made part of the information infrastructure, for the interoperability of decoders to be addressed, and for Member States to be afforded the opportunity to demand open networks.
We also welcome with open arms the fact that the Commission approves of mergers, provided open standards are used.
This will be another useful tool in our efforts to prevent abuse of dominant positions.
Last but not least, I too would like to endorse what previous speakers have said.
There is no internal market for TV services.
We need to tackle this with sensitivity, and fast.
In the light of the developments that have taken place, it is absolutely essential that we enter into a comprehensive debate on public service broadcasting.
Without infringing the subsidiarity principle, we in Europe have a responsibility not to put public service broadcasters at the mercy of the forces of competition, when they have a duty to provide information and to safeguard cultural diversity.
I would urge every one here to be particularly sensitive in this respect.
Madam President, before I left to come to Strasbourg, I said goodbye to a pensioner - Mrs Lucia Boroni from Mozzanica in the district of Bergamo - who had come to see me off.
She asked me, "What are you going to do in Strasbourg?"
I said, "I am going to speak on the Thors report."
"But what is this Thors report?"
"It is a report which deals with the fact that, soon, a pensioner will be able to turn on the television and see Mr Fatuzzo making a speech in the European Parliament and hear what he says."
"Oh, that is very good," said Mrs Boroni, and then she asked, "but can I see how many contributions I have made to the Italian National Social Welfare Institution as well?
Can I see what my pension will amount to when I retire?"
"Of course, Mrs Boroni, this is the future, the future of the citizens.
There are no more barriers.
You will even be able to see what is happening in the pension companies of other States."
"But I have to live on 700 000 lira a month" said Mrs Boroni.
"How will I be able to afford this television of the future?"
I have taken the floor to tell you what Mrs Boroni wants: namely for the European Parliament - and I am sure that this was among Ms Thors' intentions when she wrote her report and I call upon the Commissioner to see to the matter when he issues the directive - to ensure that the less well-off citizens, whether they are pensioners or not, are able to access the new digital television services of the future free of charge.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank Astrid Thors for having completed her work so swiftly and acquired such intimate knowledge of this subject.
I wish to mention one or two problems connected with this issue.
Firstly, I support the open standard and compatibility: that is only sensible.
Access has been conditional in the cable network, which has been spoken about here, but it is also important to have diversity, and not only access.
Competition alone does not guarantee it.
We know that global competition in the television sector has often led to uniformity of supply: they all compete with the same sort of soap operas.
This is a big issue, and it relates to access.
In general, I support the notion that technical systems are not neutral.
They make some things possible more than others.
Thus, for example, the ease of availability of interactive services - which the previous speaker was perhaps speaking about, in a way - is a political question.
At least it is a social question, if not a party political one, because, for example, Gallup polls and voting in local elections will depend on interactive facilities, as will the extent to which people can intelligently participate.
The MHP, or future Multimedia Home Platform, which transfers facilities from the apparatus to software, is, in a way, the final revolution in this chain, making it possible - as the rapporteur remarked - to receive everything off the television on the Internet, obviously including papers and magazines, films and everything else, perhaps even fragrances, which, for us older men, would be a real pick-me-up.
It is important that the correct policy is established here as well: the cost of the equipment must not impede public participation.
Mr President, Mrs Thors, the ARD (association of German broadcasting corporations) wants to bring a complaint before the European Court of Justice against the television alliance between the media companies owned by Kirch and Murdoch.
These are the new dangers facing new media: mergers between market leaders.
Similar discussions to the ones that have already taken place over Microsoft are now attracting attention in this sector.
The question of the moment as regards digital TV is whether it is possible to secure a monopoly with the access hardware alone, i.e. the D-box in this case, particularly when leading companies in the IT sector merge with traditional media businesses.
Nor should we be under any illusions from a cultural point of view.
There will not automatically be more interactivity or more people who know how to handle their computer via the TV.
Therefore it is still important to stand firm on the duty public service broadcasting has to society, to prevent the formation of monopolies, particularly in the media industry, and to work towards fair access and educating people in self-access to these media.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate Ms Thors on her work - a difficult task since we are regulating the future.
I will dwell on a few critical aspects which I feel should be brought to Parliament' s attention.
For example, in my opinion, it is extremely important to concentrate on the copyright rules because the restrictions resulting from copyright agreements and the differences in standards used for transmissions are likely to hold back progress towards a genuine television without frontiers and a genuine European internal market in television services.
This would probably mean losing a unique opportunity to develop a European television industry.
Citizens who live or work in Member States which are not their country of origin cannot legally subscribe to foreign platforms as these do not own the right necessary to broadcast in the Member States in question.
The European Parliament has already raised this issue in the past and the rapporteur analyses it, while drawing attention to the problem as it presents itself in the border regions, where the linguistic minorities live on the other side of the border.
In any case, we should place greater emphasis on actions aimed at implementation.
I feel that it must be stressed, as the rapporteur pointed out clearly, that in the new regulatory framework, a balance must be struck between the need to ensure the diversity of culture and contentin television networks and the risk that regulation might hamper the will to invest in digital TV.
We need a flexible approach in order to regulate the economic situations which are going through a period of deep-rooted change.
The regulation of the market must not hamper its development and, in particular, the development of new television services.
In this regard, I feel that we should go back in the forthcoming months or years to certain factors such as the separation of the regulation of the content in TV from regulation of the infrastructures.
Moreover, I would argue that there should also be great focus on the interoperability of systems which, although its aim is general protection of the possibility for users to access the data broadcast via the digital platforms, is emerging at this time as a competition protection measure, protecting the possibility of access to the market for the different operators and thus opening up unprecedented legal horizons.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, as the first rapporteur - back in 1994-1995, I believe - on the subject of digital television and the standards pertaining to this, I would like to tell the present rapporteur how highly I rate the importance of the work he has done on this subject and to tell the Commission how much I appreciate the Commission communication.
I feel that, over a period of a few years, we have all been able to gauge the progress made in this area and to emphasise that the initial choices which we made were valid ones.
Incidentally, today, at a time when we are facing a significant stage of development, I think it important to stress that in all our policies we must find the necessary balance: between the Community approach and Community standards, on the one hand, and the specific national features and national disparities on the other hand; balance between the need, in terms of production, to cover a large European market and promote European products, i.e. developing 'television without frontiers' , and, on the other hand, the ability to retain options as regards wavelength standards and local television.
These are crucial issues for us, requiring the utmost flexibility on our part.
At the outset, digital television was seen as something apart from high-definition television, another subject area that I knew well.
Today, we are coming to realise that it enables vast flexibility and quantity.
At present, we must strive to find a fair balance between what needs to be done at European level, what can be done at national level and at local level, since this has implications both for European and national action as regards deregulation, the market and technology.
It was certainly important to sum up the situation regarding digital television at the present time.
Once again I should like to congratulate Mrs Thors on the quality of her report and to say that I shall remain personally very attentive to the work done in this field.
The important thing is to keep in mind that information, communication and television should be aimed primarily towards the citizens, and any inflexibility which might tomorrow prove an obstacle to a culture accessible to all should be avoided.
Mr President, as the final speaker I, too, would like to join in thanking Mrs Thors for what is, as Mr Caudron has just said, a very well-balanced report.
It is a focused report.
I should like to conclude by making a link to the next debate on electronic communications.
In this whole area we have to be very conscious about how fast technology is moving and how that technology is beginning to change our whole thinking and indeed the whole form of competition in which digital television and other media are developing.
I come from a country where there is a long tradition of public service broadcasting and that is one of the areas Mrs Thors has addressed powerfully in her report: the questions of access to this new technology and access to the viewer.
Let us not forget that one of the key things that all people in the industry are facing is competition for a very scarce amount of viewer time.
As channels multiply, viewers are having more choice - not just in looking at programmes but in being able to shop, to use interactive Internet media through their digital televisions; interactive media which they can pay for.
They can pay for a sports event with interaction to be able to choose the sort of format that they want.
It will not be long before they are able to buy a digital recorder which will hold hundreds of hours of television time on a hard disk which will be sorted for them so they will be able to watch things in time shift.
They will have different forms of competition.
We have to make sure that our legislation does not constrict the growth of technology and does not constrain the growth of competition that is going to come through these new forms of technology.
That is an issue we have to think about, both in considering Mr van Velzen's report and in the new report on copyright in the information society which will be before this House in a few months' time.
Mr President, I wish to begin by thanking Mrs Thors for her excellent work.
The Commission welcomes this report.
It raises the need for a balanced approach to regulation.
We need to balance two things: first, commercial freedom and incentives to invest and, second, protection of defined public interests in a focused and proportional way.
The new regulatory framework will provide regulators with much greater flexibility to achieve this balance.
The directives that the Commission will propose this month take account of the three key points raised in Mrs Thors' report.
First, the need to update ex ante regulations for digital television.
The new framework will allow regulators to address new gateways such as Applications Programme Interface.
Second, the report supports limiting "must carry" privileges to channels with a public service remit, as defined in Protocol 32 of the Treaty.
The report also points out that there should be negotiation that balances remuneration for operators with the value of public service channels to operators.
The Commission will address these issues in its upcoming legislative proposals.
Third, the need for increased interoperability between different television platforms.
More specifically, the report singles out two key elements.
First, the need for interoperability wherever possible and access rules where proprietary standards contribute to significant market power; and, second, the need to define a new, open decoder architecture, the multimedia home platform.
The Commission prefers an industry-led approach rather than imposing standards.
We have reserve powers to intervene if the market actors cannot agree.
However, the market is developing open standards.
In dynamic markets the standardisation process lags behind the leading edge of technology.
The use of open standards reduces both regulation and the number of competition cases.
The report signals this clear message to the market place very strongly.
I fully support this.
The report also raises several issues which lie on the content side and are, therefore, outside the scope of the new framework for electronic communications.
As far as possible, we must separate the network and content regulation.
The reception of encrypted digital television services across borders raises several difficult issues.
First, there is enough ill treatment of copyright: pay-TV services only buy the rights for a particular Member State.
Even digital free-to-air services are being encrypted.
This creates tensions with single market principles for pay-TV services.
Differing approaches to content regulation may also play a role.
But here I need to reflect on this with my colleagues, Mrs Reding and Mr Bolkestein, who have particular competence in this field.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Electronic communications and associated services
The next item is the report (A5-0145/2000) presented by Mr van Velzen, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, Foreign Trade, Research and Energy, on the Commission communication to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions entitled: 'Towards a new framework for Electronic Communications infrastructure and associated services - The 1999 Communications review' [COM(1999) 539 - C5-0141/2000 - 2000/2085(COS)].
Mr President, I would like to start by thanking those I have worked alongside.
A rapporteur without such sound qualitative input is only a small cog in a big machine.
We have been able to establish a sound dialogue, which is what is important at the end of the day.
I would also like to express my sincere thanks to the Commission, especially Commissioner Liikanen, for the sound cooperation and meaningful debates which we held, but more than anything, I am grateful to him for his willingness to take into account the debate and vote on this report in the publication of the new directives.
Mr President, five years ago, it was totally inconceivable that today, we would be talking about competition in the field of services but also, above all, competition in the field of infrastructure within Europe.
This is completely new.
If we close our eyes and think ahead about what is going to happen in the next five years, then this is an enormous development.
This also means - and that is my second point - that you have to think very clearly about what to legislate for at the moment within the European Union in order to promote this convergence process which is moving at the speed of light.
I think that the point of departure should be that we decide, if at all possible, in favour of full competition and that, based on full competition, we identify what we still need now in terms of sector-specific regulation.
There will, of course, always be sector-specific regulation, but eventually, we need to move in the direction of competition as a guiding principle.
I therefore think that the Commission was right - and my report has hopefully contributed to this - in opting in favour of fine-tuning the - to my mind - more rigid model which was used by the Commission in the first instance, the so-called 'significant market power and dominant position' .
I honestly hope that the Commission will move further in the direction we have proposed.
The markets are moving extremely fast.
The developments transcend national borders.
We are witnessing all kinds of vertical and horizontal integrations.
We can see inter-sectoral movement, which means that, each time, we need to examine one particular sector within the market.
Mr President, my third point is that you also need to consider the supervisory structures which are in place.
It will, of course, not be the case that in five years' time, we will still have 15 telecom/ICT markets in Europe.
As far as this is concerned, we will need to grow towards one European internal market.
This also means that I can see two developments in this field, which cause me some concern.
One is that national supervisory bodies are still working in isolation and my report offers an enormous boost to these bodies to link up, merge or integrate with the general national competition authorities and, where necessary, with media supervisory bodies.
We also need to ask ourselves how long we need to continue the specific sector supervision.
It is, of course, excellent to have a High Level Group, but the main drawback of having such a group is that, because of its huge significance, it is extremely difficult to sideline.
I therefore hope in this respect that by means of sunset and horizon clauses, we will be able to do something about limiting the time during which these groups are active.
Mr President, it is of utmost importance to the citizen for prices to become much more transparent and the cost of roaming to drop, and for the citizen to gain an insight into how this mechanism works.
The citizen would also very much welcome number portability, as would the mobile sector, so as to empower the consumer, and I think we should fight for this.
Mr President, auctions should also come under close scrutiny.
Currently, auction prices far outstrip the actual administrative costs, and I am therefore very curious as to whether the Commissioner would like to answer my urgent written questions at this stage, namely to what extent the forthcoming auctions in the United Kingdom and other Member States comply with Article 11 of a Licensing Directive which explicitly states that only administrative costs should be covered.
Mr President, another important point is 112, caller location.
If something happens to me, it should be possible to trace me immediately.
This is why this caller location facility is so vital.
But it is also important to combat the abuse of 112.
In addition, it is also of great importance, in my view, certainly in the case of third-generation mobiles, to offer the caller location facility.
This does mean, however, that the user should grant permission to set this up.
Mr President, a serious problem is the democratic hole within the entire ICT sector.
Once we have completed 5 or 6 directives in the foreseeable future, we as European Parliament will have outlived our mandate in this field.
At the same time, the Commission will carry on with the CoCom (Communications Committee), the Council delegation.
In my report, I expressly call for an EP working party which is authorised by Parliament to negotiate with the Commission on the same terms as the CoCom.
Mr President, surely it should not be the case that Parliament could be sidelined in this day and age.
I therefore make an urgent appeal to Parliament, but also to the Commission, to plug this democratic hole which currently exists in the way I have just described.
Mr President, we have now reached the stage where at the end of this month, the European Commission will produce the directives.
I have thanked the Commissioner.
I also hope that the Commissioner is able and willing to take into account the outcome of this debate in the forthcoming directives, because that is what it is all about at the end of the day.
That is democracy.
Mr President, Commissioner Liikanen, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr van Velzen, warmly on his report, which brings out succinctly and precisely the essential elements of the extensive and complex communication from the Commission, and also forms an accurate assessment of them.
Approximately two years ago, the national telecommunications markets were successfully liberalised by Community directives and the transposition thereof.
A new legal framework will be framed this summer at European level, as Mr van Velzen has already mentioned.
It is intended to strengthen competition, particularly at local level, and will take account of our experiences with the existing legal situation.
Furthermore, a new legal framework tailored to new dynamic and unpredictable markets with considerably more players than there are today must be drawn up.
Permit me briefly to address four key points that are also to be found in the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on whose behalf I am able to speak today.
Firstly, particular attention must be given to the transposition of existing directives, so that what are still major disparities in the liberalisation of the national markets do not become entrenched, thereby impeding implementation of the new regulatory framework.
Of course, this is where the Commission comes in, as Guardian of the Treaties.
Secondly, the possibility of deregulation, or rather the gradual transition from sector-specific rules to general competition law must be enshrined in the directives as of now.
However, that too has already been catered for by Commissioner Liikanen and his team.
Thirdly, the new legal framework must take account of the convergence of the media.
However, this should not lead to the highly competitive mobile radio communications market, which has grown freely, being subject to the same rules as apply to the fixed network.
In any case, the operators are currently being hit hard by the auctioning of UMTS frequencies.
According to the experts, it will take them several years just to raise the funds needed for auction.
This alone is very detrimental for Europe' s future industry, the mobile radio communications sector.
We must not add to the problem by imposing ex-ante access and interconnection obligations on investors in transmission infrastructure and introducing the instrument of operator selection developed for the fixed network.
Fourthly, ultimately, the unbundling of subscriber access should be laid down in a binding manner.
The competitors of the former monopolists should be afforded direct access to the final customer via the telecommunications cable in all Member States, so that they too are able to offer broad band services.
This kind of competition will increase the number of Internet connections with a high data transmission rate and reduce the cost of Internet connections.
So as not to disadvantage those Member States that have already complied with this requirement, it should be left to the Member States themselves to decide which aspects of unbundling subscriber access they wish to lay down in a binding manner.
Mr President, I would like to thank my colleague, Mr van Velzen, for his excellent work in handling the Commission' s communication.
He has done an enormous amount of work on the amendments to reach a compromise.
The liberalisation of the telecommunications markets has advanced by leaps and bounds in recent years in Europe.
Regional differences are still too great, however, for us to be able to speak of a free telecommunications market.
Every Eurocitizen must be afforded the opportunity to use all communications services at a fair price.
For example, factors that restrict competition in mobile communications, such as the overpricing of the 'roaming' facility and the lack of the preselection and call transfer facility, must be rectified through action at Community level.
The Commission must give assurances that these obstacles to competition are removed as promptly as possible.
We cannot, however, simply concentrate on wireless communications.
The situation regarding competition in the fixed networks must also be radically improved.
The monopoly status the telephone companies enjoy must be destroyed right down to the last copper wire.
Otherwise, people living in remote areas, in particular, will be at a disadvantage.
I hope the Commission gives a clear response to this question: how will local loops be opened up to competition, or, in other words, how can we most effectively break up the monopolies in the fixed networks?
The question of the distribution of the UMTS frequencies is a matter that should not be regulated at Community level.
Arguments could be put forward in favour of both spectrum auctions and so-called beauty contests.
The fact is that the astronomical prices that result from spectrum auctions always end up with consumers having to foot the bill.
Beauty contests are, in many respects, more consumer-oriented, and more of an alternative that supports the freeing up of the market.
Unlike spectrum auctions, beauty contests do not involve operators having to pay a sum of money that is in the nature of a PAYE tax.
I would like to ask the Commissioner, in connection with this issue, whether the Commission considers that spectrum auctions promote competition.
I hope that I will receive unambiguous answers to these questions.
Mr President, the rapporteur, Mr van Velzen, is to be congratulated on having produced a balanced and well-founded report and a balanced and well-founded speech in support of it.
I can applaud, as always, his comprehension of the need to regulate but with carefully argued parameters.
It is right to remind ourselves that when we talk about regulation, it is not something of which we have either more or less; within the European Union we plan to regulate for a purpose, for a goal, over a certain period of time.
It is good, too, that Mr van Velzen's report has a clear appreciation of what the convergence of various technologies means.
He and many other contributors to this debate have reflected on how both Parliament and the Commission have been able to look at what has happened in the past and try and guess - educated guesses - about what may happen in the future.
Where we have not guessed correctly, we have been able to put things right.
The speed of change, not only in terms of technology, but also in global competition in this field, has meant that the margin of error is much less.
This is why this report is so important.
It lays the groundwork for the future development of the Commission's plans and Parliament's response for this industry.
The Socialist Group will not be able to support all of the amendments and the details of qualified criticisms of the "auctions versus beauty contest" proposals.
We had hoped to be able to have split votes on that.
I regret that we cannot; nor can I support the amendment that calls for mobile telephones and the mobiles market to be excluded.
We ought to take great care not to introduce rules that limit growth in this startlingly versatile market.
Nor do we want to enter into a situation where mobiles are excluded and other forms of telecommunications are included.
Finally, I would like to draw attention to Amendments Nos 3 and 4.
Amendment No 3 calls for a clearer and unambiguous formulation of the political aims and principles underlying the further development of the European telecommunications market, which is absolutely essential.
Amendment No 4 highlights the urgent need to devote special attention to implementing the existing directives so that major differences in the liberalisation of national markets do not become entrenched and thereby hamper the implementation of new rules.
We still have 15 partially liberalised and still largely segmented markets.
What we have here is the basis for opening up the European Union market in a genuine sense.
I commend Mr van Velzen's report to you and congratulate him again on it; and I congratulate the Commission on the speed, diligence and thoughtfulness with which it has approached the redrafting and relaunching of European Union legislation in this field.
Mr President, Commissioner, rapporteur, it is a valuable piece of work which Mr van Velzen has carried out.
On behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, I want to point out that we support the original report.
We cannot, however, support all the amendments because they do not show the increased clarity which might well be demanded when, within a few weeks, we shall have the concrete draft directives on the table.
I do not think it is necessary for us to agree upon woolly compromises a few weeks before we have the directives in front of us.
Today, we can discuss the telecommunications area at a sociable hour and not, as we usually do, late in the evening with just a few telecommunications freaks taking part.
There is therefore also good reason for noting that, since we last met, important solutions for Europe have been produced at the World Radio Conference in Istanbul.
It is also important that we in the European Parliament should support the preparatory work which has been done in the CEPT, or European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations, and that we should not criticise this work for I believe that it was one of the reasons why Europe was successful to the point that our models were adopted and that we obtained supplementary limits for the third generation telephones, as well as uniform frequencies throughout the world.
When we talk about the forthcoming principles, I think it is extremely important that, then too, we try to strike a balance regarding technology-neutral solutions.
I believe, for example, that, even today, the auctions we are talking about are not technology-neutral because they discriminate against mobile telephony in relation to the existing, fixed networks.
That is not being technology-neutral.
The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party has tabled amendments to cancel the demands to merge the national regulatory and competition authorities.
We do not think that this would be in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity.
There is no reason for requiring a merger in this context.
What is more, we have a very great variety of solutions in different Member States.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this paper from the Commission was an extremely sound document as it was but Mr van Velzen has managed to improve on a number of points in what was already a welcome paper.
I would like to congratulate him on having done so.
But it is pointless to make liberalisation an end in itself.
Hence political objectives must be fulfilled.
Liberalisation should benefit subscribers and competition.
There are a few points that we definitely still need to address.
There has certainly been a drop in prices, however, this has happened in the business sector and there is little or no evidence of it in the case of local calls, roaming, or calls between the fixed network and mobile phones, and vice versa.
Therefore this is a clear example of market imperfection.
Perhaps it is not cost-effective for new firms to work at this level.
Consequently, there is a need for regulations here, otherwise the citizens in more remote regions will be at a disadvantage because they will not be connected, i.e. they will not be part of the universal service.
Therefore we are calling for the state to be given the right to intervene.
Secondly, we demand a more flexible formulation of universal service, for e-mail and the Internet used to be considered a luxury.
These days, people who do not have these services are almost being discriminated against.
Accordingly, Internet access ought to be counted as one of the universal services.
Thirdly, needless to say, drops in price must not be to the detriment of quality of service.
Furthermore, we are agreed on transparency and on the matter of choice.
Pre-selection is restrictive for the subscriber and is something they should be able to sue over.
Like you, we are in favour of having transmission obligations.
You have also taken account of health in recital E, which is a matter particularly dear to the heart of the Greens.
By and large, we support your report, however we cannot support 8a or 8b, both of which are new.
8a is contrary to the Amsterdam Protocol No. 32 and to the 'Television Without Frontiers' Directive.
I have only this to say about 8b new: the 'television without frontiers' directive is not the object of this dossier.
The guidelines for a common audiovisual policy are discussed in the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, and specifically in the Veltroni report.
This discussion has only just begun and we must not prejudge the outcome.
Last but not least, I would like to issue a rebuke of the Commission for failing to wait for Parliament.
It is continuing to work on an independent basis.
I just felt that this needed to be said.
Mr President, we all know that the words 'communication' , 'information' , 'networking' and 'connection' lead to the following two expressions: firstly, the information market and, secondly, the information society.
Market or society.
We are indeed dealing with a market.
That much is certain.
Everything is moving in that direction.
It remains to be seen, however, what sort of a society we are dealing with.
Even though Mr van Velzen' s report is very technical, the purely technical issues end by confirming two other problems of a technical nature which are, moreover, brought up again in the amendments: access for all, democratic access to this information society market, and the definition of a public service, henceforth known as a universal service, without forgetting the development of the content of these information and communication networks, a content which seems to interest so few people, which never fails to amaze me.
Firstly, on the subject of democratic access, people will tell me that other reports and other programmes, the one on "e-learning" for example, exist to support the efforts made by European countries to promote access to the Internet and to new technologies.
These programmes must not, however, be just a salve for the existing infrastructures, specifically the ones we are currently setting in place.
May we hope for some consistency on this?
Next, what form can a universal service take nowadays?
What undertakings must Europe and the Member States set themselves in this regard?
Affordable access to all communication services is not enough to guarantee a universal service.
We need financial commitments from the Member States in order to guarantee a public service, in schools and libraries for example, and we also need them to monitor the quality and diversity of the proposed information content.
This brings me to the matter of content.
It might be feared that our reintroducing this question could be taken for an automatic reflex on our part.
But how is it possible to agree to our opinion being consulted on the regulation or on competition without our being asked to deal with the matter of the content of information and communication?
At the present time, 94 of the world' s 106 most visited web sites are American.
While Europe is certainly ahead of the United States in terms of mobile communication, it lags behind them specifically in relation to the handling of content.
This reminder is, perhaps, just a reflex, as I tell myself every time our only concerns with regard to the new economy are the actual networks.
Is it, however, possible that the matter has become urgent today?
I was pleased to note Amendments Nos 6 and 7 to the van Velzen report clearly acknowledging that the question of content was a problem.
I also take the fact that, on 24 May, the Commission adopted a programme that was proposed to promote European content and multilingualism on the Internet, as a very good sign.
It is only a start, but let us not forget that we also have the task of building a cultural Europe.
Mr President, at the outset I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr van Velzen, on the preparation and presentation of an extremely balanced report on the important subject of electronic communications.
I would like to focus on a few points relating to this important report.
The Union must keep pace with the technological changes which are taking place globally at this time.
If the economies of the Union are to prosper and succeed, businesses must be apprised of new changes in the field of information technology.
In many ways, the Union is ahead of the United States of America in the field of technology.
EU-technology in mobile-phone systems is well advanced.
Most Union countries have extensive competition in the field of mobile-phone markets.
This is going to continue with the next set of mobile-phone licences known as UMTS licences when the respective EU governments give them out.
I fully support competition in the telecommunications market, because it is good for consumers in terms of the prices they pay for telecommunication services.
The European Union is behind the United States of America with the Internet.
EU governments must redouble their efforts to ensure that all businesses are fully linked up to the Internet and e-commerce companies must be promoted at every turn.
It is very important for social policies, in terms of promoting the Internet in rural parts of Europe, to be incorporated in the EU strategies.
I would like to take the opportunity of congratulating Commissioner Byrne for setting in train the process for the regulating of contracts on the Internet.
The Commissioner has started this process of looking into mechanisms to guarantee consumer protection.
The Commission wants to bring forward proposals to regulate procedures and for dispute mechanisms for contractual arrangements entered into via the Internet.
Entering into contracts on the Internet must bring with it regulatory procedures and dispute-regulation mechanisms so that consumers will enter into such contracts.
In conclusion, in my own country of Ireland there are 750 software firms employing over 23,000 people.
I am confident that this sector will increase as new opportunities and e-commerce fields open up to them.
Mr President, today we are looking into a new legislative framework for the communications infrastructure.
This sector, however, not only needs regulation at European level, above all it needs regulation on a global scale.
These rules require the necessary flexibility, as rapporteur Van Velzen pointed out with good reason.
After all, it is unclear what the future holds for that sector.
We therefore need to restrict ourselves to prescribing pre-conditions for future developments and proposing measures which can enter into force at the time when the developments are in the offing.
The drafting of pre-conditions requires attention to both the supply and demand side of the communications market.
Fair competition is vital to suppliers.
Accordingly, our pre-conditions should in any event create equal access to national frequencies and infrastructures.
Pre-conditions are important to consumers too.
A new social chasm between consumers who take part in the information society and those who do not is undesirable.
In the field of universal services and the supply of public services, the national authorities should, therefore, be free to intervene within the market.
However, this sector is not just about access for everyone and as much freedom as possible for the consumer.
It is not enough to optimise the customer' s freedom of choice by providing information on the services on offer.
The national Member States, the Commission, but also other international legislators are required to act prescriptively in the supply of services.
The Commission' s current stance against child pornography and racism are good examples of this.
However, there is a need for standards which apply universally and worldwide.
I would like to call for the standards of the Bible to be applied, as they offer the consumer the best protection.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to congratulate Mr van Velzen on his work.
I agree that it would be appropriate to proceed to a new phase in the liberalisation of the electronic communications sector which will mirror market developments and constantly evolving technology.
The new legislation should affect all the communications infrastructures and related services by means of recommendations and codes of conduct and other vehicles.
If we keep the regulations to a minimum, this will ensure proper coherence between market developments and the reference legislative framework in addition to promoting investment by operators, improving the quality of the services and, therefore, giving the consumer greater benefits.
In addition, considering the substantial increase in the number and size of operators and the changing conditions of competition over the market as a whole, the national regulatory authorities should, henceforth, start to use their competences, moving on from an ex ante approach to regulation to an ex post approach.
In a scenario where the issuing of licences is genuinely liberalised, no prior approval should be required by the regulators before operators can enter the market unless this is strictly necessary.
We agree with the Commission that, in this second phase of opening up of the market, while full competition has not yet been achieved, it would be appropriate for there to be specific legislation governing the activities of telecommunications companies which used to have monopolies and whose economic and financial strength is such as to influence the market.
When competition is consolidated and the free telecommunications services market has fully developed its potential in the various sections, it will be possible to reduce the sector rules and the special obligations for the operators dominating the market which I have just referred to.
The Commission will have to be careful not to create inequalities between the different national product and service markets.
Moreover, in the longer term, a joint public and private action appears essential in order to make it possible for all people to use all the telematic services of a distinct social nature, such as telemedicine, teleworking, electronic public administration services and electronic commerce.
These objectives are an integral part of the well-known e-Europe initiative, which is a universal service based on a development philosophy which is social as well as economic.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to extend my sincere congratulations to Mr van Velzen for his report and I would like to thank him warmly for his accommodating and constructive cooperation - it sets the tone for how this kind of report should be dealt with.
There are two questions which, to my mind, need to be asked about this report: how much regulation and what sort of regulation do we need to promote a competitive European internal market?
As I see it, three questions have emerged from our joint debate.
Firstly, there is the question as to what the role of the Member States should be.
European rules are needed for a European market, for example the unbundling of subscriber access, and of course the much-lamented principle of subsidiarity means that we need rules where they can best be made use of.
This may be at Member State level, but it may also be at EU level.
That being the case, we should at least issue a reminder about the need for reinforced cooperation and coordination between the national regulators in the Union.
The second issue - also raised by previous speakers - concerns the auctions, or beauty contests.
I will be quite honest with you, opinion is extremely divided in my group too, on which of the two is the best method.
I still think that auctions are the most viable way of finding the most efficient and effective operator in a competitive setting.
Of course it is a problem that some Member States opt for this method and others go for a different one.
That is bound to lead to distortions in competition.
When these come to light, surely it falls to the Commission to intervene.
We should learn our lesson from that and make sure that in future, everyone is treated equally.
Thirdly, how long can rules be put in place for?
There will need to be a review as of the year 2005, at all events, for no one is in a position to say at the present time what we will need in the way of new sector-specific rules in the year 2005, or indeed whether we will need them at all.
On a final note, I have a comment of a personal nature to make about the caller location system and the 112 emergency number.
We had a few discussions about this in committee.
I must admit that having lived behind the iron curtain in the Eastern block for four decades, and having grown up there, I am always sceptical about being monitored and controlled 'big brother is watching you' style.
I therefore think it is absolutely essential where the 112 emergency number is concerned, for the prior consent of the user to be required for the use of caller location facilities, even in the event of an emergency.
But that is something I personally feel strongly about.
We will find a reasonable solution when it comes to the vote.
Mr President, Mr van Velzen, I am pleased to see that the demands for basic information society services and universal service feature in this report.
After all, Parliament, the Council and the Commission have made the point often enough that everyone should have access to the new technologies.
Unfortunately, neither basic provisions nor universal service are defined.
And it is so very important to define these tasks to my mind, because otherwise the marginalised target groups will find themselves even further back in the queue, for example the elderly, the disabled or immigrants.
All the report says is how the undefined basic services are to be achieved, i.e. more market freedom and less state intervention.
You are right to note that the state is not providing, in an optimum manner, for fair access to information technologies.
But companies are even less motivated in this respect.
They are only interested in developing for the market, as was reconfirmed by the UNIC Summit at the weekend.
It will only be possible to stop people from becoming digital illiterates if we afford them self-access to the new media in schools, universities and other public spheres.
Only then will people become truly innovative in their dealings with these technologies, and will a discussion about opportunities and risks take place.
Unfortunately, this is where the report is lacking in concrete proposals.
For example, for there to be fair access, the state should not spend billions on Microsoft programmes when there are more democratic, innovative and secure software versions, namely Open Source, available for free on the Internet.
The opportunities are there but they are not being used.
The issue of data protection, as Mr Glante has just mentioned, may have been raised here on more than one occasion, but there are no ideas forthcoming as to how to give it concrete form.
It is all very vague.
There has been one concrete proposal to this effect, i.e. automatic caller location for purposes other than emergency calls, for commercial applications that is.
Firstly, even if the consent of the user were to be required, this would start to chip away at fundamental rights, and secondly, the proposal is completely out of touch because it has long been possible to ascertain the location of callers using mobile phones without obtaining the user' s prior consent.
The market is not a panacea, and secondly, the statements on data protection are still vague.
As such, commercial interests are taking precedence over the protection of fundamental rights.
Therefore I intend to vote against this report.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to congratulate our rapporteur on the report which he has presented to us.
The fact that Mr van Velzen' s political approach differs from mine does not prevent me from recognising a serious piece of work, such as the report which he has presented to us here today.
The aim of the European Union' s policy in the telecommunications sector is to fully liberalise the markets, develop competition and privatise public-sector corporations.
The Communist Party of Greece is fundamentally opposed to such policies.
We take the view that basic sectors, especially sectors of strategic importance to the economy and to the very existence of a country, should be under government control.
This ensures that the necessary investments are made in order to develop these sectors and provide services even to the most remote areas, such as islands, and, at the same time, it guarantees low prices, because there is no corporate super profit motive involved.
The European Commission' s report endeavours to evaluate the application of this policy to date and proposes measures for the future.
The Commission should recognise that the number one problem which needs to be addressed is the fact that the market is monopolised by a few extremely strong players.
This is proof positive of the fact that the European Union is guilty of hypocrisy when it maintains that it wants to impose equal and fair operating and profit rules, since its very policy takes us in the opposite direction.
In truth, not only do the various agreements, alliances, acquisitions, mergers, etc. not want competition; they indirectly abolish it by creating extremely powerful groups which crush small- and medium-sized businesses or force them into submission.
Even yesterday' s competitors are coming to private agreements and arrangements, thereby adulterating the competition.
Under these circumstances, it is idealistic to believe that measures to strengthen competition further will prevent the market from being control by a handful of monopolies.
Mr President, I wish to join in the congratulations to Mr van Velzen on a very good and focussed report and to say that it has been a pleasure working with him.
As a Member new to this House with his first involvement in work on the telecommunications directive, I have certainly learnt a lot from the process, and I think other colleagues have as well.
I want to focus on some of the crucial issues raised in the report and, in particular, the whole transitional period towards a future single open market for all electronic communications.
The important thing about this debate is that by and large there is a strong consensus towards that.
Our colleague, Mr Alyssandrakis, does not agree with that - and it is always good to have his distinctive contribution to our debates.
But Mr van Velzen has quite rightly focussed on some of the difficulties in making that transition and how it is going to be regulated.
The second issue on which there is important consensus is that we do not want a centralised regulatory body at European-Union level.
We want to see the national regulatory authorities have the responsibility, but there are going to be new responsibilities which will need a strong measure of coordination to ensure that process is carried out quickly and effectively.
I should like to say to Mr Liikanen that one of the things to be addressed is that in thinking about combining the regulatory authorities with the overall competition authorities in each Member State, let us not forget that those competition authorities are already taking on significant extra responsibilities through the activities and policies of his colleague, Mr Monti.
We need to ensure that those competition authorities are adequately staffed, conscious of their European responsibilities and prepared to buy in to the coordination process that is being proposed in this report, because they will have that crucial responsibility.
That will need very careful monitoring, a lot of cooperation between the Member State governments and as Mr van Velzen said, we as politicians have an important role to play in putting pressure on the Member States to ensure that process is achieved satisfactorily.
My final point concerns the question of universal service, which has already been mentioned earlier.
It is quite right that in his report Mr van Velzen does not propose that we should move to an extension of universal service at the moment.
Everything we are talking about shows how fast the market is changing.
The value added, the commercial potential of every connection is going up all the time.
In remote areas the potential for remote shopping and remote services is going to be much enhanced in the new world we are living in.
It is right to keep that under review and not to make a significant change at the moment.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I think convergence is a generic term to describe this battlefield of companies, some colossal, some small, where more money actually now circulates than anywhere else.
If we study this issue horizontally, first there is the production of content, then the transmission systems and associated services, which are dealt with in Mr van Velzen' s report, and then comes the terminal equipment: televisions, telephones and computers.
These are manufactured by companies whose methods and staff have encroached on each other' s territories, and this causes the confusion, although there is also new business, which is the issue here.
We need an analysis of the situation as a whole from the Commission.
I, too, believe that we can expect one, as the Commissioner has looked long and hard at the matter.
The large converged monopolies are becoming a problem for us Europeans since they often make mutual agreements on regulations to control the market and thus stifle free competition, i.e. as we deregulate here, they re-regulate: they make new regulations, and this balance - as I understood Mr van Velzen to say - is very important.
In my opinion, the digital divide has already happened.
It is just a question of how to get rid of it, as this equipment and hardware is so expensive that the only people to possess it are those who can afford to use it in converged form.
Then there is the universal service, about which my learned colleague, Mr Harbour, spoke.
Perhaps there is no need to define it, but it should be returned to, as this concept is constantly evolving.
We are always having to return to the matter of the universal service, as it must be made available.
It may involve, for example, hospital services, consultation services, and other important services of this type.
I agree with Mary Read that UMTS should have been included here, as they provide everything we can get from elsewhere - perhaps they were omitted for reasons of economy.
I want to say one last word on spectrum auctions.
They are causing Europe to lag behind America, and this to me is a serious issue, this process that works against an eEurope.
Mr President, I too would like to join previous speakers in extending sincere thanks to the rapporteur, Mr van Velzen, for this report had to deal with two important subject areas, and has managed to strike an excellent balance between them.
We need competition if we are to have any chance at all of creating the necessary conditions for the information society.
At the same time, however, we want to afford EU citizens equal and secure access to these IT facilities.
This report demonstrates this in the form of important points.
I would like to touch on four of them.
Firstly, the report emphasises the need to separate regulation from infrastructure and content.
This is absolutely essential if we are to secure not just a stronger market, but also greater diversity of information for citizens in the future.
Secondly, this report is in favour of using open standards and the common interface to secure access for all citizens to the information society and to enable them to participate in it from a technological point of view.
Thirdly, accordingly, it is both right and logical to use must carry rules to secure transmission opportunities for public service broadcasters under the terms of the content of their task.
Fourthly and finally, I would like to point out that what we need to do now is to analyse very carefully, on the basis of this report, what conclusions we should draw if we are to secure a broadly-based right to information for all citizens in the future.
I hope there will be sound cooperation between the Commission and Parliament at the forthcoming discussions on the new directive, and also on the 'Television without Frontiers' Directive.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the report by our fellow Member, Mr van Velzen, marks the start of a re-examination of the current regulatory framework for communications.
It is a matter, here, of the European Commission providing the European Union with a world class communication infrastructure with the best possible quality/price offer, if not the lowest possible prices.
Of course, no one can disagree with this objective, and I am in favour of it myself.
As for the means of achieving it, however, this is a very different matter and, personally speaking, I refuse to validate the rapporteur' s excessively liberal alternatives which go beyond the text presented by the Commission, which, however, is intended to promote the competitive European single market.
Let me add four points, which I consider are important, to this debate.
Firstly, regarding the principle of competition, I could never accept this being considered an end in itself.
Secondly, regarding monitoring, I am not in favour of subjecting national regulatory authorities to outside supervision.
Thirdly, regarding the allocation of the frequencies necessary for UMTS licences, I think this must remain within the remit of the Member States.
Fourth and finally, regarding the universal service, I am in favour of quickly implementing a review mechanism which is transparent, proportional and non-discriminatory, and I endorse the request to place Internet access within the scope of the universal service.
In conclusion, while thanking our rapporteur for his work, I incline more towards the Commission' s view on this case than the rapporteur' s, some of whose liberal, or even ultraliberal ideas I find rather disturbing.
Mr President, I too should like to congratulate Mr van Velzen on an excellent report.
I totally support his emphasis on the need to protect the European consumer.
We must at all costs ensure that the revolution in technology benefits everyone equally and that we do not create an information underclass.
We also need more transparency, especially in roaming and international tariffs.
I believe we should be looking at making invoices much clearer, for example, so that the consumer can tell whether he or she has chosen the right tariff.
Where I differ with the rapporteur, however, is with his concerns on spectrum auctions.
Auctions are a fast, transparent, fair and economically efficient way of allocating the scarce resources of radio spectrum.
Governments should not be trying to judge who will be innovative and successful.
Industry, not government, is best placed to judge the opportunities offered by third-generation mobile telephony.
In the debate today and in committee criticisms have been levelled at allocating spectrum through auctions.
It has been suggested that auctions are simply a device to provide extra money for governments.
That is wrong.
The fact that they raise money is subordinate to other aims such as fairness and economic efficiency.
A well-defined auction with well-informed bidders ensures that licences are awarded to operators that can generate greatest economic benefit.
It has also been claimed that licence costs will just be passed on to the consumer.
I do not believe so.
Auctions allow the market to determine the commercial value of scarce radio spectrum.
More importantly, they give greater opportunities to new market entrants.
Beauty contests often favour incumbents with established track records.
Auctions are fairer than picking winners, which can be more subjective and less transparent.
To conclude, what we are trying to do is to ensure that the EU maintains its position as the world leader in mobile telephony.
The only way to maintain the EU's global lead in this sector is by maintaining a balance between regulation and innovation and not ruling any option out.
I believe this report will help us reach this goal.
Mr President, Wim van Velzen has shown that services and competition are being properly employed in the interests of the consumer.
I would also like to thank the Commission for its professional work, because it has endeavoured to stimulate dialogue and discussion.
Europe' s strength is its objective problem-solving ability, and not rejection of dialogue.
I believe we must have transparency, particularly where pricing is concerned.
We want to be able to ascertain immediately, and at all times, what an incoming or outgoing call costs.
We want to make it possible for there to be a benchmark, which the most efficient and competent operator can actually implement.
We need transparency in this sector to this end.
However, we also want portability of numbers, so that a number is a personal distinguishing feature and people can actually be recognised by their numbers.
It should be possible for there to be portability without the number issuer being able to charge for it.
Of course, it should also be possible for there to be number portability from the mobile to the fixed network, and perhaps also to other future technologies.
The emergency number 112 has very special significance.
I myself have advocated in the past that 112-operators must be able to deal with calls in the official languages of the European Union, and that it should, of course, also be possible to ascertain the caller' s location, because it is in emergency situations, for example in the event of fire or accident, that a person is most likely to be in a state of shock and is often unable to provide a precise definition of their location.
Therefore, I believe it would do those who find themselves in emergency situations a great service if it were possible to ascertain their location automatically.
The caller location facility should be regulated where consumers so desire, but in a clear and transparent manner.
It is absolutely vital for there to be transparency in relation to the costs, and for no contracts to be awarded on the quiet here, unbeknown to the public and the consumer, but which still have to be paid for.
Hence all operators in this sector must be governed by the same regulatory framework.
Needless to say, it is also important to tackle damaging content.
We should give thought, in this respect, to whether it would be possible to conduct studies analysing who in the European Union, is actually responsible for tackling damaging content.
My final point concerns the proceeds from auctions.
I believe this is another area in which we should offer best practice models as to what should happen with the funds, so that it is not just used to cover debts but is used mainly for forward-looking investment.
Mr President, I feel that this report marks a decisive moment for the future of electronic communications in Europe.
I would stress, in particular, the fact that the legislation which we are going to vote on and adopt tomorrow will, of necessity, prove to be a regulation which will become obsolete within a very short space of time.
Technological development in the sector is, in fact, so rapid that Parliament and the Commission will have to go back to the issue in a very few years' time and update the legislation we adopt now.
Moreover, I would argue that the laws on telecommunications should be kept rigorously separate from laws governing other sectors, particularly the TV information and broadcasting sector, and this point will have to be clarified tomorrow when we vote.
With specific regard to communications, I feel that this is a good starting point and that we all agree upon its structure and substance.
The rapporteur, Mr van Velzen, has done some excellent work, for which all thanks are due to him, although we must be aware that any regulations we adopt today can, by definition, only be limited in time and are destined to become rapidly obsolete.
With this in mind and commending this approach, I would like to state that I am in favour of the report which has been presented.
Mr President, Commissioner, representatives of the Council, a condition of success for the eEurope plan is that there should be healthy levels of competition in the telecommunications markets.
We now have before us a large package of reforms which it is vitally important that we adopt and implement swiftly in order to further the process of freeing up markets.
It is good that Mr van Velzen' s excellent report gives weight to the importance of common competition legislation to promote competition in the telecommunications sector.
It will be important in applying common competition legislation, however, that the legal provisions relating to a dominant market position are interpreted in a way that does not discriminate against operators in smaller markets.
Parliament has reservations about licence auctions for third generation wireless communications.
I am also worried, for my own part, about how licence fees will affect the development of markets.
As spectrum distribution will be the responsibility of Member States, however, we in Parliament have to accept that competition strategies in the different countries will vary.
Only time will show what the most rational solution will be.
It is also important that the trend should be towards a technologically more neutral operational environment, and that the sector-oriented approach be abandoned as far as possible.
The danger of too much regulation must also be taken into account in good time.
I support the 'soft law' approach in the creation of the new operational environment, in a way, however, that the legislator is given ample opportunity to make his or her position known to the Commission and the Council, before recommendations are made concerning the matter or other decisions taken revising the operational environment.
I would like to ask the Commissioner how the Commission intends to promote this 'co-regulation' approach.
How will it be possible for Parliament to exert sufficient influence?
I would still like to stress that competition should be promoted openly and transparently, to a degree that is adequate, and not through price policy regulation.
Tariffs must be open, consumers must be able to acquire information regarding the cost of calls easily, and pricing mechanisms must safeguard the ability people have to compare prices.
Mr President, Commissioner, rapporteur, ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to offer heartfelt congratulations to Mr van Velzen.
First of all, I would like to say that everything Wim van Velzen tackles turns out well, and his report is highly principled in its responsible treatment of the issue, which he makes his own.
The communications industry is having an increasingly influential effect on our lives.
It has an impact on the economy, the information society, global competition, Europe' s position in the world and employment.
However, the communications industry also has an effect on democracy because it enables more and more people to participate in the democratic process.
It increases the transparency of political activity.
We must continue the privatisation programme.
Competition led to price reductions, rapid innovation and diversity of supply.
The organisation principle underlying the social market economy demands liberalisation and competition on the one hand and necessary rules on the other, so as to be able to do justice to a sense of social responsibility.
A great deal has been said.
I should like to add just three points by way of conclusion.
Communication also means information.
I therefore call upon the European Parliament and the Commission to step up the involvement of all public bodies in their information campaigns and to enlighten them about the new media.
Secondly, I call upon all public bodies to get themselves an e-mail address, to acquire their own homepage, to own an SMS mobile phone, and to involve the constituency media in their communication by using the new media.
I urge the European Parliament and all national parliaments to establish a file containing all the e-mail addresses of all the public bodies, because we should not just be drawing up framework directives, but actually making use of them as public bodies.
Mr President, the Commission' s communication provides an in-depth analysis of the sector and certainly presents a series of positive proposals.
However, in my opinion, further study of certain areas is necessary, such as the way the competition criteria are applied and how to tackle a market which is as yet imperfect.
Although it is true that excellent results have already been achieved in the mobile telephony sector, I would argue - and the rapporteur has put in a great of deal of work in this area which has certainly paid off - that the cable transmissions sector is developing new infrastructures which may require convergence of regulatory policies.
I believe that the final objective is liberalisation where the general competition rules guarantee the legality of the procedures, favouring a more competitive market and producing better results for the end user in terms of both services and price.
These are further reasons why I feel that the directives' application period should be limited, so that it can be determined to what extent the sector is still in need of legislation and whether that legislation would be able to react swiftly to the developments in a market which is constantly changing.
Finally, I feel that it is important for Parliament to express its disapproval of the auction system.
Auctions tend to push licence fees up above their effective economic value, and this increase is then passed on to the consumer as prices are raised and it is no longer possible to introduce new services.
The Member States which have applied this system should, moreover, not treat the profits as their own general resources but should use them to promote the development of the information society and electronic commerce, as they were called upon to do by the Lisbon Summit.
Mr President, as the last Member of this House to speak on this important report, whose rapporteur, Mr van Velzen, I congratulate, it seems to me appropriate to remind you that this Commission communication is the gateway to a great reform and a redrafting of the legislation on licences, data protection, universal service and access to the networks.