# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Finally, my third principle, we must in future select the best instrument to respect subsidiarity.
It may simply be a matter of coordination; it may be a matter of establishing minimum requirements; it may also be a matter, at a higher level, of harmonisation.
But this selection of the best instrument must be limited to that which is strictly necessary.
Generally speaking, the end goal of measures for which the transition to qualified majority is suggested would not be to harmonise the national legislative systems systematically, but simply to coordinate them.
This is in any case, ladies and gentlemen, what has been going on for almost forty years in the field of social security.
We also consider it important to introduce it to the field of taxation too.
Still, before answering your questions, I would like briefly to mention the content of the proposals as you will read them.
Regarding direct taxation, we propose the qualified majority in order to coordinate the campaign against fraud and tax evasion and in order to ensure proper handling of situations involving the legislations of several Member States.
For the remainder, unanimity shall remain the general rule.
Regarding indirect taxation, in order to combat fraud, and modernise and simplify the acquis in the light of economic developments, in order to take account of the objectives of the Treaty in environmental matters, we propose to act by qualified majority decisions.
We further propose to retain unanimity for decisions on tax rates and the points of taxation.
In short, still on the subject of taxation, in the interests of clarity and legibility we are proposing to combine the provisions for all tax measures in a single article which will be reorganised and rewritten as Article 93.
In so doing we are seeking to achieve coherence.
My fourth point, this time, regarding the coordination of legislation in matters of social security, we propose qualified majority voting in order to update and adapt the conditions intended to avoid penalising people, not just workers. in addition to workers, there are also, for example, students who move about within the Community.
We must avoid penalising them.
Finally, with regard to the minimum requirements for social security, there is one possibility that we propose to extend to social security, which already exists for other areas of social policy, which involves adopting minimum requirements by qualified majority vote.
Mr President, let me just say one final word to explain the state of mind I have continued to work in, as we had done under President Prodi in adopting our opinion on 26 January.
The Commission undertook to carry out clear, proactive work.
We eliminated any ideological thinking.
We wish to keep to specific facts and tangible proposals in order to avoid approaching matters with slogans or ideologically.
Let me confirm, finally, that, in addition to this extra presentation, I shall be returning to this House to give further presentations of the Commission opinion on the whole of the reform of the European institutions prior to enlargement, as we did on 26 January.
Mr President, firstly I would like to welcome the Commission's approach in general to the IGC.
The fact that we are getting this rolling presentation of more detailed explanations of issues is very helpful.
Secondly, I agree with the Commission that this is indeed an extremely delicate issue.
Taxation and social security get to what Mrs Thatcher used to call the nooks and crannies of everyday life.
It is something that affects Member States and their people in a very sensitive way and we have to be careful before the Community moves into these fields.
From what I hear, the Commission has got it more or less right and I would like to put a couple of questions for the sake of clarity.
It is right to say where the Member States have already accepted a Community competence, in other words where we have already passed a measure, then QMV should apply to adjust that measure.
That makes absolute sense.
What I was not clear about was when he talked about other measures where it was necessary to make the single market work.
How will that be defined?
It sounds fine but how do you define a measure that is essential to make the single market work?
That is a matter of intense debate.
Similarly, the issue of harmonisation against coordination: one man's coordination can be another's harmonisation and we need clear definitions of what is coordination and what is harmonisation if this is to work.
I wish him well in this area because it is an area in which we need a breakthrough.
But it is not going to be easy to get an agreement and I would like to see the document in detail before passing judgement on what the Commissioner said this afternoon.
Thank you, Mr Martin, for your assessment.
I understand that it is related to the detailed analysis that you will make of the Commission text.
The text will, as soon as it has been adopted - as is now the case - be made available towards the end of the afternoon.
I took careful note of the reference you made to Mrs Thatcher and I appreciate the concern you feel, in the light of your own country' s particular sensitivity in this matter, in stressing that we must adopt a pragmatic approach.
Just now, ladies and gentlemen, I expressed my concern in this document, and in the discussions we will be having, to avoid ideology, to keep to a precise approach.
This is what I said in the course of one of my presentation sessions in one of the national parliaments - your own parliament in Westminster, Mr Martin - and I think I made myself understood.
Indeed I believe that this is the right approach.
So let me repeat that our watchword was to say that qualified majority should be extended to everything that directly affected the operation of the internal market and which might compromise its proper operation in an enlarged Europe.
We have, of course, worked on the three instruments which I mentioned, coordination, minimum requirements and harmonisation, treating harmonisation as the additional stage.
Further to this general answer, with thanks for your remarks, I shall be attentive to your criticisms or your proposals when you have had time to peruse this document.
Mr President, I believe it is absolutely right to comment that we do not need additional competences where taxation is concerned, but what we do need to do, in my view, is consider how we can develop the various topics more effectively.
To quote but one example: the country of origin principle in matters of VAT.
Would it not be possible to start by making adjustments to the current VAT systems, so that harmonisation systems can be implemented more efficiently at European level?
Or another example: double taxation, which causes so many problems.
My question is this: will the Commission' s work programme include a schedule for this, or how do you intend to proceed?
Thank you very much, Commissioner, for your comments.
I do not understand your assertion that there will be no transfer of powers.
If you are increasing qualified majority voting and therefore taking away the national veto, you are effectively transferring powers from the nation state to the European institutions.
I am also very uncomfortable with your statement that you would only seek harmonisation of tax in areas "linked to the single market" because we know that, if that phrase is interpreted liberally - as the European institutions are inclined to do - practically everything can be said to be linked to the single market.
Are you aware, Sir, that the leader of the British Conservative Party has said that we have reached the limits of European integration?
Are you aware of recent public opinion surveys showing that the British people are opposed to the transfer of further powers from the nation state to Brussels, and how will you take those facts into account?
Commissioner, I should like to pick up on a point which you made in your speech.
You said that wherever we require unanimity, we shall retain unanimity, and wherever qualified majority voting is required, we shall use qualified majority voting.
We all know of course that the European Parliament takes the clear view that qualified majority voting must apply as the rule and unanimity as the exception.
If we forego this practice, then we also forego the subsequent promotion of the European Parliament to colegislator on all future legislative issues requiring a qualified majority.
In other words, wherever we maintain unanimity, Parliament will not have the legitimate, democratic, important role which it will have in all cases requiring a qualified majority, cases which, as far as Parliament is concerned, and because of the democratic way in which it functions, should be the general rule.
Mr Rübig, in answering I shall focus on the matter of VAT.
You ask me about the Commission' s work programme and I had said, as a precaution, that we had not discussed this matter today, that the Commission had established its work programme and that the Commissioners directly concerned would be coming to address you at the proper time.
Nonetheless, you have asked me, broadly speaking, whether the great VAT modernisation project might be adopted with your proposals by qualified majority?
I must answer that it depends what you mean by 'great VAT modernisation project' .
More specifically, if you are thinking of the changeover from the transitional arrangements for levying VAT to the final arrangements, which would involve changing the points of taxation, we have clearly indicated that this matter would in any case be decided by unanimous decision, and I can confirm this.
As regards modernisation of the system in the light of recent economic developments, and I am thinking in particular of all the implications of globalisation, liberalisation and e-commerce, this is a question that you should ask Mr Bolkestein.
Jointly with the Member States, we are currently identifying what should go into this package.
A meeting was held on 2 March but, frankly, I think it is rather too early to be able to give you any further details.
However, I have now spoken about updating the VAT system, which means that I can now turn to Mr Helmer and say that I am well aware that these are sensitive issues, I am well aware of the importance accorded to taxation, in the name of national sovereignty, and to the matter of voting upon taxes and, in particular, upon the rates of taxation.
After all, I did have a seat in the parliament of my own country for twenty-two years.
I should merely like to use the force of my conviction together with you, certainly, and if possible also with the negotiators and Mr Tsatsos and Mr Brok, to say to the States which are reluctant and more sensitive than others on this subject, 'Please pay careful attention before rejecting the application of qualified majority voting to proposals which the Commission has made in a reasonable manner.'
We are talking about the proper operation of the internal market, and about the success of this internal market and all the countries involved in it, because it is in the interests of all the countries of the Union.
But what will happen in a much enlarged Europe, where disparities are even greater than they are at present in social terms and budgetary matters?
This is why we recommend an extremely thorough, and I might almost say clinical analysis of these matters, in the interests of the internal market.
Finally, I would like to thank Professor Tsatsos for having mentioned the connection between these proposals and the role of the European Parliament.
Since I have been given the opportunity, let me confirm that one of the Commission proposals is to associate codecision directly to all measures decided by qualified majority as soon as legislative measures are involved.
It is evident that in these matters affecting the internal market and its proper operation - social security or taxation - there are legitimate grounds for the European Parliament to express its opinion and adopt a position.
Professor, we shall have further opportunities to state this and to try to convince the other negotiators of this throughout the coming months.
Mr President, Commissioner Barnier, I am extremely pleased that the Commission has produced this initiative.
It is clear that there is a need for harmonisation of taxation policy within the internal market and the currency union.
Those who deny this call the future of the internal market into question.
You talked specifically about VAT but I did not hear you mention two other taxes that have long been the subject of discussion, i.e. tax on interest and company tax.
These are clearly two basic taxes that we are going to have to harmonise in some way.
I do not know if you included this under tax evasion; it does not feature in your document at any rate.
Could you comment on this?
Mr President, I have to say that I am most impressed by the principles which the Commissioner has set out.
If we can limit these changes to the rules on qualified majority voting in connection with the operation of the single market to minimum provisions and to practice developed by the Court of Justice, I believe, in fact, that it may well be possible to implement these changes with the approval of all the countries, which is of course incredibly important.
At the same time, I have to conclude that, if the Commission wants to adhere to these three good principles, then it must, at some point or another, disagree with the note which the Presidency has submitted.
The Presidency has, of course, tabled the proposal that qualified majority voting should also apply to those areas dealt with in Article 137, paragraph 3, subparagraph 3, concerning the defence of employees' and employers' interests, and in Article 137, paragraph.
3, subparagraph 2, concerning the cancellation of contracts of employment.
I have difficulty in seeing what the justification is for this on the basis of the three principles which have been laid down and which have been emphasised by the Commission.
In the light of this, may I conclude that the Commissioner does not wish to comply with the Presidency' s note on these proposals?
Commissioner, you are proceeding with the utmost caution, and that is an approach which I support.
With reference to the argument of subsidiarity, I should simply like to tell you that, in my opinion, it is also important to put forward the argument of citizenship in fiscal matters.
After fifty years of building Europe, it is unacceptable that the citizens of Europe should not be equal in the eyes of the law simply due to their being classed as resident or non-resident.
The concept of citizenship is common property, on behalf of which we must move beyond failures such as Helsinki.
I have three specific questions that I would like to ask you:
My first question is this: do you anticipate that the instrument you are proposing might be applicable to the integration of financial markets and the requisite tax regulation thereof?
My second question is: does the instrument that you are proposing in the area of environmental taxation provide for qualified majority voting?
My third question is: would the instrument you are proposing enable the Council to put an end, by qualified majority decision, to the tax havens which exist within the European Union?
Thank you, Commissioner, for your statement.
I am sure that none of us here will object to fraud and tax evasion being tackled but I must say that it is necessary to maintain the confidence of citizens in the Union, and I think that many Member State governments will be wishing to look very carefully at any extension of QMV before agreeing to it.
It does strike very much at the heart of what is perceived as the national ability to conduct one's affairs.
I am thinking in particular of things such as the withholding tax, which it would have been quite unacceptable to have subjected to a QMV regime.
I hope those points will be borne in mind when you look at the practicality of getting the package through.
We are very happy to combat fraud and tax evasion and to improve social security legislation, but there are some points where there will be difficulty in convincing all the Member States to follow.
Commissioner, I have some very simple questions for you, which require just a 'yes' or 'no' answer in each case.
Can you guarantee that the Commission will not seek, under any circumstances, to use qualified majority voting to impose the withholding tax?
Can you give the same guarantee in relation to the proposed tax on aircraft fuel, which was discussed in ECOFIN this week, and can you give the same guarantee in relation to corporation tax in the European Union?
Are there any circumstances where the Commission would seek to use qualified majority voting on any of those issues?
Can you guarantee that the Commission will not use qualified majority voting on any of those issues?
Mr President, I can imagine that according to some Members, the citizens are sensitive to European intervention in tax and social matters.
I can tell you that in my country, many citizens lie awake at night, worrying about the fact that Europe leaves social and tax matters well alone on account of this unanimity.
This is why I would like to direct two specific questions to the Commissioner.
First of all, citizens who are very badly affected by non-intervention are mainly those who wish to enjoy free movement and, more specifically, cross-border workers.
Dossiers concerning the coordination of social security, expansion into third countries, supplementary social security systems have all been on the Council' s table for years, untouched.
Could the Commissioner tell me if the present issue is also affected by qualified majority voting?
Secondly, I would like to fall in with the Members who have asked whether the packages regarding the "Prima Rollo Group" , which are on the table, would be subject to qualified majority voting, as referred to by the Commissioner.
I should like to answer a number of you collectively, particularly on what we might term the tax package.
Mr Leinen discussed this, as did Mr Baltas and, just now, Mrs Van Lancker.
Let me make one preliminary remark.
The purpose of this speech is not, let me repeat, to foreshadow the conditions for the execution of the Commission' s work programme.
In order to facilitate the task of reforming the institutions, we wish to distinguish the everyday administration of policies (the normal work of the Commission, and we have regular meetings on the subject) from the reform in the context of the accession of thirteen new Member States.
Obviously, the Monti package is related to the proper operation of the internal market.
This is why Mr Monti, a few months ago, and now my fellow Commissioner, Frits Bolkestein, continue to make it a political priority.
I hope that all these efforts will produce a result before the conclusion of this IGC, before the ratification which will follow the Treaty of Nice, and that we shall have this tax package at our disposal, in the interest of the proper operation of the internal market, before any amendments to the Treaty may be ratified.
Mrs Thorning-Schmidt and a number of you, including Mrs Van Lancker, mentioned the social matters which are extremely important, particularly with regard to third country nationals.
We do wish to include them as beneficiaries of social policy (Articles 42 and 137, which are to be subject to qualified majority voting).
Once again, regardless of ideological considerations, we have reordered the paragraphs of the new Article 137 in order to subject to qualified majority voting everything which affects, from our objective point of view, the proper operation of the internal market: social security and protection of workers, worker protection in the event of cancellation of the work contract, collective representation and defence of the interests of workers, including codetermination, working conditions for third country nationals legally resident on Community territory, and financial contributions for the promotion of employment and job creation without prejudice to the terms of the Social Fund.
The recent history of the development of the European Union shows that, in Maastricht, we were aware that creating the single currency would require improved coordination of social measures at European level, but, at the time, we had not yet achieved it.
In Amsterdam, as I remember specifically, since I was one of the negotiators of the Treaty almost up to the end, we expanded the definition of the objectives of social policy within the Treaty and the Community was granted its own areas of competence, complementary to those of the Member States.
In Nice, prior to the great enlargement, I would ask you, please, to see this text as anticipating events.
As we exist right now, we could continue to operate more or less and to live together, but that is not what it is all about.
We should form a Community, and I do not feel that we can subsequently come back to this sensitive issue if we do not resolve it now.
As I said, we must form a Community of 27 or 28 Member States, despite the much greater disparities.
We wish to ensure that the Community has effective means to support this restructuring at Community level.
We therefore propose that it should be possible to adopt these minimum requirements by qualified majority vote, and not by unanimity, in all the areas I have mentioned.
Finally, I should like to tell Mr Jonckheer that, for all sorts of reasons, I absolutely agree with him on the matter of citizenship.
I should like to assure him that, with regard to tax provisions in matters of the environment (many of which are directly connected with the operation of the internal market in addition to citizens' welfare and quality of life), we are well aware that these issues entail the risk of distortions of competition, which would moreover be exacerbated by enlargement, and we therefore propose that in fact all measures for taxation in matters of the environment should be decided by qualified majority.
I am aware that my answers are necessarily incomplete given the time available.
Mr Bolkestein, Mrs Diamantopoulou and myself will have the opportunity to address you again in future.
We wish to initiate this debate, and to fuel and feed it on the basis of these proposals, as I undertook, in order to facilitate to some extent, the difficult negotiations within the Intergovernmental Conference.
But, in the final analysis, as we all know, what we need is the political will.
Question Time (Commission)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0201/2000).
We will examine questions to the Commission.
First Part
Question No 39 by (H-0174/00):
Subject: Consideration of the international legal status of the waters of the Western Sahara On 4 November 1999 Mr Fischler' s head of office wrote a letter to Mr Pierre Galland, who had taken an interest in the effects of the EU-Morocco fisheries agreements on the Western Sahara self-determination process.
Given the EU' s support for UN resolutions on the Western Sahara and the concern generated by the ambiguous content of the letter sent to Mr Galland, does the Commission not think that, as a matter of urgency and in agreement with the Council, it should officially consult the UN Secretary-General regarding a legal definition of the Western Sahara' s waters based on international law?
It should be borne in mind that the territory in question is engaged in a process of self-determination and the negotiations on fisheries agreements should therefore not lead to any misunderstanding regarding the EU' s attitude towards the territory' s future, nor should its inhabitants' rights be infringed.
The Commission confirms the position expressed by the chef de cabinet of the Commissioner for Agriculture and Fisheries on 11 January in response to a letter from Mr Galland on behalf of the coordination committee of the Sahrawi support organisation.
That position recalled that the fisheries agreement which expired in November 1999 applied to Morocco's fishing zone which is defined as waters over which Morocco has sovereignty or jurisdiction.
This definition does not in any way affect the status of Western Sahara and its coastal waters.
This is a matter which falls under international law, and in particular various UN resolutions, and the responsibility of the UN Secretary-General, whose efforts to find a just, equitable and durable solution have been consistently supported by the European Union.
I would like to start by thanking the Commissioner for his kind answer, although I find it to be completely insufficient.
The letter which I referred to in my question was very unclear as to the European Commission' s conception of the coastal waters of the Western Sahara.
However, you have expressed it with extreme clarity?.
There is no doubt that the Kingdom of Morocco is currently occupying the Western Sahara and this territory is currently undergoing a process of self-determination.
However, according to international law, it should be considered that Morocco has control over that territory, although it in no way has sovereignty over it.
If it cannot have sovereignty over the territory, neither can it have sovereignty over its coastal waters.
This would prejudice the future of those waters, given the possibility that the planned referendum on self-determination will support the independence of that territory.
What situation would the Government of the Western Sahara then be in with regard to the waters which it would have the sovereign duty to administrate?
I agree absolutely that we should reach a fisheries agreement with Morocco which is favourable to the interests of the European Union fishing fleet, in particular the Spanish fishing industry.
But I believe this is not contradictory, on the contrary, with a legitimate interpretation of international law which I ask to be done formally.
Does the Commission commit itself to formally consulting the Secretary-General of the United Nations?
Yes or no, Commissioner?
I have many regrets in life and one of them is that I am not a lawyer, so if the honourable gentleman will excuse a scriptural reference, I tip toe on these waters with some nervousness!
But I understand that international law is quite clear and that the question of territorial waters is directly related to the question of the sovereignty of a territory itself.
That is a question which is being considered at the moment in the context of the referendum and of the UN Secretary-General's initiative.
As I am sure the honourable gentleman knows, we strongly support that initiative and if there is any way that we can assist the UN Secretary-General, then we would certainly want to do so.
That also goes, of course, for his special representative.
As they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 40 and 113 will be taken together, at the request of the Commission.
Question No 40 by (H-0241/00):
Subject: Landmines In a recent statement in the UN General Assembly the Council Presidency stated that the EU remains the main contributor to de-mining programmes worldwide.
However, people in the field complain about the limited role the EU is playing and the confused nature of EU funding for de-mining.
Could the Commission provide me with a breakdown of the funding provided by the EU for all activities relating to anti-personnel mines?
How much money goes into mine action programmes and how much into R&D in de-mining technology?
Could the Commission draft an annual report on its APM policy to eliminate the existing lack of clarity?
Could the Commission tell me what progress is being made with regard to introducing a regulation on anti-personnel mines, which would provide a legal base for these activities and bring them together within a single transparent framework?
Question No 113 by (H-0251/00):
Subject: EU action to combat mines Will the wide range of action programmes to combat mines have to be financed solely from budget line B7-661, which is now more justified than ever?
What provisions will be taken to ensure that NGOs enjoy effective access to Union funding?
With reference to the conditions making aid conditional on accession to and compliance with the Treaty of Ottawa, what criteria and procedures will be used for the implementation of EU actions to ensure that, in the field, some vulnerable communities are not victimised twice?
I hope you will excuse me that in answering the questions together, I take slightly longer.
I am particularly pleased to have the opportunity to reply to Mr van den Bos on anti-personnel mines today.
I will also take this opportunity to respond to Madame Carlotti' s question.
The Commissioners today adopted a communication and a draft regulation on European Union action against mines with the aim of achieving better coherence, greater effectiveness and more visibility in the very considerable activities in this area in which we are already involved.
In doing this, we are responding to and building on the initiative of Parliament to create a specific budget line for mine action.
Anti-personnel mines create appalling casualties in many of the poorest parts of the world.
But they are not only a constant and treacherous threat to life and limb.
They are obstacles to economic development and to the implementation of a range of Community programmes in support of reconstruction, rehabilitation and development.
That is why the Union is already involved extensively in mine action across the globe and why we were so active in the negotiation and conclusion of the Ottawa Convention on the prohibition and destruction of anti-personnel mines which entered into force a year ago.
Over the past eight years, European Community support for mine action has exceeded EUR 180 million.
We have intervened in all corners of the world.
We have supported action by national authorities, international organisations, and not least NGOs.
We have contributed to de-mining and mine destruction as well as to victim assistance and research into new de-mining technology.
But until now, we have not had a coherent overall approach to our mine action.
To take full advantage of the diversity of our instruments and funding mechanisms, we must make sure that we have a framework in which we can formulate the necessary horizontal guidelines and priorities in order to ensure effectiveness and consistency in what we do.
The funding of mine action from the geographic programmes and their budget lines will continue.
Mine clearance and other forms of mine action are often a preliminary step to any sensible development programme.
Therefore they should form part of national or regional reconstruction and rehabilitation plans.
The new regulation and the special budget line will support and complement the geographic line by providing the overall policy framework and by functioning as a general reserve and a source for funding for international programmes.
The resources available for EU mine actions should remain at least at the same level in real terms as we have achieved over the last few years, that is about EUR 30 million a year.
Regular programmes for mine clearance and destruction under our new policy should principally benefit countries which have subscribed to the Ottawa Convention.
But we must also be ready to provide exceptional assistance to mine victims at their homes or when they have been displaced, even when they have the misfortune to find themselves in a non-signatory country.
Finally, the European Union is recognised as one of the leading contributors to mine action within the international community.
The entry into force of the Ottawa Convention a year ago provided us with a forceful new instrument and a set of ambitious targets for the years to come.
We have signed up to the objective of eliminating all landmines worldwide in ten to fifteen years.
That will require determination, consistency and perseverance.
With the funding and coordinating mechanism under the new regulation and communication, we are well placed to take on that challenge.
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply which I find extremely satisfactory.
It indicates the Commission' s high level of commitment to this issue.
I only have one additional question, which is whether the Commissioner would submit to us an annual report on the Commission' s actions in this field?
- The new regulation provides for the Commission to submit an annual report to the Council and to Parliament on its actions the previous year by 30 April of the following year.
A breakdown of the mine-action funding per country by the European Union from 1992 to 1999, as well as for projects in the last year, is attached to the communication and we will continue to provide that sort of financial information as well.
Can I say how grateful we are to the honourable Member, and to other members of this House, for their encouragement and support and for the leadership they have shown in this issue, which is of enormous importance as, alas, we continue to discover.
Thank you very much, Commissioner, for this comprehensive answer.
Might I ask you to clarify one point?
If the justification for budget line B7-661 were increased, what measures could be taken in order guarantee effective NGO access to Union funding?
One thing that we obviously need to do is to advertise very clearly what is available.
We have taken a website that will enable us, I hope, to inform the NGO community and others more clearly about what is available.
We intend establishing a multi-annual work plan.
We will refer to that on our website.
I hope, therefore, that NGOs will feel involved in what we are doing.
We depend a great deal on their active support and understanding.
I should like to mention one other area which is of concern to them, even though they are not always so directly involved in it, namely the whole area of research, on which we spent EUR 17 million out of more than EUR 40 million in the last full year in 1998.
But overall I can assure the honourable Member that we will be involving NGOs as much as possible.
They have a great deal to contribute to this important work.
Question No 41 by (H-0212/00):
Subject: 'Dialogue on Europe' initiative The President of the Commission intends to launch this initiative on 8 March 2000.
The Commission's communication on the subject implies that the intention is to explain the consequences of the IGC 2000 to the public opinion of the Fifteen.
Since this initiative falls under the PRINCE programme for providing information to the citizens of Europe, does the Commission intend to include the Charter of Fundamental Rights as one of the main themes of this initiative?
Mr President, in agreement with the European Parliament, the Commission has taken the initiative of instigating what we are calling the 'Dialogue on Europe' which is intended to raise awareness regarding the issues involved in institutional reform in the context of the enlargement of the Union.
The Commission considers that all the institutional matters liable to have a connection with the work of the Intergovernmental Conference should in fact come within the scope of the debate which has been initiated.
This also, therefore, applies, and this is my answer to your question, to the matter of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of citizens.
In complete agreement with Mr Vitorino, I can assure you of the Commission' s determination, in close collaboration with Parliament and your representatives, both at the Intergovernmental Conference and in the convention for negotiation of the charter, to promote dialogue on all current thinking on the future of the Union.
This dialogue on Europe will be developed with all national and regional institutions, but also with opinion formers, the media and organisations in civil society.
This is completely justified given the actual purpose of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Mr President, I would first of all like to thank the Commission for its reply.
I am satisfied with it for two reasons.
Firstly, it links the Charter of Fundamental Rights with the Intergovernmental Conference, which is the political objective of this Parliament expressed in the report by Messrs Duff and Voggenhuber.
Secondly, because it is going to include it within this campaign.
Furthermore, I was very pleased with Mr Lamy' s reply - which was inevitable, given that Mr Lamy knows these issues very well - concerning the decentralisation of the information campaign.
I believe that this is an important objective because, if we want to reach the people, we have no choice but to go to where they are and, therefore, the decentralisation of the campaign is a priority task.
As on other occasions, such as the Intergovernmental Conference of 1996, this Parliament must offer the Commission its support in order to monitor information activities.
I am pleased to hear the Commissioner's comments on the Charter.
I would like to push him to give details about the nature of the campaign.
Last Wednesday we had a very successful launch of the European information campaign involving Commissioners and Members of the European Parliament.
I would like the Commissioner to reassure me that, when the campaign is decentralised, information offices in the Member States will involve Members of the European Parliament in the information campaign as a matter of course.
After all, it is the MEPs who are supposed to represent the citizens.
We are at least as well-placed as the Commission to engage in that dialogue with the citizens.
The answer to Mr Martin' s question is 'yes' , and I can include Mr Barnier and Mr Vitorino in that.
The Commission does intend to involve Members of the European Parliament at grass roots level in the Dialogue on Europe initiative.
Indeed, no later than this evening there is to be a coordination meeting between the Commission administration and that of the European Parliament in order to determine the practicalities of the approach to be adopted.
The simple answer, Mr President, is 'yes' .
Question No 42 by (H-0215/00):
Subject: Environmental threats facing Europe The recent leak of cyanogen into the river Danube has revealed the existence of hidden environmental threats which could imperil the whole of Europe, while a report by the European Environment Agency predicts that during the first decade of the 21st century the production of paper, glass and plastic waste will increase by 40 to 60%, emissions of cadmium and mercury will rise by 20 to 30%, and waste management will place a strain on the environment with heavy metals, gases and other toxic substances combining to create the 'greenhouse effect' and generate air and water pollution.
On the basis of the information provided in the report, how does the Commission intend to react, what policies will it pursue and what measures will it take to safeguard Europe from the environmental threats it faces?
Mr Fischler will reply on behalf of Mrs Wallström.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Karamanou' s question relates both to the pressing problem posed by the pollution of the Danube, whilst the second part refers more generally to the ongoing threat to the environment in the Community as a whole.
As to the disaster that occurred in the Rivers Tisza and Danube, my colleague Mrs Wallström, has announced, as a result of the leakage of cyanide into the Danube, that as of now, the Commission' s inquiry into the potential environmental risks posed by the mining industry, which is already under way, is to include an investigation into the situation in all the candidate countries.
In addition, Community environmental legislation currently in force is to be examined in detail in order to ascertain if it would be desirable to extend it to environmental risks occasioned by the mining industry.
As far as the problems of a more general nature are concerned, i.e. those raised in the second part of the question, the Commission is well versed in the report put forward by the European Environmental Agency.
This report formed the basis for the overall assessment of the fifth environmental action programme.
This assessment has shown that Community policy has enabled us to chalk up positive results in a number of areas recently, for example in the work that is being done to contain acidification, improve water quality and protect the ozone layer.
In other areas, however, the current state of play and the prognosis for the future give great cause for concern.
This is largely due to the fact that rapid growth in a number of economic sectors is ruining our endeavours to reduce the impact on the environment.
The Commission intends to apply itself to the most serious of these problems in its draft for the sixth environmental action programme.
It will base this on the idea that has already been expressed in the overall assessment, i.e. that in principle we should retain the general plan underlying the fifth framework programme, but it must be substantially reinforced.
What we need most of all is for the Member States to devote more energy to implementing Community legislation, and for environmental interests to be integrated into other policy areas more effectively, so as to ensure that economic growth and environmental damage are no longer two sides of the same coin.
The Commission awaits the European Parliament' s opinion on its overall assessment and will put forward its proposals for the sixth environmental action programme - to be drawn up on the basis of the positions adopted - by the end of this year.
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his answer.
Of course, the European Parliament appreciates the Commission' s efforts to promote Community policy on environmental protection and, especially, its efforts to incorporate the environmental dimension into all policies, i.e. mainstreaming.
However, since you mention the problem of the pollution of the Danube, I should like to ask a supplementary question: you are obviously well aware of the recent accusations by the Romanian Minister for the Environment, Mrs Lilian Mara, who maintains, and many of us share this view, that the ecological damage caused to the Danube by the NATO bombings is far worse than the damage caused by the recent leak of cyanogen.
As we all know, the bombings destroyed bridges, oil refineries and chemical factories, which damaged the ecology of all the areas along the Danube.
I would like to hear your views on the matter, Commissioner: do you intend to take action for the economic, ecological and cultural restoration of the areas which were damaged?
Mr President, Mrs Karamanou, firstly, as I am sure you are aware, my colleague Mrs Wallström paid a visit to Romania and Hungary and was able to get an idea of the scale of the disaster at first hand.
She also reached agreement with the competent ministers of these countries on setting up a task force to handle these issues.
The key issues to be addressed by this international task force have already been established.
As far as the financial aspect is concerned, the Commission is in the process of looking into which funds could be made available for an emergency aid package.
In addition, the PHARE and ISPA programmes are of course available in principle, which brings us to the question - to be answered in conjunction with the States concerned - as to how much money could be employed from these two funds.
Commissioner, I am convinced that the Committee on Budgets will be delighted to read this information as soon as they are provided with it.
Question No 43 by (H-0242/00):
Subject: Concern over the memorandum on nuclear safety at the Kozloduy plant in Bulgaria Despite the constructive step represented by the signing of the memorandum between the Commission and Bulgaria on nuclear safety at the Kozloduy plant and the opening of accession negotiations with Bulgaria, there is legitimate concern over the agreed procedure for decommissioning the four unsafe reactors at Kozloduy, as the procedure is not in line with the Union's position or Bulgaria's commitments in the agreement it has signed with the Nuclear Safety Account.
What decisions have been taken regarding the definitive closure of units 1 and 2 by the end of 2002 and what steps have been taken to conclude an agreement on the definitive closure of units 3 and 4 earlier than 2006, as called for in the agreed memorandum?
Will the Commission use the opportunities and means available to it in the context of its partnership with Bulgaria to bring about the definitive closure of units 1 to 4 at Kozloduy, and in what way?
Is the setting of a date for the decommissioning of reactors 3 and 4 - as referred to in a letter of 17 February from the President of the Commission, Professor Prodi, to the author of this question - a condition of granting financial aid to Bulgaria?
What was the outcome of the meeting held on 4 February between the Commission and the Bulgarian authorities and what is the joint working party working towards?
Second Part
Mr Trakatellis, the agreement between the Commission and the government of Bulgaria that was signed on 29 November 1999 is in line with the policy that the Commission tends to pursue.
This policy proposes shutting down those reactors in the case of which, upgrading to internationally recognised safety standards would not be financially tenable.
The agreement concluded between the Bulgarian Government and the Commission provides for units 1 and 2 of the nuclear power station at Kozloduy to be conclusively shut down before 2003.
In addition, provision is made for the government of Bulgaria to reach agreement with the Commission in the year 2002 on deadlines for shutting down units 3 and 4 of the same power station.
All four units will be shut down earlier than the dates that the Bulgarian Government originally had in mind, which were 2004 and 2005 for Kozloduy 1 and 2, and between 2008 and 2010 for units 3 and 4.
The Commission is working on the assumption that the final shut down of the two reactors 3 and 4 will take place in 2006 at the latest.
The Commission is offering to provide Bulgaria with several years of extensive aid, so as to help the country overcome any problems arising from the shutdown.
This includes grants from the PHARE programme to the value of EUR 200 million and a EURATOM loan.
The various components of the aforementioned agreement form an integrated whole.
In order to ensure full implementation of the agreement, we will not confirm our undertaking to provide the second tranche of the grants until we have reached conclusive agreement on shutdown dates for units 3 and 4.
Both components of the aid package - the EURATOM loan as well as the grant - will depend on how and whether Bulgaria fulfils its obligation to shut down the blocks.
On 4 February 2000, the joint working group on Kozloduy comprising representatives from the Commission and from Bulgaria, met in Sofia.
This joint working group agreed to draft a work schedule for the shutdown of units 1 and 2, by May or June 2000, and to put forward a political framework and potential projects in the energy sector that are to be financed by the aid package.
The Commission would like to point out that Bulgaria did not take the decision to shut down operations lightly.
The decision shows, however, that the Bulgarian Government, as required under the terms of the enlargement process, subscribes to the European Union' s commitments to achieve higher safety standards in the nuclear sector.
The Commission will continue to work together with the Bulgarian Government to implement the agreement of last November.
This cooperation will also take place under the auspices of the accession partnership, which has made this task one of its priorities.
Commissioner, thank you for your answer.
However, I also have a number of queries because, during your hearing before Parliament' s Committee on the Environment and here today, you talked of decommissioning nuclear reactors which, as we all know, are extremely dangerous, as quickly as possible.
And not just these reactors, but also the reactors in Slovakia and Lithuania.
Of course, I appreciate that there are certain difficulties involved in closing them down immediately, but is that the earliest possible date?
I just wonder because, although you set a specific date for units 1 and 2, saying that they would be closed down before the end of 2002 - which in my view is quite a long way off because, as you know, we are afraid of an accident in any one of the four reactors, which would be disastrous both for Bulgaria and the Bulgarian people, as well as for neighbouring Greece and Europe too, since, as you know, these installations are very dangerous - what is stopping you from setting a date for the closure of reactors 3 and 4?
And why are you keeping them open until 2006, or even longer as you will no doubt turn round and tell us in the future?
Mr Trakatellis, opinion is extremely divided as to how unsafe the reactors 3 and 4 actually are.
I was very surprised to learn that I was openly criticised by some Member States following the conclusion of the agreement in Bulgaria, because this agreement was said to be too hard on Bulgaria and to go far too far, and because safety standards at these power stations were said not to be as bad as the Commission was claiming.
Now it is up to me who I believe.
I believe the reports that were compiled at the outset, and I still maintain that we must abide by the principle of risk avoidance in this case.
On the other hand, I must ask you to bear in mind that the decision on whether to go for the nuclear option in energy production is the sovereign right of each and every State.
The Commission is no more able than Parliament or the Council to forbid any country in the world from using nuclear energy, or to force them to shut down reactors without delay.
All we can do is put a package together, as we have done in Lithuania and Slovakia, and, just recently in Bulgaria too, that enables the country in question to deal with the economic and financial consequences of shutdown operations of this kind, and their impact on society and infrastructure.
It must be left to the country concerned to determine how to implement the objectives set as quickly as possible.
All I can say is that this is what proved to be attainable during negotiations, which I headed myself part of the time.
If we had tried to achieve more, then we would have failed to reach agreement and ended up with no shutdown dates whatsoever.
You can always do one of two things in such cases: either accept the attainable or maintain a very intransigent attitude, which may, at the end of the day, salve your conscience on the environmental policy front, but will leave you empty-handed.
As a matter of fact, I believe we achieved a particularly positive outcome in Bulgaria, in view of the extremely difficult situation there.
I would like to point something else out to you, somewhat circuitously, but you will soon see why.
As far as the shutdown dates for blocks 3and 4 are concerned, it says in the text that this will be decided on in 2002.
So that is quite some way off the shutdown date we had mind.
As the Commission understands it, this shutdown will take place by latest - and I repeat, latest - 2006, which is also stated in the text.
The fact that the Bulgarian government signed this text without questioning this, has a certain political significance.
That is all I can say on the matter, but I think you know what I am driving at.
Questions to Mr Lamy
Question No 44 by (H-0206/00):
Subject: Trade preference for least developed countries Precisely what damage in specific European sectors is Commissioner Lamy seeking to avoid in his commitment to waive all EU quotas and export tariffs on 'essentially' all products and services from the world' s least developed countries (LLDCs) rather than waiving them in their entirety?
As LLDCs account for less than 0.5% of world trade, will he reconsider his reservations in this respect?
What timetable does he propose for the implementation of this measure?
The European Community initiative intended to offer free access to the markets of industrialised countries, and the most advanced developing countries, to essentially all products of the least developed countries, was launched as part of the process which led to the Seattle Conference.
The initiative was drawn up immediately after the Singapore Conference, when the Council invited the Commission to make proposals in favour of the least developed countries, both for immediate action and additional medium-term action.
In its conclusions dating from June 1997, the Council made reference to the expression: 'essentially all the products of LLDCs' .
Regarding the immediate measures, in the GSP regulation at the end of 1998, the Community established, for all least developed countries, a system equivalent to that of the Lomé Convention, as the Council had requested.
In 1999, as part of the post-Lomé negotiations, the Council, among other things, specified what it intended to do regarding market access for LLDCs and decided that the Community should, in the year 2000, commence a process which, by the end of the multilateral trade negotiations and by the year 2005 at the latest, will enable free access for essentially all LLDC products, based on the trade system existing under the Lomé Convention.
The difference between all and essentially all products affects, as we well know, a number of specific agricultural products.
This is the mandate which the Commission was given and therefore, naturally, we must respect it.
My own services are currently preparing proposals which will be presented to the Council when they are completely ready.
At the same time, the Community, in its 'least developed countries' initiative within the framework of the WTO, seeks to associate other commercial partners to this market opening policy of ours, which would consist of exempting essentially all the products of LLDCs from duties and quotas.
This initiative is intended, if I may say so, to kick-start our own proposal which, combined with what we can achieve with other parties, would enable the least developed countries to sell their products, in virtually total freedom, on a large number of markets other than our own.
I am thinking particularly of the markets of the developed countries: the United States, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand.
I am also thinking, possibly, of a number of emerging countries, already industrialised.
At the moment I am making great efforts to move forward this initiative which we have included in the rescue package which we are working on in Geneva.
That is the state of play at the present time.
As the questioner indicates, we should ask whether the restriction associated with the expression 'essentially all products' may be retained for very much longer as soon as we consider granting these countries total access to our markets.
As far as the Community is concerned, following the signature of a new agreement with the ACP countries which no longer includes the obligation to offer equal access for all ACP countries, we could in fact start thinking about more extensive liberalisation of access to our markets in favour of the least developed countries.
I should not, however, wish to start thinking about this until our present initiative regarding essentially all products has reached a sufficiently advanced and credible stage, following talks with our commercial partners, to be able to move on to the next stage.
I should specify, finally, that access to the market is not the only requirement for countries that, occasionally, do not have a sufficient export capacity for internal reasons, be they distribution, logistical or transportation capacities.
It is therefore necessary to look at what is termed 'capacity building' , i.e. technical assistance measures to be implemented in order to ensure that this access is tangible and not just theoretical.
This is the response I wished to give to this question which looks to the future.
I am grateful to Commissioner Lamy for his answer, as far as it went.
I certainly agree with what he said in the last part of his answer about the need for capacity-building in the least developed countries as well as, perhaps the need for asymmetrical measures, resulting in a certain level of protection for their markets that we do not seek to enjoy in return.
But my main concern in asking the question - and I do not feel this has been fully dealt with - is over this matter of exactly what "essential products" means.
Commissioner Lamy talks about certain agricultural products, but it has been precisely the protectionism of the common agricultural policy that has most offended developing countries and which has held back development for many of those countries in terms of agricultural production.
What more specific comments can he make about which sectors and which products will be concerned, and for how long?
That is the sort of message we want to hear.
I wonder whether it would not be a better step forward, in terms both of winning the confidence of the developing countries and of acting as an example to other trading partners, for us, as Europe, to say: "now is the time; we are going to offer this now.
We do not want to wait for five years; let others follow our example".
There are two parts to my answer to this question.
Firstly, I think I gave a clear answer to your question when I said that the difference between 'all' and 'essentially all' affected only a really very limited number of agricultural products.
I am thinking particularly of sugar which can effectively constitute an additional resource for several of these countries.
You know that the Community, and in this case the Commission, has considered the idea of a complete review of conditions in the sugar industry.
These are matters to which we shall no doubt return.
But that is something that only we need concern ourselves with.
Regarding the more comprehensive initiative that we have undertaken, I would like to try to convince you that at this stage it is more important, as far as these least developed countries are concerned, that the Community should persuade the United States, Japan and a number of developed countries to follow our initiative because, in terms of real export capacity, this initiative opens up a market to them which is, roughly, twice or three times larger than our own.
In terms of our priorities, then, Mr Howitt, and in terms of efficiency, I feel that, given the choice of either eliminating the difference between 'essentially all' and 'all' , a problem which I acknowledge must be solved one day, and considerably increasing the size of the market opened for 'essentially all' products, duty free and quota free, we are on the right track if we work, in the first place, on expanding the market.
Thereafter we will be able to start to think, as you wish, on the approach we might adopt with the Member States, who sometimes show some reluctance, and a European Parliament which will also have to be convinced, when the time comes, that we should go on to the second stage.
Question No 45 by (H-0208/00):
Subject: China's accession to the WTO In keeping with the Commission's opinion on the IGC, would the Commission agree that the accession of China to the WTO represents a sufficiently important agreement to justify invoking the assent procedure of this Parliament?
Will the Commission agree to submit the agreement on China's WTO accession to this Parliament's assent even if the IGC has not yet been concluded?
Mr Clegg, the Commission acknowledges that the agreement on China' s accession to the WTO is an extremely important decision.
It is, moreover, exactly the type of agreement which would be submitted to Parliament' s assent if the Commission' s proposals to the Intergovernmental Conference were accepted by the Member States.
The fact remains, however, that at this stage they are no more than proposals and the Commission cannot contravene the regulations in force under the Treaty establishing the Communities, nor can it anticipate the decisions which the Member States will take at the Intergovernmental Conference.
Let me remind Mr Clegg, if necessary, that, in consideration of its service-related aspects, the agreement on China' s accession would in any case be subject, in principle, to the consultation procedure envisaged under Article 300.
This would mean that Parliament should have the opportunity, pursuant to Article 300, to declare its opinion on this agreement.
Obviously, in the normal course of things, it is up to the Council to consult the European Parliament.
This is the legal and institutional answer to your question, Mr Clegg.
With regard to more practical aspects, let me restate my determination to try to find some way, together with the European Parliament, to have Parliament play an active part in these negotiations.
I have said this on several occasions, and I feel it is important in terms of relations between the Commission and Parliament and also in terms of the effectiveness and capacity of the negotiator in this type of case.
I am therefore perfectly willing, as always, to discuss this matter in somewhat greater depth with the relevant parliamentary committee.
Thank you very much for that reply.
Let me reiterate my appreciation that the Commission and Parliament are, for the first time, speaking with one voice on changes to Parliament's role in important trade agreements.
I just want to ask you a non-legal and institutional question: if we look, for instance, at the decision which was taken to submit the Uruguay Round conclusions to the assent of this Parliament, there were some legal questions relating to the institutional and budgetary implications of the Agreement, but the decision was fundamentally a political recognition that this was an agreement of such importance that the strict boundaries of what was then Article 113 could, so to speak, be overstepped, thus allowing the Agreement to be submitted to Parliament's assent.
My own view is that the accession of China to the WTO, whilst perhaps not quite as eye-catching as a multilateral agreement, is just as important to the future global trade regime, and that a similarly political position might therefore be taken by both Parliament and the Commission.
I would urge you to do so.
I would ask you what you think we could do together to promote this type of action.
Like you, Mr Clegg, I believe that China' s accession to the WTO, whenever it takes place, is a matter of crucial importance.
Having said that, I feel that the comparison you make with the Uruguay Round is not totally justified.
At the time of the Uruguay Round, particularly when the mechanism for the settlement of disputes was being set in place, there was a institutional shift in the international legal order which justified assent, specifically with regard to an unequivocal reading of the Treaties.
As regards China, legally speaking this is the procedure for the accession of a country to the WTO, and it is proceeding according to a relatively appropriate and familiar route, one which, for the time being, has not given rise to any disputes.
I suppose, then, that the Council will be reluctant to require assent because the Council is not in the habit of going much further than is required by the Treaties in terms of consultation with Parliament.
The important thing, from our mutual point of view, is that, when the time comes, we can, either in committee or in plenary session, have a debate on the conditions which, I hope, will be those we have agreed with the People' s Republic of China, and that this will be completely transparent.
Personally, I am perfectly willing to take part in this.
I know, when the time comes, that questions of a rather more political nature will be asked.
That is perfectly normal, I feel, and I look forward to it.
Mr President, Commissioner, I suppose our parliamentary members should be satisfied with the consultation procedure at this stage, although I myself agree with Mr Clegg that it should have been possible - to touch briefly on legal matters - to invoke the assent procedure by now.
My question, however, concerns concrete matters and the substance of this agreement.
When talks between the EU and China commenced, we MEPs were told that there would really not be any great problems, as approximately 80% of the EU objectives were contained in the outcome of the negotiations between the United States and China.
Now, however, it would seem that the rest, the remaining 20%, are so problematic, that time is passing by and the talks have already ended in deadlock on many occasions.
I would like to ask whether it is a question of the Chinese not being prepared to accord us the same negotiating status as they did the US representatives or why we should not be able to achieve consensus on the remaining - the tail end - 20%.
This is a good question.
I remember using this expression, contrasting 80% and 20%.
It was intended to offer an explanation of the fact that a good deal of the work has already been done because, thanks to the most favoured nation clause, we inherit everything that the previous negotiator has achieved.
That still leaves 20%, however, and for a very simple reason.
In bilateral negotiations, each party tries to focus on the areas where he is least competitive, since it is understood that the rest will be left to the others.
That is why, in a number of subject areas, the United States have signed a bilateral agreement with the Chinese which is of benefit to us but which, on several points, is not as favourable as if we had negotiated it ourselves.
That is the first reason.
What we have to do as far as possible, and I am making every effort to achieve this, is to ensure that what is generally a good deal between the Americans and the Chinese is also a good deal for Europeans.
So we are left with this remaining 20%, and it is only 20%, but, as you know, in negotiations the last few percentage points make all the difference, and this is where we are now.
There is another, more technical reason, involving some subtle points.
Although the designations are fairly similar, there may be very different tariff items.
Let me take the example of spirits.
Bourbon and gin are not handled in the same way as whisky and cognac.
Even though all spirits are ostensibly the same, there are cases where tariff items are not the same.
These are more technical considerations, but they show that all these aspects must be looked into and negotiated in detail.
It is not quite over yet.
I mentioned that I would be going to Beijing during the last week in March in order to attempt to resolve what I feel are real difficulties in these negotiations.
These concern the political section with regard to which the Chinese authorities have expressed a number of reservations.
My mandate at present is to attempt to overcome these reservations, and I shall make every effort to do so.
Thank you very much, Mr Lamy.
The time allotted to Mr Lamy has fully elapsed.
Question No 46 will therefore be replied to in writing.
Questions to Mr Fischler
Since the author is not present, Question No 47 lapses.
Question No 48 by (H-0173/00):
Subject: Cost to agriculture of EU enlargement On the basis of the most recent studies and estimates, what cost will the forthcoming enlargement of the European Union place on agriculture and what will be the impact thereof?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission is unable to give a concrete answer to Mrs Izquierdo Rojo' s question, at the current stage of negotiations.
To be able to calculate and determine the costs that enlargement will place on the agricultural sector, we would need to have a fairly precise idea of the following: a) when will the various countries join the EU? b) how many countries will join the EU at this time and in what order? c) what conditions will these countries join under?
For example, what transitional arrangements will there be?
Since not one of these three parameters has been established yet, and this is in fact the point of the enlargement negotiations, any estimate would be purely speculative at present, and we do not believe there is any point in that.
Although I have signed this question, as an elected representative, I must say that I am not really its author.
As the Commissioner can imagine, the question is posed by farmers, in the European countryside, who are wondering, at this stage, whether they, their income and their Community aid, will have to pay the price of enlargement.
The Commissioner has not been explicit.
However, his services, the Commission, and some of us MEPs, all know that there are studies and estimates covering this issue.
The Commissioner is, at times, the master of side-stepping the question, with all the skill of a bullfighter, and failing to provide an answer.
However, the Commission, if it wants the countryside to support its positions, must clear the fog, and be explicit.
Therefore, I would ask the Commission, if it does not want to talk of its data and studies - which exist - at least to calm this real fear of the farmers and reply as to whether the cost of enlargement will be met at the expense of the farmers' income and, furthermore, whether he can guarantee that it will not have an effect on Community aid.
Mr President, Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I believe it should not come as news to you that farmers' revenue does not just consist of subsidies, rather they must earn most of it on the market.
Therefore the comparison you have just drawn is inappropriate to my mind.
Secondly, these are two completely different questions.
In your question, which I answered, you asked what enlargement will cost.
The question as to whether the Common Agricultural Policy will be amended in the course of enlargement, is an entirely different matter.
All I can tell you today is that the CAP that was adopted in Berlin for the next seven years, still holds good.
In addition, a financial perspective was adopted in Berlin, i.e. we decided how much money we could spend.
You raised the idea of studies: the first studies were made several years back, and we sent these to Parliament.
We are in the process of carrying out new studies and as soon as we have the results, we will be more than happy to make them available to you.
Question No 49 by (H-0187/00):
Subject: Community initiative LEADER 2000-2006 The Community initiative LEADER was planned as a pilot programme to enable the Commission to introduce innovations in development practices in sensitive agricultural regions.
According to the conclusions of the first two programmes, LEADER has operated differently in each country, depending on the varying extent to which state and regional bodies have been involved.
Since state and local administrations are preparing their proposals for the 2000-2006 period, will the Commission say what has been the take-up rate of the first two programmes by Greece, and how does it rate the success of the two previous LEADER programmes in the case of Greece?
Mr President, the LEADER I programme in Greece, which ran from 1993 to 1996, was fully implemented and the funding earmarked for this - EUR 104 million in total, EUR 52 million of which was contributed by the Community - was paid out in full.
The success rate of LEADER I in Greece also proved satisfactory, in view of the programme' s innovative and even-handed approach.
The LEADER II programme started in 1996 and will run to 2001, if one includes payment of the outstanding amounts.
Up until the end of last year, 1999 that is, the funding for the programme - which totalled EUR 364 million, the Community contribution being EUR 168 million - was completely tied up, but, as one might expect, had not yet been fully paid out.
However, since, as I have already said, the payments can still be made in the year 2000, i.e. this year, and also next year, it will not be possible to gain a full picture of how implementation of LEADER II is going in Greece, and what effects it is having, until the beginning of the year 2002.
Nevertheless, if the information we have received to date is anything to go by, the Commission has no cause to criticise the LEADER programme in Greece.
Question No 50 by (H-0190/00):
Subject: Balance between fisheries agreements in the North and South The Fisheries Council of October 1997 analysed the imbalance between fisheries agreements in the North and South, given that shipowners fishing under agreements with countries of the South are increasingly required to co-finance the agreements, which are free of charge for shipowners in the case of the North.
It also analysed the fact that agreements with northern countries are under-utilised, despite the interest shown by other Member States in making use of these fishing opportunities.
The Council therefore asked the Commission to consider decisions allowing quotas to be transferred from one Member State to another and to examine by what means the financial costs of agreements should be 'equitably shared, on a non-discriminatory basis,' between the Community and shipowners.
Can the Commission say what studies it has carried out on the possibility of transferring quotas and what the outcome was?
What decisions have been taken to balance the financial cost of agreements with the North and South?
What is the Commission's assessment of the above-mentioned imbalances between these two types of agreement?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in principle, the Commission takes the view that the fishing opportunities granted by a third country under the terms of a fisheries agreement should be utilised in full, and that appropriate mechanisms for transferring under-utilised or non-utilised quotas should be established without jeopardising the principle of relative stability.
The Commission would like to point out that the problem of under-utilisation has only arisen in the case of the agreement with Greenland, which is the only agreement to have been concluded in the northern region.
However, Mrs Fraga Estévez is surely aware that quite a number of Member States regard any transfer of quotas whatsoever as an attack on the principle of relative stability.
That is why, despite all our efforts, the legal mechanisms that come under Community law and that make it possible, in principle, for quotas to be transferred in this way, could not be brought into force yet.
Consequently, the Commission takes the view that this tricky issue can only be dealt with as part of a wider and overall examination of the common fisheries policy as a whole.
You will be aware that this examination is to take place during the reform of the common fisheries policy.
When you talk in terms of an imbalance between the agreements with third countries in the northern hemisphere and those in the southern hemisphere, I feel I must make you aware of the following situation: the Community and the Member States do not pay a licence fee in the case of agreements with third countries in the north because said countries do not ask for one, rather these agreements - with the exception of the agreement with Greenland - are reciprocal, in other words, a fish for a fish, and have no effect whatsoever on the Community budget.
Third countries in the Southern Hemisphere, on the other hand, require the Community and shipowners to pay fees.
Incidentally, licence fees of this kind were a feature of the bilateral agreements between Spain and third countries even before Spain joined the Community.
And so you will appreciate that we are not about to volunteer to include licence fees in the agreements with Greenland and other northern States, when our treaty partners do not require us to do so.
Apart from that, other third countries fish in the waters of these northern States and they do not pay licence fees either.
Naturally we would want to avoid our fishermen being treated differently to those from third countries who fish in the same waters, but this is exactly what would happen if we were to volunteer to pay licence fees.
Another difference between the agreements with countries in the north and those with countries in the south is that the Community' s fishing opportunities under the northern agreements are expressed in terms of total catch size.
It works in a different way with the southern agreements.
Under these, our opportunities are expressed directly in terms of the number of fishing vessels or even licences.
Of course this presents an opportunity to include licences for shipowners in the agreements.
And so you will appreciate that there are good reasons as to why we proceed differently with agreements with countries in the north to how we do with agreements with countries in the south.
I have asked a question because I previously consulted a series of decisions taken by the Council of Ministers in 1997 on certain guidelines for fisheries agreements and, as far as I can see, they have not yet been complied with in the European Union.
I do not wish to have an argument with the Commissioner, but I simply wish to know whether, following the guidelines laid down at the time, on the next renewal of the fisheries agreement with Greenland - where we all know that fishing quotas are not used or are under-used - the fleets which do not have access at the moment to this agreement, will be offered the possibility of using those quotas which are not used or which are under-used.
I actually referred to this at the beginning of my answer.
It is certainly a problem, for although the Commission shares your view in principle, Mrs Fraga Estévez, that under-utilised quotas should be transferable, we still lack the necessary arrangements for doing so, because the Member States will not give their consent.
You mentioned the Council.
That is why we must overcome this problem.
But I do not believe that we can solve the problem by paying fees for fishing quotas under a new agreement with Greenland.
That is no way to solve the problem.
We must draw a distinction.
"Yes" to sharing out non-utilised quotas and a mechanism for doing so, but we should not start introducing licence fees where we do not have to pay for the quotas.
There is little point in doing that in our view.
Question No 51 by (H-0195/00):
Subject: Compatibility of special export aid with Community law Following the devastation caused by the storm which struck western Europe in December 1999, the forestry sector is in a particularly serious plight.
In response to the urgent need for stocks of fallen timber to be disposed of, the French Government has, amongst other measures, decided to grant 50 French francs per tonne in order to subsidise the transportation of timber intended for export to other EU Member States.
Under the Community's competition rules (and, in particular, the Community preference requirement), such aid is rightly prohibited except when it is intended to remedy a situation which may be regarded as exceptional.
Hence, Article 92(2)(b) of the EC Treaty states that 'aid to make good the damage caused by natural disasters or exceptional occurrences' shall be compatible with the common market.
Is the export aid which has been made available by the French Government compatible with Article 92?
If so, could such aid be extended to cover timber exports to third countries?
If so, what are the criteria used by the Commission in order to determine the amount of timber eligible for such aid?
For how long will the aid be available and what is the cost involved?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, a few days ago, the Commission had dealings with the French Government over the state aid that France wishes to grant the forestry industry for the purpose of repairing the tremendous damage caused by the storms of December last year.
The notification from the French Government includes a measure intended to facilitate the transportation of wood from the affected regions.
However, the notifications make no reference whatsoever to where the wood is destined for, in particular, they do not indicate whether it is to be exported to other Member States or to third countries.
Understandably, therefore, the Commission has asked the French Government for additional information.
Since the Commission has not yet received all the additional information it requested, it is not in a position at this stage to give a definite answer to the question as to whether such measures are compatible with Community law.
I should like to ask the Commissioner to clarify his answer.
Obviously such aid is already officially provided for in the countries of the Community.
Instead, the question concerns countries outside the territory of the Community, and may be expressed thus: will we, or will we not, have the possibility of obtaining a derogation in terms of the tonnage, costs or time limits with regard to wood exports, in consideration of the quite exceptional nature of this storm?
My question clearly concerned exports outside the common market, outside the Union.
So as to make it absolutely clear: wood is an industrial commodity under Community law and it stands to reason that export aid, of the kind for which provision is made in agriculture, for example, should not be permitted under any circumstances where the export of wood is concerned.
We can only apply existing Community law in such cases.
Provision is made, under Article 87 of this Community law, for damage - and I repeat, damage - which is the direct consequence of a disaster, to be made good.
In other words, firstly there has to be evidence of damage, and secondly, a direct link has to be established.
You must also consider the following: if we were to entertain such an idea - after all, the price of wood is not just down in the French forestry industry, for the disaster has brought it down throughout the Community - then every other Member State would be within their rights to come and ask us to approve export aid.
This would be a clear distortion of the market.
Question No 52 by (H-0202/00):
Subject: Preventive distillation - increasing the quotas The Commission has opened preventive distillation at 10 million hectolitres for the 1999/2000 wine year.
The notification periods have been extended.
According to available information, the quotas in some Member States have already been exceeded.
Does the Commission feel able to increase the preventive distillation volume from 10 to 15 million hectolitres and to comply with special requests from certain Member States (e.g. Germany) for a higher volume?
Yes, Mr President, the Commission received the communications from the Member States with the applications for preventive distillation, on 24 February.
On the same day, a proposal was submitted to the administrative committee for wine marketing to the effect that the preventive distillation volume should be increased from 10 to 12 million hectolitres.
In fact this proposal met with the approval of a majority of the management committee.
That being the case, it will be possible to fulfil all the contracts concluded in the Member States.
The only exception in this respect is Spain, where, in view of the high number of applications, the take-up rate, if I can put it this way, was 98% rather than 100%.
This meant that Germany' s original allocation of 148 000 hectolitres could be increased to 468 000 hectolitres.
That is what the contracts concluded in Germany amounted to in total.
The amended regulation on preventive distillation will be published in the Official Journal in the near future and will be made retrospective to 24 February.
Commissioner, in view of the enormous wine harvest, which yielded 140 million hectolitres, and in view of the wine market regulations that are to enter into force this year, has the Commission had any more thoughts - this being the last year when we will have this option - about using obligatory distillation as a means of relieving pressure on the market, or does the Commission not take the view that this would be the subject of a further instrument?
Mr President, Mr Langen, firstly, if we can give consideration to all the applications submitted by Germany and nearly all the applications submitted by the other Member States regardless, then this would suggest to me to that the balance has largely been restored to the wine market.
I take the view - particularly in the light of the fact that we want to achieve a significant reduction in obligatory distillation - that we should not create the impression that we are now back-pedalling.
Thank you very much, Mr Fischler.
Questions Nos 53 to 60 will be replied to in writing.
Questions to Mrs de Palacio
Question No 61 by (H-0156/00):
Subject: Reopening of the railway line between Oloron and Canfranc The Commission has told the Spanish press (9 February 2000, EFE press agency) that it is aware of the need for a railway in the Pyrenees and that the Spanish Government wishes to see the Oloron-Canfranc (Vallée d'Aspe) railway line reopened on the French side.
The Commission has also confirmed that if the two countries in question agree, it will support the inclusion of the line in the trans-European rail network when the guidelines for that network are next revised.
However, should the Commission not take the first step and encourage the two Member States concerned to apply the policy of shifting traffic from road to rail and persuade them to seek an agreement on the reopening of the line?
What immediate action does the Commission intend to take in order to expedite such an agreement?
With regard to your question on the reopening of the railway line between Oloron and Canfranc, we must study the land-based and sea-based alternatives which may help to alleviate the situation of traffic congestion at the two eastern and western extremes of the Pyrenees.
In fact, these two extremes of the Pyrenees are suffering from saturation since they are the only real land links of any capacity between the Iberian Peninsula and the rest of the European continent.
We in the Commission have expressed our support for the analysis of a new rail crossing in the central part of the Pyrenees and we have supported various initiatives in the region through the granting of subsidies for different studies analysing the possibilities.
Furthermore, as you know very well, Spain and France have set up a monitoring centre for traffic in the Pyrenees in order to seek the most suitable solution to the problem facing them.
In any event, the final decision in this respect is the responsibility of the Member States.
With regard to the Trans-European Networks we cannot include anything which is not supported by the Member States.
Meanwhile, I would like to tell you that the Commission will take account of the results of the work of the monitoring centre for traffic in the Pyrenees when reviewing the Trans-European Network and we hope that this review will be ready before August.
Thank you, Commissioner, but what I would have liked to know is what the Commission is actually doing to ensure, specifically, that the Member States construct a proper railroad in the Somport Valley.
Today, the works on the road route are already under way.
We are right, therefore, to ask questions about the future.
Personally, I am afraid that provision will be made for a little tourist train just to, perhaps, keep the ecologists happy, and that will be all.
Studies have been carried out, however, such as the Gretab study, to cite but one, which show that in fact the railroad route via the Somport-Pau-Canfranc-Jaca pass would enable a volume of heavy goods traffic equal to that currently using the Mont Blanc Tunnel.
What we would in fact like to see, therefore, and what I would have liked to know, following Mr Lamoureux' s proposals within the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, to the effect that the European Union was really going to prioritise rail, is what do you actually propose to do in real terms in order to ensure that Member States also make this a priority?
Mrs Isler Béguin, I would like to say that we are trying to convince the Member States on the basis of the conversations and opinions which they express to us on the different issues and the studies which they send us.
However, as you well know, we clearly have problems with one of the countries involved with regard to the railway between Oloron and Canfranc.
There is no doubt that crossing the great mountain ranges of the European Union is a problem.
For this reason, in 1999, the Commission subsidised a study observing the flow of through land goods and interchanges in sensitive areas, namely the Pyrenees and the Alps, because they have similar problems.
Furthermore, we intend to produce a communication on this subject - on the Pyrenees and the Alps - before the end of the year, proposing concrete solutions.
However, the concrete solutions must clearly be accepted by the Member States.
The conclusions of this study that we are carrying out will also be taken into account in the revision of the guidelines on the Trans-European Networks and, furthermore, the INTERREG II programme has also financed general studies on the suitability and viability of a future central crossing in the Pyrenees, adapted to heavy goods transport.
Having said all this, and as I have made very clear in some of my appearances, I believe that we must make an enormous effort to develop goods transport by rail.
We face a level of demand which is clearly not going to be resolved by means of an increase in roads and we need to study a better use of the rail infrastructures, which is an alternative which is not only much more appropriate from an environmental point of view, but furthermore, they are an alternative which allow us to use some existing infrastructures.
In other cases, such as the specific case we are talking about, we must put the infrastructures in order, but of course we are prepared to speak to the Member States - and we are doing so - to see if we can persuade the two countries involved to finally accept a project of this type which will allow for a central crossing in the Pyrenees.
Madam Vice-President of the Commission, I would like to know firstly whether it is true that one country is causing difficulties, secondly, which country this is and thirdly, what type of difficulty it is causing.
I would also like to know, since you have mentioned it, when the Commission communication on the report on the Alps and the Pyrenees will be made available?
Since you have asked, the state which has opposed it until now is France.
It is clearly the countries of the Iberian peninsular which have the greatest interest here.
This does not only affect Spain, as the bordering country, but it also affects road traffic to Portugal, given that the Pyrenees pose such an obstacle.
The communication on sensitive areas basically tackles the issue of how to combine two elements: the environmental demands of the Pyrenees and the Alps and the need to facilitate the movement of goods and people.
As I have already said, we intend to present the communication before the end of the year, and we also intend to analyse, not only the particular issues affecting the sensitive areas, but also the possible concrete solutions in the field of more suitable infrastructures, funding, use and safety.
Safety aspects are also important, given the use of extensive tunnels.
Question No 62 by (H-0163/00):
Subject: Blood/alcohol limits for drivers Since 1988, the Commission has been advocating Community legislation concerning maximum blood alcohol limits for drivers.
In 1997, the Commission stated that it was necessary, to reduce the number of road casualties and increase road safety.
At present, the limits vary widely within Europe, from 0.8 in some countries down to 0.2 in Sweden.
Sweden' s experience has been very encouraging; a low limit has increased road safety.
The EU is at present adopting legislation to promote mobility and road safety.
Why is the Commission reluctant to submit a proposal concerning maximum blood/alcohol limits for drivers, even though this would reduce the number of road deaths?
As everyone knows, the excessive consumption of alcohol is the cause of many of our road accidents.
The European Union has supported, and the Commission considers important, a limitation on general levels of alcohol in the blood, specifically to guarantee that appropriate limits are not exceeded.
The Commission considers the suitable limit to be, in general, around 0.5 mg per mille, which in certain cases, new drivers, for example, could possibly be reduced, at least for a specific time period, and thereby make it even more restrictive.
I must point out however that, although the Commission intends to express this type of guideline, it will do so by means of a recommendation.
Given the principle of subsidiarity, we do not consider it appropriate for us to propose a directive setting this limit on alcohol levels, but rather we should produce a recommendation to the Member States on this issue.
Alcohol constitutes the second greatest danger to health in the EU according to a report on health produced by a high-level working party.
Alcohol is also the greatest contributory cause of accidents on European roads and a very important contributory cause of the most serious accidents.
I find it extremely commendable that the Commission too considers that blood alcohol levels must be kept low among drivers, for safety and alcohol do not go together.
We know from the experience of countries which have low upper limits that this is a way of reducing the number of deaths and serious accidents.
I should also like to put a following question to the Commissioner.
Why should it be impossible to issue a directive covering this area when the majority of countries now have an upper limit of 0.5 per mille and only a few have a limit in excess of 0.5 per mille?
As you have pointed out very well, the number of deaths on European roads caused by excessive alcohol consumption has risen to 10 000.
Most countries apply a level of 0.5 mg.
The 0.8 mg limit is only in force in Ireland, Luxembourg, Italy and the United Kingdom, and only Sweden has a limit below 0.5 mg.
We are going to present a communication on road safety, which you in this Parliament will receive shortly, and recommend a maximum limit of 0.5 mg.
We consider that legislation should be reserved for cases where it is absolutely necessary to legislate.
Since there are very few states with a limit greater than 0.5 mg, we consider that his recommendation will be sufficient to persuade the relevant states to harmonise their own laws.
We believe that subsidiarity and the recommendation will be sufficient for the alcohol level in the various states to be set at 0.5 mg or less than 0.5 mg.
As we are talking about blood-alcohol levels I wonder if the Commissioner, in her recommendation is also going to be looking at the broader issue of drugs?
This is an important issue that is often left out when we are talking about driving.
Will this ever be put into the recommendation?
The problem is obviously that drugs produce states which clearly limit drivers' response capacities.
The problem with drugs is that, while in some countries their consumption is subject to criminal prosecution, in others it is not and, therefore, given this differing treatment, we cannot, at least for the moment, make any progress in this field.
However, this issue worries me, as it worries you, and I would like to see whether, within the new fields of action and specifically within the new areas of communitised policies, we can make more progress in this respect.
Lastly, I must add that, in the case of drugs, control is more difficult, since the control systems are not so automatic nor so immediate as they are in the case of alcohol levels.
Question No 63 by (H-0164/00):
Subject: Verona-Munich railway link The project for a new Verona-Munich through railway line has been under discussion for years.
Traffic on the Verona-Munich route is increasing, yet only one third of the capacity of the existing railway line is being used.
The way to reduce the air and noise pollution caused by long-distance lorries would be to switch all heavy through traffic from road to rail.
To achieve this, motorway tolls for goods vehicles must be increased and a fast and efficient railway line must be provided.
If a new line is built, care must be taken to select the option that has the least damaging impact on the environment.
As the infrastructure is supposed to last for hundreds of years, it is essential to find the best solution.
It appears that the Commission favours the Brenner base tunnel project.
Why does the Commission not intend to reconsider the alternative ATT3 project put forward by the engineers Trojer and Kauer?
Has the Commission studied the potential environmental impact of the various projects for a Verona-Munich rail link?
Can the Commission finance a further study of the question of the transport of goods via the Brenner?
The project for a railway line between Munich and Verona, agreed by the Italian, Austrian and German Governments in 1994, is included in the Trans-European Transport Network and foresees the construction of a high speed network with combined goods transport.
In principle, it largely follows the route of the current conventional line.
The proposal of the ATT 3 project, which is well known to the Commission, deviates from the route established in the guidelines of the Trans-European Network.
I must say that the preparatory and construction measures have always been based on the agreed lines, and that to deviate from that initial approach would cause a significant delay in the development of the project itself.
As well as the ATT 3 proposal, which is of interest to the honourable Member, the Commission has received another series of alternative proposals and considers, based on technical, economic and environmental evaluations by the Member States involved, that the so-called base tunnel, work on which is under way, offers a series of advantages when compared to other alternative routes.
I must also say that a significant proportion of the economic aid already granted is directly related to the environmental aspects of the project, and that we are going to continue to support the Brenner project economically and especially the technical design of the section of the base tunnel which is about to be started.
Obviously, in any of these activities, the environmental impact, bearing in mind that this is a sensitive area, as I pointed out a moment ago when speaking of the Pyrenees problem, is one of the key elements in determining the specific project and in monitoring the carrying out of that project.
Mr President, one thing I would just ask you to bear in mind about this, is that owing to the noise pollution, a high-speed train has quite an impact along those stretches of the track that do not run under the mountain of course, and I would ask the Commissioner to consider this: why should it not be possible to make the breakthrough we need, and which will solve the problem between Munich and Verona in the long-term, with something along the lines of the Brenner base tunnel?
After all, it would not be too difficult to transfer all the through heavy goods traffic to rail and bring it through the mountain, thereby solving the problem once and for all.
All we need is a ban on transiting heavy goods traffic.
This would relieve pressure on the Brenner motorway, which is under great strain and also causing a few problems of a socio-political nature, and would also free it up for private vehicles and local heavy goods traffic.
Amongst other things, in order to ban heavy transport, the first thing we need is an alternative route for heavy transport.
The truth is that there is currently no such alternative.
Therefore, the first thing we have to do is suitably develop the corresponding routes.
Of course, all of this is linked to our society and its development.
However, I believe that we cannot limit that development; which does not mean that we do not have to make every possible effort to ensure that this development respects the environment as far as possible, with the least possible effect on that environment, especially in sensitive areas such as the Alps and the Pyrenees.
Mr President, I would expressly like to thank the Commissioner for the great sensitivity she has shown so far in her handling of the Brenner traffic and Brenner base tunnel issues, and I particularly appreciate the fact that mention has repeatedly been made of the need to give special consideration to the environmental implications.
I would point out that the alternative project ATT3 - and I would like to thank Commissioner Kinnock and the chairman, Mr Coleman, for their efforts here - has been examined closely and in great detail by the Commission over the past two years, and I have also received a written report on this.
I would just like to add that the question from Mr Messner goes like this: "in the event that a new installation is to be built, the project that is the most and least environmentally friendly is to be examined" .
It is completely beyond me as to why anyone should ask the Commission to make sure that something is as harmful to the environment as it possibly could be.
This is all about people living in a sensitive area who must be protected.
The fact that this request came from the Greens makes it all the more baffling, and it should be thrown out for this reason.
The Brenner project is one of 14 projects involving trans-European transport connections and, of course, the Commission will continue to support this project, although, at the end of the day, it is the Member States which must develop it.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed, Questions Nos 64 to 114 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes Questions to the Commission.
(The sitting was suspended at 7.25 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)
Eco-label
The next item is the recommendation for second reading on behalf of the Committee on Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on a revised Community eco-label award scheme (C5-0223/1999 - 1996/0312(COD)).
Mr President, as you just said, this is the second reading for the directive on the awarding of the eco-label.
The European eco-label is, it has to be said, a product of the internal market.
Its function, partly in response to the increasing flow of products across borders, is to label products and services which have a high level of environmental compatibility.
Its function, on the one hand, is to provide information to consumers from one country to the next and, on the other, to increase awareness within industry and among citizens to recognise and promote environmental issues.
And this is of major importance when it comes to the daily shopping trip.
I am of the opinion that the meaningfulness of a European label which is tailored to the European internal market is beyond dispute.
However, it is often a long road from the conception of a good idea to its practical implementation.
This is precisely the case with the eco-label whose main claim to fame at present is, unfortunately, its virtual anonymity in most States.
I think that only a very small minority of citizens have ever actually seen it and for this reason my report has paid greatest attention to the wholly inadequate preparations for the label.
What are the weaknesses in the current eco-label regulation which have given rise to today' s unsatisfactory situation?
I think that a key problem lies in the cost structure of the label.
The test procedures which companies and their products must go through in order to obtain the label are long and costly.
We are therefore advocating that the stipulation of testing requirements should look to keep test costs to an absolute minimum, although this must obviously not be misinterpreted as a qualitative watering down of testing requirements.
As well as the cost of test procedures, the on-going fees which must be paid to the European eco-label system are also highly significant.
Here, too, we envisage a reduction in costs for SMEs, firms in developing countries and enterprises involved in other aspects of European or international environmental legislation.
In this regard, I should cite, for example, EMAS and ISO 14001.
In addition to a reduction in costs for certain enterprises, the report also envisages a maximum fee.
In this we are following the example of almost all the national labelling systems, which also have this ceiling.
The purpose of this approach is to make the labelling system equally attractive to large consumer goods manufacturers and service providers.
Let me make something perfectly clear at this point: this is not a present to the large multinationals, as is being mooted in some quarters, but an important step towards the label exerting a wide influence in the long term.
We must also clearly understand that without a certain amount of financial impetus for the European label we will not make any headway.
In my opinion, we should take on the responsibility for this financing.
Another important point in this second reading is the regulation of the relationship between the national eco-label and the European equivalent.
At first reading we were still advocating the gradual abolition of national labels in favour of the European eco-label; it is not without good reason that we have abandoned this position.
In some States national labels are well established and enjoy public recognition.
This is the case, for example, as regards the Nordic Swan in Scandinavia and the Blue Angel in Germany.
In my estimation it would be nonsensical and contrary to the spirit of subsidiarity to abolish these proven labels in favour of an as yet unestablished European label.
Our approach should be different.
We must ensure that the co-existence of national and European labels is coordinated and in this regard the working plan provided for in the common position, which we have supplemented in various respects, but which I think will meet with approval, is extremely important.
The eco-label regulation treads the fine line between economic and ecological interests, one group wanting above all to enforce stringent environmental requirements, the other with an eye on the marketing aspect of the label.
Both groups, however, have one thing in common: they want the eco-label to succeed.
I believe that the regulation which we are considering today has found a solid compromise between the interests of all the groups involved and I am convinced that the constructive proposals of our House will also be acceptable to the Council and make for a highly successful European eco-label.
Mr President, Commissioner, a speaker in this House yesterday expressed the view that economic globalisation is not an incontrovertible necessity but the evil outworking of a few multinationals.
Whilst I found this observation quite persuasive, it is, of course, dangerous and misleading because nothing which we are currently doing in Europe in terms of the economy or the environment can be seen in isolation from potential global developments.
And it goes without saying that this also applies to the awarding of an environmental label in the European Union.
Take the failed WTO negotiations in Seattle, which have opened our eyes as to the difficulty Europe faces in making itself heard by third countries when it comes to its progressive social and environmental standards.
If we re-commit today to awarding a European environmental label, we must also consider that this will send a clear signal to third countries that it will be present on our products in developing countries and, of course, that others can and will follow suit.
The environmental label must and will signal to third countries a whole range of important environmental concepts: that adverse effects on the environment can be reduced in the manufacture of certain product groups; that common goals for environmentally friendly consumption should be promoted; and that the relevant international standards must be observed.
Economic globalisation has already made it possible for developing countries to share in the prosperity of rich countries and will continue to do so in the future.
However, one thing must be made clear from the outset, and the common position before us does just that: the same rules must apply for all states.
If the production plants in a country are required to meet the criteria for the environmental label, then this applies to all the production plants where the product in question is manufactured.
If we can achieve this, then we will have globalised an important environmental principle.
Mr President, we have not yet given up on the goal of a common European label, at least that is my interpretation of the common position.
The eco-label may have suffered thus far from a lack of acceptance, but a working plan which allows for coordination with the national labels can only increase acceptance.
Our proposal in committee to automatically award the eco-label to products and services which already carry national labels and which satisfy the requirements of the European label did not, unfortunately, achieve a majority.
It would have afforded the opportunity to disseminate the European label even more quickly and effectively.
An important issue is the involvement of non-governmental organisations and associations.
It is essential that expert opinion and protection of consumer interests have some influence on the awarding process.
This can only benefit the status and merit of what the label stands for in terms of ecology and the consumer.
The aim of our amendments is to increase the participation of associations.
There is much to be said on the question of fees.
We need to introduce a system which covers the costs and it is therefore not right at this stage to fix maximum fees, which would seem premature until such time as we know the actual costs involved.
In this regard I would disagree with Mr Schnellhardt because it seems to me that even though the well-known national labels do give rise to costs, suppliers are still happy to acquire them.
It is right, however, that there should be a cost reduction for SMEs and for products from developing countries.
Overall, we must succeed in establishing the European label in Member States which do not have their own label.
If the common label has a function at present, it is that of filling the environmental label gaps in Europe.
The path which we are taking is the correct one, but a recognised common European label is not yet in sight and a major effort is required in this area.
Mr President, the present proposal reinforces, improves upon and tightens up on the voluntary eco-labelling system which has existed in the EU since 1992 and which has not, unfortunately, been as successful as had been hoped.
We know from the Nordic Swan and the German Blue Angel that the eco-labelling of products is an extremely significant and powerful tool for getting consumers to change their purchasing behaviour and to shop in an environmentally friendly way.
That is, of course, what we all want, namely to be able to shop in an environmentally friendly way and so influence producers and the development of society in ways which favour ecologically more sustainable products and services.
I think that the Council' s position is fairly commendable, and I am also satisfied with the amendments from the committee and from Mr Schnellhardt.
I consider, however, that the proposal needs to be reinforced in certain ways, above all when it comes to the role played by consumer and environmental groups and the co-existence of different eco-labelling systems.
Those who argue the case for having only the one eco-labelling system are making a big mistake, I believe.
I am totally convinced that, wherever there are well-functioning eco-labelling systems, it will be possible also to introduce the EU flower that much more easily and more quickly.
It is about getting the consumer to look for and to choose eco-labelled products.
Once purchasing behaviour has been altered, it is extremely simple.
The key to success lies, to a very large degree, in the credibility of the environmental and consumer groups and in the good opinion in which these are held.
If these groups are involved in the right way, eco-labelling will also develop very much more quickly.
If you would allow me to make a point of order...
Mr President, the proposal we are now debating for a revised Community programme for awarding the eco-label has been significantly amended since the Commission' s original proposal.
It has also been altered a great deal since its first reading by the European Parliament.
Happily, all these changes are, on the whole, improvements.
Those of us in the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left believe that we have obtained a relatively good hearing for the views we already held at the first reading.
For us, the following principles were important when we assessed the proposal in the course of the journey.
First of all, this common eco-label should not replace or get in the way of national eco-labels which are, in fact, at present functioning significantly better than the EU flower symbol when one considers both the number of labelled products and the extent to which consumers are familiar with the various labels.
It is therefore especially important that the idea of prohibiting national eco-labels has been abandoned.
I also believe it is important to realise that there is nothing to prevent the existence of parallel eco-labels.
In Scandinavia, which perhaps has what is at present the most efficient eco-labelling system, there are now already a number of eco-labels complementing, and operating fairly well alongside, each other.
Secondly, we want the environmental movement to have a decisive influence over both the awarding of labels and the criteria for receiving them.
Our experience shows that the labels would, in that way, be given greater credibility.
Moreover, this system functions excellently where it has been introduced.
We are therefore especially pleased that the idea of a more commercial form of organisation has been abandoned.
I also think it is good that the idea of a graded eco-label has been done away with.
It is easier just to have the picture of a flower.
A graded system, like the one that existed originally, would probably cause more hassle than it would be worth in terms of additional information provided.
We are also pleased that the proposal is to cover the service sector, too.
All in all, we think that the common position and the amendments which have been submitted, including the amendments from the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, make this into quite a good report.
Mr President, whilst recently at my sister-in-law's house, I noticed that she had a container of "eco-friendly" washing-up liquid.
When I congratulated her on this, she looked rather guilty and admitted that the green bottle now contained normal detergent, as the alternative product was not only more expensive but needed four times as much and even then it did not get the dishes clean; by refilling the container, she could both do the washing up effectively and impress eco-warrior friends.
The moral of this story is, of course, that to compete in the mainstream market, eco-products must give a performance close to their alternatives.
Only then can these products move out of the niche market they already have and into the mainstream.
The eco-label should not be associated with mediocrity.
The German Blue Angel and the Nordic Swan have led the way in eco-labelling.
To scrap these successful schemes now would be to throw away the baby with the bath water.
In the long term, I can see the merits of the single European eco-label, but this must not be imposed on those with existing schemes.
A single scheme has advantages for business: for example, only one registration fee and inspection, standardised packaging, and advantages for consumers who will not be confused by a plethora of labels.
Eco-labelling is moving on from forest products and detergents to computers and household appliances, but why stop there?
Services such as tourism and clean taxes could register.
In addition, groups of similar small business could possibly cooperate and register together.
In the United Kingdom, we have a flourishing ethical financial services sector, offering savings and pensions which invest from a green perspective.
These should not only qualify for an eco-label, but be allowed to sell their products without hindrance throughout the EU in a single financial services market.
Mr President, first of all, I wish, of course, to thank the European Parliament' s Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, in particular the two rapporteurs, Mr Schnellhardt and Mr Poggiolini, for the very constructive work which has been carried out in reviewing the regulation on eco-labelling.
The proposal for a revised Community programme for awarding the eco-label is mainly aimed at making the programme more effective and more open and at improving the methods used.
It ought to make the programme more attractive to manufacturers, distributors and consumers.
In particular, the proposal accords greater responsibility to the bodies responsible for eco-labelling and to various interest groups when it comes to establishing ecological criteria.
The Commission considers that these objectives will be fulfilled thanks to cooperation with, and interest on the part of, the European Parliament and the Council.
I believe that the relationship between the Community' s eco-labelling programme and the national eco-labelling programmes is better and more clearly defined in the current proposal.
The proposal also reinforces the interested parties' role and participation.
This applies, in particular, to various interest groups and to the environmental bodies dedicated to eco-labelling.
Their participation is crucial if the present voluntary instrument is to be favoured and made more widely available in the correct way.
It is one of the few European instruments which will, in fact, be able to play a key role in supporting sustainable consumption.
With regard to the amendments tabled by the European Parliament, the Commission considers that these have helped improve the exposition of the regulation.
With regard to Amendments Nos 1, 4 and 8, which propose active participation on the part of environmental and consumer organisations, the Commission shares the view that their support and participation is crucial if eco-labelling is to be balanced and credible.
We are therefore able to accept these amendments.
With regard to Amendments Nos 2, 3 and 7, which relate to certain aspects of cooperation and coordination with national eco-labelling programmes, the Commission is convinced that common supporting activities are important, particularly with a view to making the Community' s eco-labelling better known.
We are therefore able to approve these amendments, too.
Amendment No 5 proposes four ways of making the fee structure more flexible and easier for those who apply to be accepted.
The Commission supports this overarching objective.
After all, eco-labelling is, of course, voluntary, and the fees ought not to be so high that those who make the most effort in the interests of the environment are prevented from applying for the eco-label.
Amendment No 6 concerns fee reductions for small and medium-sized companies, as well as developing countries, and emphasises that these should be appreciable.
The Commission is able to support this amendment, too.
To summarise, the Commission is therefore able to approve all the amendments.
Mr President, I wanted earlier on, as I concluded my previous speech, to make a point of order to which I should like to alert the President and the Bureau.
Before the vote tomorrow, it needs to be made clear that certain amendments to the present report have not been translated.
They are only to be found in English.
This applies, for example, to Amendments 7 and 8.
These are only available in English, which is totally unacceptable.
If we are to be able to vote on this report, these amendments need at least to be read out before they are voted on.
That was the first point.
The second concerns, for example, the work programme for environmental strategy...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Thank you very much for pointing out the position regarding amendments.
The services are looking at this and I hope that they will be ready in time for tomorrow.
We cannot allow the debate to continue because we are running out of time.
Thank you, Commissioner, for your contribution.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Incineration of waste
The next item is the recommendation for a second reading on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the incineration of waste (C5-0274/1999 - 1998/0289(COD)).
On Amendments Nos 36 and 37, which have been distributed, I am shown as the joint mover of the motion.
I discovered this yesterday evening and notified DG1 of the fact this morning.
DG1 acknowledged that a mistake had been made by the translation service.
I then asked for this to be corrected.
DG1 refused, saying that they did not have the time.
I should like to say that I think this is completely unacceptable.
They have had more than 12 hours in which to correct the amendments concerned.
I feel very put out that these have been made publicly available with wrong information about who the movers of the motion are.
It is a question, then, of Amendments Nos 36 and 37, of which I am not the joint mover of the motion.
Thank you very much for pointing that out.
We will try and make sure it is corrected by tomorrow.
Mr President, Commissioner, first of all, I would like to thank the Members for their fruitful cooperation.
As a result of this, we have been able to table various amendments in a joint effort and reach agreement on a number of issues.
This is illustrated by the compromise we reached on the scope of the directive.
I would also like to thank the European Commission for providing the information and technical advice, which was extremely helpful.
In a civilised society, it is to be expected that waste should be processed in an effective and environmentally responsible manner.
In the European Community, this will increasingly be done by incinerating waste and recycling energy.
This process will obviously need to be closely monitored for emissions of dangerous substances.
Once we have reached a point where, in order to counter the adverse effects on the environment, dangerous and organic waste, in particular, is no longer dumped, incineration should then inevitably deliver environmental benefits.
By tightening up emission standards, a balance was struck at first reading between what is viable over a period of about five to seven years and what is necessary from an environmental point of view.
The emission values currently proposed by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection are a reasonable compromise.
It should, however, be noted that stricter requirements are already in place in a number of Member States.
It is one thing to prescribe sound environmental standards but quite another to comply with these.
Compliance requires adequate control which, in turn, requires proper monitoring.
Just imagine a situation in which we laid down excellent standards for emissions of dangerous substances such as dioxins but, on the other hand, left the way open for exemptions from all kinds of monitoring obligations.
We would then run the risk of not, on balance, making any progress, and the quality of air would not improve.
In addition, we also need to avoid a situation where it becomes clear there are long-term health risks for a reason which may not be immediately obvious, namely that the emission of harmful substances is not measured.
We cannot justify the occurrence of illnesses, such as cancer or blood diseases, which we have not prevented because there was no obligation to measure the emission of harmful substances by incineration plants.
Mr Florenz was among those who were right to point out that clear measuring regulations are vital.
I expect, therefore, that we will be joining forces in order to put a sound monitoring process in place.
As far as the scope of the directive is concerned, I am pleased to say that, thanks to good mutual cooperation, we have reached an acceptable wording.
However, we need to bear in mind that, with this draft, we have deviated a long way from the first reading, in view of the fact that only untreated timber was then regarded as an acceptable exception.
Regarding the definition of coincineration plant, it is unfortunate that we were unable to reach agreement on this beforehand.
After many discussions involving various Members and the European Commission, a simple solution, which may well be acceptable, has been found in the form of Amendment No 43.
If waste were used as a replacement raw material, such as in the recycling of glass, the relevant process would fall outside the scope of the directive.
If, on the other hand, only part of the waste were to be used as a replacement raw material, then this process would fall within the directive' s scope.
As for the recycling of energy, I would like to point out that, in November of last year, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the integration of environmental concerns into energy policy, in which it was requested that special attention be given to the application and development of the best methods for energy recycling.
Consequently, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has made a recommendation that energy recycling by means of combined electricity/heat production should also apply to the incineration of waste.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has asked for ammonia levels to be measured.
It is wrong, however, that the standards for ammonia should not apply to all installations.
Accordingly, I have, for reasons of consistency, proposed an ammonia standard for cement kilns and for ordinary waste incinerators.
As far as the continuous sampling of dioxins is concerned, this appears to be quite feasible.
Belgium has started to use such a measuring technique in the wake of its dioxin crisis.
A cumulative sample is taken for a one-month period.
After this period, this sample is measured and the result gives a good indication of the levels of dioxin emitted during that month.
Needless to say, this is a more effective monitoring method than the random measurement method used twice a year.
According to experts, the costs are not higher since the measurement of cumulative samples is far cheaper.
As such, the cost of the equipment for continuous sampling is recouped within the space of a few years.
At first reading, considerable improvements were made to the Commission proposal thanks to a great deal of support.
It was at that stage that expectations were raised amongst the citizens.
I strongly urge MEPs to meet these expectations.
A consistent approach taken by the European Parliament will benefit our credibility amongst the citizens, especially those citizens living in the vicinity of plants which incinerate or co-incinerate waste.
Mr President, Commissioner, we feel that this directive is far from satisfactory because it involves a combination of two texts, one on the incineration of dangerous waste and the other on the incineration of non-dangerous waste.
This raises problems for us at several phases of the incineration process: the reception, processing and handling of the waste.
One might well ask what was the point of combining these two matters.
We can find the answer in Mr Blokland' s report, which is violently opposed to the coincineration industry.
Paradoxically, however, by the same token, the rapporteur is in favour of mixing dangerous and non-dangerous waste.
What is the advantage of this for the environment?
Our Group has no wish to favour either type of industry, since both are extremely useful to waste management in Europe.
The practices of each Member State must be taken into consideration, while maintaining the existing industrial balance and investigating how the environment can be better protected.
This is what the common position proposes.
Priority must be given to the emission limits for the most harmful substances, i.e. NOx, dioxins and furanes.
Moreover, the common position suggests an NOx limit value for the incineration of dangerous waste for the year 2007.
Such a thing does not yet currently exist.
As regards dioxins and furanes, the limit values have now been made mandatory for all types of waste.
Until now, they applied only to non-dangerous waste.
It is therefore unfortunate that the Blokland report is putting unrealistic solutions forward when it is known that a good many directives on waste management are not yet applied or are not properly applied by Member States.
If one wishes to go too far, one becomes counter-productive.
It is completely unrealistic to wish to review the limit values of this directive every three years, if one considers the considerable investment that the industry would have to make.
What the industry needs is legal certainty and reasonable time periods.
The real problem is that in Europe we do not have a proper definition of what waste is, resulting in ongoing confusion when we have to revise a text on waste or to present new proposals.
Commissioner, waste management in Europe must undergo complete reform as a matter of urgency.
Mr President, I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Blokland on this report.
We know that waste incineration is a very difficult and highly technical area, but I think that a creditable piece of work has been done in connection with this report.
Unlike Mrs Grossetête, I think that the common position and Mr Blokland' s report will, as a matter of fact, make a significant environmental contribution in connection with waste incineration, whether we are talking about hazardous or non-hazardous waste.
I believe that we are, in this way, obtaining a good tool for preventing and limiting environmental damage in connection with waste incineration and for preventing and limiting the associated risks to human health.
Moreover, there are also some good resources which are being put to use.
I shall certainly support the demand that proper waste planning be carried out, with waste being duly sorted, so that we have a situation in which waste incineration is linked to the EU' s combined waste legislation, with the incineration problem correctly placed in the waste hierarchy.
I also think it is good that we should now be told very precisely which plants are covered by these rules and also which types of waste are thus exempt from them.
Regarding the very difficult question of defining coincineration plant, including cement factories - in connection with the handling of which there has been some quite aggressive lobbying - I want to say that I think we can support Amendment No 43, which I think defines the common position well.
Finally, there is the absolutely crucial point about establishing emission limits in relation to air and water - whether we are talking about heavy metals or dust, ammonia, dioxin, sulphur dioxide or other hazardous substances.
I think that defensible levels have been identified in this connection, and a reasonable balance has been struck between incineration plants proper and the combined plants.
It is a balance that I hope will be maintained, including during the vote tomorrow here in the plenary sitting.
Again in contrast to Mrs Grossetête, I want, moreover, to say that the levels set here for emissions are realistic.
They are technologically feasible and they are, in actual fact, already being applied in a number of the Member States.
The existing plants which do not at present fulfil the requirements are also to be given a good few years in which to be adapted to the new requirements laid down here.
I hope therefore that, by means of the vote tomorrow, we can make our contribution to solving the health and environmental problems involved in waste incineration so that the enormous quantities of waste which we produce every single day do not cause more serious health problems or greater damage to the environment than is absolutely necessary.
Mr President, Mr Blokland has carried out an enormous task.
This subject is incredibly involved.
Moreover, the lobbyists have been something else.
I should never have believed that there were so many of them concerned about waste in Europe.
You might have thought it was gold rather than waste they were talking about.
One never knows, but it perhaps bodes well for the future that a recycling industry is developing which possesses such competence and power in terms of financial resources and personnel.
Obviously, the EU must create a sustainable system for protecting air, land and water.
This is a common commitment and a common responsibility.
It clearly ought, too, to be regulated at European Union level.
But is this the right level at which to produce such very detailed technical descriptions as this Directive is attempting to produce?
Ought it not, rather, to be the case that decisions should be made on permitted emission levels for various substances, on the measurement systems and on how the measurements are to be carried out and that, subsequently, the principle of subsidiarity should be applied?
It is true that, when it comes to the ways in which waste is dealt with and is co-incinerated using large quantities of biomass fuels, there are really quite enormous differences between northern Scandinavia (where the transport routes are also long) and the densely populated areas of Central Europe where the problem is, quite literally, more one of waste incineration and of refuse collection and disposal than of, for example, generating combined power and heat.
I should like us at some point, but not now, to debate the opportunities for creating framework legislation in this area.
Mr President, I would also like to congratulate Mr Blokland on this report which will set Europe-wide standards for incineration, including for the first time emission standards for dioxins and furanes; this should lead to more competition between different methods of waste disposal, and as a result help bring to an end the transport of hazardous waste across Europe in search of the cheapest waste operators.
With the predicted increase in incineration, it is vital that overall EU legislation on waste disposal and on air quality is consistent and comprehensive.
We must look at the whole hierarchy.
Incineration may increase as stricter controls are put on landfill, but it does not go hand in hand with recycling and environmentally friendly waste-disposal methods.
Building new incinerators is a costly and long-term venture which in turn has to have a long-term return for the investors, so it would be in their interests for waste to continue to be burned.
This means that there is a danger of over capacity which will lead to encouraging incineration for reasons of profit, rather than encouraging the reduction, recycling and safe treatment of waste, which is our goal.
This Parliament must protect the health and quality of life of the people that we represent.
There is no safe threshold for dioxin emissions and more research is being done on the effects of micro-particles on human health and the environment.
So we have to ensure that there is frequent testing and monitoring, that regular and detailed information is made available to the public, and that real action is taken against breaches of the rules.
Measuring emissions twice a year may give an early indication of what is happening in an incineration plant and in the air that the local community is breathing.
Measuring once every two years would not do that.
So we must set the highest possible standards and not make exceptions which will weaken this very important legislation.
Mr President, you cannot dispose of waste by dumping it in the sea, shooting it into space, or by simply incinerating it.
It has a habit of reappearing, often in a more harmful form.
Incineration can be the cause of illnesses, air pollution, climatic change and a rise in the sea level.
A great deal of waste is incinerated these days, but not, in fact, by these expensive installations equipped with flue-gas cleaning devices.
These installations are not being brought up to date.
In fact, they are closed down if it appears that it is cheaper to co-incinerate waste in the cement industry and in electricity plants.
This is why it is important that incineration should cost the same across the board and meet the same high environmental requirements.
It is a fact that left and right do not often see eye to eye on many issues - rightly and understandably so - both within and outside this Parliament, as they represent opposing interests and visions of groups in our society.
This issue, however, should form an exception.
Anyone, rich or poor, must be able to breathe, remain healthy and keep their feet dry.
Only a reckless short-term vision and the pursuit of quick profits can explain why attempts are still being made to weaken this directive.
Amendments of this kind reduce the directive to rules for those who would poison us and threaten the world with another flood.
The Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left therefore supports the proposals made by Mr Blokland and hopes that destructive amendments will be withdrawn or rejected.
Mr President, waste management is now central to achieving the highest standards of environmental protection.
Regrettably, our consumer society is contributing to an increasing volume of domestic waste and there is also growing concern in relation to industrial waste.
Thankfully there is now an awareness among citizens of the importance of protecting the natural environment, and in my view the social and economic climate is conducive to achieving this objective.
In previous debates I referred to the need to reduce waste: here the manufacturers of food and consumer goods have an important role to play, particularly in relation to packaging in its various forms and the importance of using products compatible with recycling, which is of course my preferred option.
We are all conscious of the need to reduce the volume of waste now disposed of in landfill sites and every effort must be made to find more environmentally friendly alternatives.
In my view, we will not be able in the foreseeable future to totally eliminate landfill sites but we must not only reduce, on an ongoing basis, the volume of material going to landfill but must also be more selective as regards the materials disposed of.
While incineration is getting a lot of adverse publicity, and recent planning decisions in Ireland have certainly raised the crucial question of the location of incinerators, it is difficult to envisage a complete programme of waste disposal without incineration, particularly in relation to toxic waste, and in this regard consideration must be given to finding locations where the facility will not impact badly on the natural environment.
Finally, Mr President, it is obvious we need further informed debates in helping to allay the citizens' concern on the health aspect of incineration, a matter which has been addressed through extensive research carried out in various Member States and through the experience gained in the many state-of-the-art facilities now in operation throughout Europe.
Mr President, Commissioner, firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work.
The recommendation for second reading before us is an extremely important legislative resolution, not just for the environment but also for the economy of the European Union.
This can be seen from the many letters which we receive from environmental associations and from the economic sector, not least of course the cement industry, but also many others such as the wood-processing industry, the paper industry, the metalworking industry and so on.
I think that we must regard both sets of arguments as important, those of the environmental associations and also those of industry, because industry has also put forward arguments from a genuinely environmental viewpoint and not just from an economic viewpoint.
We should treat this seriously.
Not all amendments which are probably well intentioned from the environmental viewpoint are necessarily an improvement on the current situation.
I think this can be seen from some of the amendments which were put forward in committee with regard to coincineration and which now reappear as amendments in plenary.
We cannot in any way guarantee that in restricting coincineration we will actually achieve what we want environmentally.
Above all we want to save fossil fuels.
If we set up the hurdles wrong here, then we will not achieve the right environmental objective.
For this reason, our Group rejects the amendments which have been resubmitted by Mr Blokland, the Greens and others.
However, I think that there are still some amendments decided on in committee which we can support in good conscience in order to improve the common position.
For example, I tabled a motion in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy relating to NOx emitted during coincineration which, at least for new installations, is somewhat more ambitious than the Council' s proposals.
I think it is realistic and, as the industry in question is saying the same, albeit with its hand in front of its mouth, we should be altogether more positive.
I think, therefore, that we are on the right track in accepting much of what has been decided in the committee, but certainly nothing which goes any further.
Mr President, unusually tonight I am not speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group, largely because I have some particularly strong views about this directive.
I do believe that Mr Blokland has produced the wrong report at the wrong time for the wrong reasons.
It is not so long ago that we addressed this issue and produced a set of rules that were appropriate to the situation, and which Mr Blokland was seen to be happy with at the time and did not complain about.
Given a task to do, Mr Blokland has produced a new and revised report that has certainly exceeded anything that we have done before.
We cannot say that it is all wrong.
Indeed there are many sensible proposals put forward in areas where the technology makes it possible to advance.
But quite frankly we cannot expect, having already given industry one set of rules to implement only a year or two ago, to hand them a completely new set of rules so quickly.
We have to expect that it will take time to implement this report.
Mr Blokland has also exceeded in many ways the brief he was given.
In particular, the scope of this proposal goes far further than previous directives and brings into its legislative fold a great many processes which require separate legislation, and need to be separately regulated because they are inherently different from the simple process of combustion.
If one is being kind to this directive one could describe it as being good in parts, like the curate's egg.
Unfortunately, this is going to give environment policy a bad name.
We should not be constantly re-regulating incinerators.
We should be seeking ways to avoid incineration in the first place.
Parliament's objective in waste management strategy is not to constantly tighten rules on existing incinerating plant, it is to change the role of waste management, to change the type of waste management that we do.
We would be much better concentrating our efforts in the next few years on recycling, re-use and other methods of reducing the waste heap.
If we do not, we will very soon find ourselves back with this problem again.
Mr President, I certainly agree with Mr Bowe's final summary.
Although the common position places firm controls on permitted emissions from waste incinerators, I know that whenever proposals to build such an incinerator are made in my country, people rise in protest, they distrust the operator's claims and I have a degree of sympathy with them.
So I and many of my colleagues will be backing most of Mr Blokland's amendments because we want the highest possible standards.
I have no problem at all if these prove technically difficult to achieve - no problem, because Britain has a shameful record of having the lowest household waste recycling in Europe and great room for improvement.
Many of us believe that any government in our country will encourage the construction of waste incinerators as an alternative to encouraging the alternatives.
It would be a case of "throw it on the furnace" and putting it out of sight and out of mind which to my mind is a false approach.
We have to concentrate on reducing waste, recycling what is left and leaving incinerators as a last resort.
Mr President, I too would like to thank Mr Blokland for his report which strives to improve the Commission's proposal, and the authors of the other amendments which do so as well.
But incineration has to be considered as a last resort and - as has been said already - waste reduction, re-use and recycling are the main things we should be striving for.
I just wonder about Mr Bowe's statement about the need to reduce, recycle and re-use waste.
Will his position remain the same when he is debating the packaging directive?
It will be interesting to see if he sticks to his principles there.
The only thing incineration does, as Mrs Evans has said, is to encourage the need for more waste.
It will not be economically viable if you do not have enough waste to keep the incinerators going.
We also must remember that waste does not disappear.
It is turned into dioxins and also toxic ash - what will you do with that?
In Ireland, some operators are proposing using it in building materials.
What will be the long-term consequences of that?
In Ireland, regardless of what my colleague Mr Hyland said, we have an appalling record on waste management.
We have one of the highest landfill records in Europe.
Now it seems the government are moving from landfill to incineration and it is being presented as the green option.
They say: "We are turning waste into energy - isn't that wonderful?" when in actual fact they are trying to hoodwink the public into believing that this is something that is ecologically sound.
The recent court case in Ireland which decided against the siting of an incinerator in an agricultural area was extremely important.
It is very important that we get our act right, that we look first and foremost at waste management.
For any government to propose that incineration should be introduced instead of landfill is completely misguided.
We have to look at the root causes of why the waste is there in the first place.
Mr President, the amendments by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy underline generally the high levels of environmental protection, and for that reason many of these amendments are acceptable.
There are differing infrastructures for the treatment and incineration of waste in different countries, however, and, as a result, the same provisions are not in fact the same for everyone.
In Finland and some other countries the sorting of waste in close proximity to where it originates is very advanced.
Thus, we do not incinerate mixed waste, as they do in certain countries.
The incineration of mixed waste is bad environmental policy.
Sorted waste can be incinerated effectively together with other fuels in a so-called coincineration process.
The amendments by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy unjustifiably lump together the incineration of mixed waste with parallel incineration.
That might have an adverse effect, as a result of its indirect economic impact, on levels of environmental protection in the countries that sort waste.
For that reason, Amendments Nos 14, 17, 18 and 27 should not be adopted.
Finally, I would like say that the cement industry lobby should not be put in a competitive position that is better than that enjoyed by the hazardous waste disposal plants.
Mr President, I find myself in agreement with Mrs Grossetête and Mrs Paulsen and - rather alarmingly for both of us - with Mr Bowe.
But I want to make a particular point in relation to an alarm which has been raised in the United Kingdom by the agricultural sector literally in the last few days.
A number of United Kingdom MEPs have been contacted by farming interests, who are very worried that the incineration directive will apply to all on-farm incinerators in the United Kingdom.
There are said to be several thousand of these, and the full effect of applying the controls outlined in the directive would be to put up the costs for each incinerator to operate by an estimated £200 000.
Typically, such incinerators deal with animal waste from the agriculture sector and with the disposal of empty pesticide containers at a rate of less than 50 kg an hour.
Both processes satisfy the criteria of best practicable environmental option and are accepted by environmental inspectors in the United Kingdom.
No exception has been moved for these under Article 2(2) and the closure of incinerators following the entry into force of the directive would pose enormous problems of cost and of disposal of animal waste for UK farmers.
My question to the Commissioner, which I hope that she will able to answer when she comes, is this: since we have not moved an exception to take account of these on-farm incinerators, is this the first time the European Commission has heard of this difficulty?
Have they received any representations from United Kingdom ministers?
Can the Commissioner say when an opportunity for revising the directive to introduce these exceptions - supposing Parliament would ever agree to them - might arise, and does it feel that such an exception for animal waste and for the burning of empty pesticide containers in on-farm incinerators would in fact be likely to gain acceptance?
I have given the Commissioner notice of these questions.
Mr President, the treatment of waste and the whole policy on waste is becoming an ever more important part of EU environmental policy.
To be able to act sensibly and correctly we have to bear in mind something that has already been spoken of here, which is to say the waste hierarchy: the prevention of waste, recycling, the exploitation of its energy-producing potential through incineration, and its final treatment.
The Commission' s proposal is not a total response to this idea, and is rather based on the notion that everything must and can be burnt.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy added the necessary amendments to promote the waste hierarchy to its common position in its second reading, and I hope that these points of view will also be adopted in tomorrow' s vote.
I also hope there is support for the proposal that was very much endorsed by the Committee to facilitate the incineration of waste produced by the paper and cellulose industry at the production site.
This waste is an important energy source not only for the industrial plants themselves but also for the surrounding community.
As the waste hierarchy is implemented in very many different ways in different Member States and in most countries they burn both hazardous and non-hazardous waste in the same incinerator, very strict rules are required.
However, in those countries where the recycling of waste is reasonably well established, such as Finland, and where they know what is being incinerated where, tighter controls will not improve the state of the environment; on the contrary, it might make it worse, as the incineration of waste will be prevented in small incineration plants and transportation will increase.
But, as regards impurities in the air, it would be necessary that exceptions to the strict standards would only apply when the party incinerating the waste can truly demonstrate that no more emissions are being released into the air than what the licensing conditions allow.
Mr President, the directive on the incineration of waste is well intended but I think those responsible for preparing it have gone into too much detail.
I am mainly worried about the so-called coincineration of waste.
Sorted community waste and, for example, the fibrous pulp sludge that is produced in forest industry processes serve as good fuel supplements for many heating plants.
The draft, however, calls for ongoing, expensive, to some extent impossible, and environmentally unnecessary monitoring of plants that are engaged in harmless coincineration.
The end result will run counter to the original aim: non-hazardous sorted waste, which is a valid form of fuel for heating plants, will have to be driven to a landfill site to add to methane emissions or it will have to be transported hundreds of kilometres to large incinerators, all the while polluting the environment.
There are many amendments in the report that are problematic.
I think the matter should either go back to the Committee or the Council' s common position, at least its main features, should be adhered to.
Mr President, honourable Members, efforts to set limits for pollutants produced by waste incineration and to introduce specific control procedures are indeed a positive step.
It is unacceptable for pollution to be transferred from the air into water and the ground.
The directive makes some headway in that direction.
Nevertheless, the problems inherent in waste incineration still remain, since it is the actual burning process which produces toxic substances, including dioxins.
This applies even more to domestic waste which contains negligible quantities of toxic substances before it is burned.
Treating dangerous and non-dangerous waste in the same way therefore exacerbates the problem.
What is more, the cost of installing and operating incineration units is far higher than the cost of mechanical recycling or sanitary landfill.
In a nutshell, the legislative proposal under discussion will not solve the problems inherent in incineration as a waste management method.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Blokland for this report; he has had a very hard job to do.
Drafting environmental legislation for the whole of Europe is a demanding task, as circumstances in Member States differ enormously.
I myself come from a country where we have already opted for a policy that corresponds amazingly closely to the EU strategy on waste.
Only Finland has already embarked on perfectly feasible practices, as you have heard this evening.
Therefore, it is tiresome to see that the same mechanisms that are needed to guide those countries that have been lax in their attention to the matter of waste disposal, are forcing the more advanced countries to take a step backwards.
This should not be happening.
Mrs Paulsen, was right: this is exactly where compliance with the principle of subsidiarity is needed.
If more stringent requirements regarding emissions are being illogically imposed on the use of waste as fuel than for other fuels, fuels classified as waste will cease to be used.
There are no alternative proposed uses for waste: it would be deposited in landfill sites.
That will add to the formation of methane, as a result of putrefaction of organic waste, and the greenhouse phenomenon.
This holds true especially for the incineration of harmless sludge produced by the paper and cellulose industry.
It is important that Parliament amends the proposal for the directive in this respect in accordance with the Committee' s amendment.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy adopted some proposals that, if realised, would make it harder to practise ecologically justified coincineration.
For example, the limit values for emissions for fuel that is not waste in coincineration are required to be the same as for waste as fuel, even though the same material may be incinerated and give off higher levels of emissions, under EU legislation.
Another example is the call for the ongoing monitoring of the ammonia content of gas from chimneys.
That will add substantially to the costs of monitoring with no benefit to the environment, as the monitoring obligations have not just been imposed on those plants where ammonia emissions are generally produced.
Investments that do not bring a value added element with regard to the environment mean less investments that are of benefit to the environment.
Mr President, Mr Blokland, ladies and gentlemen, waste management is a complex task.
This is confirmed yet again by our discussions and the particularly powerful lobbying.
I therefore approve of the European Union' s approach which is to adopt an overall strategy in relation to this major environmental and health issue.
Nonetheless, personally speaking, I have always been rather worried to see the incineration of dangerous and non-dangerous waste dealt with in the same legislation, and I expressed my opinion on this point at first reading.
The majority decided in favour of coincineration.
My opinion is that today we must fight to prevent the emission standards for dangerous waste being relaxed.
The volume of waste to be incinerated is going to be significantly increased.
The figure of 31 million tonnes in 1990 has been mentioned.
This year we are talking about close to 60 million tonnes, and waste incineration generates, as everyone has mentioned, the emission of particularly dangerous substances into the atmosphere and soil.
The debate has focused on coincineration.
I find the maximum standard of 40% excessive, but I should like more especially to stress, just briefly, the fact that the increasingly widespread use of dangerous waste in coincineration units is liable to lead us to accept the production of this type of waste, with a particularly high risk of hearing, tomorrow, that serious investment has been made with a view to constructing coincineration units.
They therefore now have to be made to run profitably, leading to an increase in the volume of dangerous substances transported, with all the risks that this entails.
In conclusion, while mentioning that penalties must be applied in cases of non-compliance and perhaps also that support should be provided for the authorities modifying their household waste incinerators to comply with the standards, it is still essential to stress that our top priority is, and must continue to be, avoiding the creation of this type of waste and recycling as much as possible.
Mr President, we all know that disposing of waste in an environmentally friendly manner and utilising its energy by means of the latest technology is a requirement of our time and wholly appropriate.
The directive on the incineration of waste contains important starting points for introducing compulsory high environmental standards throughout the European Union which have already been in place in some Member States for a number of years.
And this is important and necessary.
The aim of the directive is to establish emission levels which ensure harmless and environmentally friendly incineration of both dangerous and non-dangerous waste in incineration and coincineration plants without presenting any risk to human health.
People are sensitised today and have fears of a high level of air pollution and the illnesses which can result and so the policy must also create completely clear framework conditions to limit the risk.
Nevertheless, I must say that Mr Blokland is proposing some regulations and stringent conditions for the directive which go way beyond the objective.
The operating conditions for incineration plants, as proposed in Amendment No 11, are neither appropriate to the objective nor practicable but, quite simply, superfluous.
Science and practice have shown for some time now that such a measure does not prevent high emissions of hydrogen chlorides and dioxins.
In practice, Amendment No 11 would also mean that many halogenated substances, for example PVC, which frequently occurs in mixed domestic waste, would be excluded from incineration in waste incineration plants.
A further point is to ensure that the directive does not give rise to any protected markets.
Industries which use coincineration plants in their production process have, for many years, successfully concerned themselves with achieving high air purity standards in incineration.
Many companies are also dependent on the use of waste to retain competitiveness and jobs.
Millions have already been spent on measures to reduce energy consumption.
In my opinion, we should not disregard these efforts ....
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, I should like to make two brief points which may well be relevant should this go to conciliation, as I suspect it will.
The first is the impact of this directive on the existing specialist toxic waste incineration industry.
These incinerators have to adhere to higher standards than the coincineration plants.
My concern is that the high calorific value waste will be cherry-picked for coincineration and this in turn will push up the cost of the specialist toxic waste incinerators which will mean that they will have to actually buy in fuel in many instances to achieve the high temperatures which are required to destroy things like dioxin.
We need the specialist toxic waste incinerators.
There are only three at the moment in the United Kingdom.
If we had fewer of these plants, it would mean that hazardous waste might well have to be transported for large distances, which is not acceptable for both political and practical environment reasons, and it would also push up the cost of incinerating this toxic waste.
The second point I would make is to underline the point made by Dr Jackson.
I come from a region in the United Kingdom with the highest density of pigs.
Now traditionally fallen stock has been disposed of by burial on the farm, but with these very large units this is just not a practical way of disposal, so many of the units have installed their own incinerators - small incinerators using less than 50 kg per hour.
If these incinerators are not used, people may well have to go back to burial.
I think this mix-up has been due to a misunderstanding between the Department of the Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture in Britain, who thought there were only sixty incinerators of this type when in fact there are several thousand.
This problem also applies to hunt kennels which feed fallen stock, and dispose of offal and - bizarrely - to pet crematoria, although I understand that human crematoria are not covered as dead people are not classified as waste.
In conciliation could I ask you to make allowance for these farmers who have invested in cleaning up the environment by installing incinerators, and for whom the cost would be excessive should they not be able to continue.
Mr President, first and foremost, I want to thank the rapporteur, Mr Blokland for the considerable commitment he has shown and for his well prepared recommendation for second reading.
Together with the Council' s determination to arrive quickly at a common position, the report has helped with the efficient reading of the Commission' s proposal.
The proposed directive on waste incineration goes to the heart of environmental legislation: the protection of public health.
The proposal will help reduce dioxin emissions from incineration by 90 per cent.
As from 2005, when the directive begins to apply to existing plant, dioxin emissions from incinerators will be insignificant.
Together with the directive on waste deposition, the directive on waste incineration will put a stop to methods of treating waste which do not take account of future generations' needs and interests.
Both directives constitute a firm basis for the sustainable treatment of the waste hierarchy, with improved preventative measures, better recycling and environmentally safe deposition of waste.
I should like to remind you that there already exists a directive on a waste hierarchy.
It is therefore obvious that, in this case, it is recycling that one should attempt, in the first place, to regulate.
Unfortunately, Mr Bowe, it has been 11 years since the technical requirements in these directives were last reviewed.
43 amendments have been tabled.
Of these, the Commission is able to approve eight in full, five in part and three in principle.
The following amendments are aimed at clarifying the Commission' s proposal.
The Commission is able to approve them in part, in principle or in full: 4, in principle, with the exception of the last section; 6, 8, 9, 10 and 11, but only the elucidation of the two seconds; 12 and 14, second section; 17 in principle, but not the requirement continually to measure the levels of ammonia and mercury; 18, first section; 19, 22, and 24 in principle; 25: the figure of 500 milligrams for nitric oxides in new plant, together with the proposed new paragraph at the end; 27 in principle, together with Amendment No 43.
The Commission is not able to approve the first section of Amendment No 14.
If the word "untreated" were to be deleted, it would no longer be possible to use mixed household waste in co-incinerators, something which would also apply to waste which had undergone extensive pre-treatment.
The second section of this amendment is, in principle, acceptable.
By introducing an explanation of the word "untreated" , the paragraph can be made less ambiguous.
The European Parliament' s Amendments Nos 1, 2 and 7, which are aimed at introducing provisions concerning the treatment of waste, cannot, for reasons of principle, be approved.
The Commission' s proposal is aimed at introducing limits for emissions and at establishing operative conditions for all waste incinerated or co-incinerated, and this should not influence the legislation concerning the treatment of waste.
The Commission is not able to approve Amendments 5 and 15 which are designed to introduce links to standards of air and water quality.
Legislation of this kind already exists or is at present being prepared, for example the directives concerning air quality and coordinated measures to prevent and limit pollution, together with the proposed framework directive concerning water.
The amendments would involve the provisions in these acts being duplicated or becoming more ambiguous.
Amendments Nos 3, 16, 30 and 33-35 are not compatible with the directive' s structure and cannot therefore be approved.
There has been a certain amount of confusion concerning Amendment No 13 where a number of language versions have been changed but not the English language version.
This amendment cannot, however, be adopted by the Commission.
Articles 12 and 15 of the proposal concern access to information and reporting.
They are now worded in such a way as to guarantee that all players have access to the information they require.
The Commission therefore considers that Amendments Nos 20 and 21 are unnecessary.
Amendments Nos 36-39 are designed to tighten up the requirements with regard to measurements.
The Commission is not able to accept these because they would place an additional burden upon those responsible and because no justification of their real value can be provided.
Finally, Annexes II, IV and V are, as you know, the heart of the Directive, establishing the limits for emissions in the cases of coincineration and incineration.
As I have already mentioned, the Commission accepts the proposed limit of 500 milligrams for nitric oxides in new cement kilns.
This is also justified from the point of view of cost-income analysis.
Any further amendment for the purpose of making the limits stricter or of removing from certain plants the right to be regarded as exceptions would threaten the delicate balance achieved in the common position.
The Commission cannot therefore accept Amendments Nos 23, 26, 28, 29, 31, 32 40, 41 and 42.
With regard to Mrs Jackson' s question about the incineration of dead animals on farms, I would provide the following clarification.
The incineration of dead animals is not included under the directive, and this in accordance with the exceptions defined in Article 2.2.
As I have noted previously, the Commission accepts parts of Amendment No 4, which refers to Directive 74/442 and which indirectly makes it possible to exclude the incineration of infected animals on farms.
We consequently accept this principle.
The Commission is to investigate the possibility of extending the exception concerning radioactive waste also to include exceptions such as infected dead animals.
I understand that there is a debate going on in Great Britain, and perhaps in other places too, concerning the incineration of, for example, empty packages of insecticide etc.
It is not, of course, the intention that these should be incinerated.
That sounds dangerous.
Nor does it sound as if one should be burning them at home in one' s backyard.
I do not want to exclude our needing to review how the exceptions are to be worded once we have obtained more information and know exactly what types of plant are concerned.
There was a certain amount of confusion because we at first believed that we were concerned here with dead animals and infected dead animals, of which we thought exceptions should be made.
My understanding from the interpretation was that the incineration of dead animals is not covered by this directive under the terms of Article 2(2).
I am looking at Article 2(2) and I cannot see that exclusion set out there.
It talks about vegetable waste and vegetable waste does not cover dead animals.
However, I will get clarification from the Commissioner personally.
Infectious animal waste is not covered by the scope of this directive in its common position form because it is covered by Directive 90/667.
The adoption of Amendment No 4 to Article 2(2) might give the Commission the chance to revise the text so as to include a specific exclusion for infectious animal waste.
As things stand all other animal waste is covered by Article 2(2)(a)(v) of the directive and Directive 90/667.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon.
Ozone in ambient air
The next item is the report(A5-0062/2000) drawn up by Mr Davies on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on a proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive relating to ozone in ambient air (COM (1999) 125 - C5 - 0047/1999 - 1999/0067 (COD)).
Mr President, given the importance of the directive on national emission ceilings to this report on a proposal for a daughter directive, it is a little surprising that the order of debate is as it is, because without reduction in the key trans-boundary pollutants we are not going to reduce ozone.
This report sets national targets for ozone levels and proposes action plans for dealing with local problems of exceedance.
To save time I am going to assume that the respiratory and other health problems associated with ozone are understood, and that every Member of this House will want to reduce them.
The disputes between us will be about costs and time-scales, and perhaps also about the accuracy of the Commission's methodology and the achievability of the targets it has set in this directive.
Let me deal directly with the Commission's core proposal, the setting of a target for 2010 of 120 mg per cubic metre for ozone, not to be exceeded on more than 20 days per year.
Commission proposals for environmental improvements need to be both ambitious and realistic.
These proposals are certainly ambitious but many governments dispute whether they are politically realistic, and having just come from a difficult - albeit ultimately successful - group meeting of my own, I know that many Members have doubts.
In particular, representatives of the Mediterranean countries point out problems resulting from the strong sunlight they enjoy.
I point out that the Commission's methodology has taken full account of this but I look at their faces and still see a degree of scepticism.
I did wonder some months ago whether to table amendments, which would suggest a less ambitious outcome, but which would perhaps be more acceptable to Member States.
But the Commission's 120 mg target is in line with World Health Organisation proposals, and who am I to suggest that they should be challenged?
The number of days of exceedance could easily be adjusted, but that is something to negotiate only when necessary.
It is a good target and, if it is at all possible, then it should be retained.
The position I have taken in preparing this report is to say that those who want tougher targets than the Commission has proposed should have their views rejected.
But equally it would be wrong for us to water down the draft directive.
That is why I am sorry to see amendments tabled which reflect the Industry Committee's position.
It seems to have been overlooked by many that these amendments, if carried, would leave the European Union in a much weaker position with regard to ozone targets than is enjoyed by the United States of America.
We are aware of growing problems of ozone across Europe, but if we are not even prepared to match the standards being set by the USA, one of our great commercial rivals, this would indeed be a great shame and a sorry reflection on our commitment to environmental improvement.
I ask Parliament to support my proposals, to give its backing to the Commissioner and to let her play her part in negotiating a common position which is both ambitious and politically realistic.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to put forward the proposal of the Industry Committee which was adopted by 40 votes to 4 and which deals with target values in particular.
There is absolutely no doubt that in tightening up or adopting the ozone directive we must find a reasonable compromise between the justifiable demand for improved air quality and the possibility for European economy and society to reasonably adapt in particularly polluted regions.
For this reason, unlike the Environment Committee which has responsibility in this matter, we have not taken on board the proposals of the Commission wholesale, but have modified them.
I know that the experts at the Commission will vigorously oppose this, but we think that we can propose a compromise given that the guide value of 180 µg/m3 is not disputed, nor indeed the critical value of 240, only the target value.
We would like to propose for this a 30-year programme which, although based on the WHO value of 120 µg/m3, provides for a phased reduction in the number of days on which this value may be exceeded: 40 days in 2010, 20 days in 2020 (which is the Commission' s target for 2010) and no days in 2030.
This is a concern in particular for the warmer regions of Europe, namely coastal regions, which have to cope with a particularly high external ozone penetration.
I think we have put forward a reasonable compromise here.
In any case, we are prepared to compromise with the Commission, particularly as we assume that only this type of compromise will also find approval in the Council.
For this reason we are venturing to re-introduce this proposal on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party, even though it was marginally defeated in the Environment Committee.
We hope that you will consent to it.
Mr President, Commissioner, I agree that the most important difficulty with this directive is the diversity of criteria with regard to the establishment of target levels and time-scales for the reduction of the ozone concentrations in the atmosphere: the famous items 2 and 3 of annex 1.
We in the Group of the European People' s Party consider it necessary to support the main lines set in the Commission' s proposal, especially with regard to target levels, which coincide with the guidelines of the World Health Organisation on air quality and which establish the permissible concentrations of ozone at 120 µg/m3.
Nevertheless, it seems to us to be inadvisable to accept the amendments which make 2010 the time limit, the only one in the short term, and set 2020 as the time limit for long term objectives.
In this respect, we think it is essential to allow for greater flexibility with regard to the periods of adaptation to the said target levels, given the real difficulty of controlling ozone concentrations when setting figures purely on the basis of the existence of previous data, as is constantly seen in certain climatic conditions, especially, as has just been mentioned, in the Mediterranean countries.
Our Group therefore vigorously defends Amendments Nos 26 and 28, which establish a progressive and realistic achievement of the proposed objectives, by means of a progressive scale according to the number of days in a year the target levels can be exceeded.
However, we consider very positive the amendments on the countries which are candidates for accession to the European Union, so that they may participate as soon as possible in the achievement of the Union' s objectives - and we congratulate Mrs Davies on this initiative - and it also seems important to us that the action plans are of a local nature and that the possibilities for reducing ozone concentrations are studied on a case by case basis.
I believe that a vote in favour of the amendments proposed by the European People' s Party is a vote for progress in the control and monitoring of one of the most serious pollutants to date, initiating, in a decisive and homogenous way, in all the Member States, actions for its elimination as a threat to the health of persons and ecosystems, without deluding ourselves as to the real possibilities of completely eradicating it in the short term.
Mr President, I should first of all like to thank Mr Chris Davies for this report.
Adoption of the Commission' s proposal and of Mr Davies's report will mean a considerable improvement in air quality for Europe's citizens.
I think there are two crucial points here.
The first is that the WHO' s guidelines should be adhered to.
I think that this would be an important step towards preventing serious illnesses and premature deaths, especially among particularly vulnerable sectors of the population, including children.
The second thing I think is very important is that specific dates should be set, both for when in 2010 we are to achieve the provisional targets and for when in 2020 we are to attain the long-term objectives.
I think that setting dates is very important to our also in actual fact attaining the objectives.
In addition, I should like to make a couple of remarks on the amendments inspired by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy and which are intended to weaken the Commission' s initiative by allowing much greater exceedances of the WHO's recommendations and by significantly delaying efforts to achieve the targets set by the WHO.
The amendments would not only impair the Commission' s proposal but also constitute a deterioration and retrograde step in relation to the situation of which we are now, in fact, aware in Europe.
As Mr Davies also mentioned, standards are, in actual fact, lower than those in the United States.
I do not know how one can call the proposals a happy medium or compromise, as Mr Langen did a moment ago.
I think they are completely incomprehensible and irresponsible.
They would involve serious health and environmental consequences for the people of Europe, together with a bill for Europe' s health services to the tune of billions.
I would therefore very much recommend that we support the Commission' s proposal, together with Mr Davies' report.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to congratulate Mr Davies on his excellent report.
I would also like to thank the European Commission for its sound green proposals.
Back in July 1995, Strasbourg was labouring under ozone smog.
On the initiative of the Green Group, the European Parliament then adopted a resolution to halve the ozone standard stipulated in the 1992 directive.
The European Commission' s proposal has made a lot of headway in this direction.
Ozone smog is still on the increase.
It is now even permeating the southern European skies during the winter months.
It has paralysed the traffic in northern Italy over the past couple of weeks and, during the summer months, countries such as Denmark and Sweden also suffer with ozone smog.
Ozone smog is now to be found everywhere in Europe.
Ozone is always an aggressive substance.
There are no safe ozone levels, despite what the World Health Organisation claims.
This is why the Green Group proposes allowing just fifteen exceedances of critical loads per annum.
This number is slightly lower than the proposal made by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection.
My group can also support the twenty exceedances proposed by the Committee.
However, it cannot back the proposal made by the Christian Democrats and UNICE Employers' Union of forty such incidents per annum.
This is far too many and thirty years is a ridiculous time limit, given the fact that the problem is taking on such proportions.
In order to reach this strict ozone standard, the NOx emissions from traffic, in particular, and the emission of volatile organic substances will need to go down drastically.
This is the topic of Mrs Myller' s report.
In the case of an ozone alert, we also need to be able to take short-term action.
The Dutch Government makes so many concessions to the transport lobby that it fails to realise this.
For my group, the car is no sacred cow.
Mr President, I too wish to thank Mr Davies for the report he has prepared.
It is an extremely important report, especially from a health perspective.
Seen from an environmental point of view, it is also intimately linked to the next subject, namely Mrs Myller' s report.
I am convinced that these two reports together provide a sound basis for positive developments in Europe in the fields of health and the environment.
During the short time I have in which to speak, I should like to try to scotch some of the flourishing myths which exist with regard to the ozone issue.
This especially applies to the situation in southern Europe.
The climate in southern Europe is often used as a reason for, or explanation of, the high levels of ozone which are often to be found in the summertime.
It is true that climates with long periods of high pressure increase the presence of ozone.
At the same time, research shows that the reasons why ozone affects cities such as Barcelona, Athens and Milan and many of the tourist resorts along the coast must be sought elsewhere.
The reasons have to be sought in traffic levels, in industrial processes and in energy production.
It is also these matters which we can influence by means of the Directives concerned.
It is therefore something of a pity that the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy should have such a detached attitude towards the present Directive and only see it in a perspective which favours industry.
Instead, we ought to see what happens when the limits set by the WHO are constantly exceeded and when people (both residents and tourists) are constantly exposed to a danger to their health.
We know that the risks are greatest for people who are in the open air a great deal, especially children.
We know that exceedance of ozone limits directly affects children' s lung capacity.
The Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy ought to consider this when the present directive is voted upon tomorrow.
Mr President, I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy for their support of the Commission' s proposal and draft report.
Within the European Union, we have achieved a certain amount of success when it comes to improving air quality.
Nonetheless, ozone still constitutes one of the most serious environmental problems.
On more than 60 days every summer in a number of locations in Central and Southern Europe, ozone levels exceed the target values set by the World Health Organisation.
The Fifth Environmental Action Programme established the long-term objective of ensuring that these limits were not in fact exceeded.
If we are to be able to solve this problem, we need to take measures with clearly defined subsidiary objectives.
The Commission' s proposal therefore for the first time establishes clear limits upon ozone levels which, as far as possible, are to be attained by no later than the year 2010.
The target value in terms of protecting people' s health means that the WHO' s guidelines must not be exceeded on more than 20 days per year.
Programmes for reducing emissions are necessary in those cases where the target values are not attained.
The directive on national emission ceilings, which is the next point on the agenda, will lead to improvements in ozone levels so that the target values in question might for the most part be attained.
The proposal is nonetheless a clear expression of the political will that exists to attain the long-term objectives in the directive, too.
Attaining the World Health Organisation' s target values is only the first step.
In reviewing the Directive in the year 2004, we must therefore analyse how and when we can achieve the long-term objective.
The Commission is able wholly to approve Amendments Nos 3, 4, 6, 7, 13, 14 and 15.
Amendment No 5, section two, is also acceptable in view of the fact that the Member States have to prepare emission reduction programmes before they can implement them.
With regard to Amendment No 9, the Commission is also able to approve some of the changes in their entirety and the majority of them in principle.
We approve those changes relating to short-term measures which are to be implemented in each zone in which the threshold value is exceeded.
We also agree that the Member States should inform the public as to whether they intend to prepare and implement short-term action plans and, if so, in what ways, and that they should also inform them as to how often such measures have been taken.
We believe it is necessary for this information to be reported to the Commission.
However, that issue is more at home in Article 10.
We cannot, however, accept that short-term measures should only be taken at local level.
Nor do we believe that the Member States should be enjoined to analyse whether short-term measures are an effective tool in each individual case and in each individual place where the threshold value has been exceeded.
The Commission is able to approve the principles behind Amendments 10 and 11.
We are going to redraft subparagraph 1c in order to take account of the idea behind the last section of Amendment No 9 and Amendments Nos 10 and 11.
Amendment No 12 can be approved in principle.
The Commission believes that progress by the Member States ought to be presented in a form which permits direct comparisons between countries, if that is possible in practice.
The principle in Amendment No 16 is also acceptable.
The Commission agrees that climate changes ought to be emphasised.
This ought, however, to be done in a broader perspective and not only in relation to changes in fuel consumption.
Amendment No 2 advocates coordination between Member States and Applicant States.
This can in principle be approved, but some rewording is required if misinterpretations are to be avoided.
We cannot, however, approve Amendment No 1.
Even if the Commission agrees that it is important to involve the Applicant States, there is no reason for reiterating this in a directive aimed at the Member States.
Nor is Amendment No 8 acceptable when it comes to predictions of exceedances of information thresholds.
The use of prognosis models is specified as a prerequisite of thresholds for alerting the public, something which would make the way in which the public is informed or alerted less reliable.
This is an issue on which practical considerations and the possibility of practical implementation must be taken into account.
Finally, we must reject the first and third sections of Amendment No 5, together with Amendments Nos 17 and 18.
In the present situation, we quite simply do not have enough information available to be able to predict when the long-term objective of not exceeding the World Health Organisation' s guidelines can be attained.
In addition, the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 28.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken at 12 noon tomorrow.
Atmospheric pollutants
The next item is the report (A5-0063/2000) by Mrs Myller on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on national emission ceilings for certain atmospheric pollutants (COM(1999) 125 - C5-0047/1999 - 1999/0067(COD)).
Mr President, the European Union has ambitious goals for the environment, which were set forth, for example, in the Fifth Environmental Action Programme and the acidification strategy presented in 1997.
These programmes stated as their aim the protection of people and nature from the adverse effects of air pollution, meaning that critical ceilings in respect of nature and people would not be exceeded.
The Commission' s proposal for a directive on national emission ceilings is an important step in achieving the aims the Union set itself: to protect its citizens from the adverse effects of air pollutants.
The legacy of past decades is going to take some time to put right, however.
We are still not even aware of all the technical potential for ridding ourselves of sources of emissions entirely.
For this reason, it is reasonable to proceed in stages, as the Commission has proposed.
The first stage is the Interim Environmental Objectives to be achieved by 2010, which means cutting health-threatening ozone loads by two-thirds by that year.
We cannot be satisfied with just this, however, as, after this target has been met, there will still be too many areas where pollution counts exceed levels that are dangerous to people and nature.
Owing to this, I have recommended in my report a long-term goal, in addition to the interim one, and a final target for 2020.
In that way, we would finally be able to reach a point where critical levels and loads are not exceeded and everyone will be protected effectively from all known health effects of air pollution.
In this connection I would like to draw your attention to my amendment, in which, owing to a translation error, there is a wrong word in your copy of the document.
In place of 'reached' it should say 'exceeded' .
I hope that this will be sorted out before tomorrow' s vote.
How, then, do we achieve a situation in which air pollution does not exceed tolerance levels for humans and for nature?
The Commission' s proposal sets limit values for each Member State with regard to certain kinds of interrelated emissions, which cause acidification, increased ozone in the inner atmosphere and soil eutrophication.
Dealing with these problems and the emissions that cause them together has proved to be the most cost-effective way of tackling the causes of air pollution and bringing it under control.
The biggest disagreements in the implementation of the directive relate to the limit values, i.e., the emission ceiling set for each country.
The UN Economic Commission for Europe has also examined the objectives for reductions in the same sources of emissions as in the proposal for a directive now under discussion, and, as a result of these talks, the so-called Gothenburg Protocol was signed.
There is a clear difference between this proposal and the Commission' s.
If we were to accept the ceilings in the Gothenburg Protocol, we would never reach the targets that the Union has set itself regarding air pollution.
Comparing the differences between the Gothenburg Protocol and the Commission' s proposal with regard to the effects on health, the annual reduction levels proposed by the Commission would save the lives of as many as four thousand people a year in Europe.
Although it is beyond dispute that the ambitious targets set for the environment have been found to be an essential ingredient in people' s health and safety, there have been pleas for lower ceilings, on the basis that cleaner air costs too much for industry and communities.
It has to be said, however, that there is very considerable exaggeration with regard to the costs involved.
If, on the other hand, we calculate the benefits that better air quality will bring to people and the natural environment, as well as to buildings, we see that the economic benefits are four times greater than the costs.
We still have to work on the proposal for the directive so that, for example, the situation with regard to the applicant countries and those questions too that relate to the EU' s neighbouring regions can be better taken into account.
Mr President, the industry committee, after much discussion and serious consideration, is overwhelmingly opposed to the Commission's proposed ceilings, and this is across all groups and nationalities.
The UN ECE ceilings were agreed by all our Member States, by the applicant countries and globally, in a protocol signed at Gothenburg as recently as November 1999.
Why did the Commission come up with these even stricter and substantially more expensive ceilings only one month later?
I understand that the groups, the whole Parliament, are split on this issue, between supporters of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and supporters of the industry committee's line.
Members of Parliament should be aware of the serious implications for our industries and agriculture, for our competitiveness, for jobs and - yes - for people and our constituents if the Commission proposal wins through.
The industry committee urges this House to vote in favour of the amendments which are tabled in my name and in the name of Mr Bowe.
These are the amendments passed by the industry committee.
The UN ceilings are quite ambitious enough for us to reach our internationally agreed targets in reasonable time.
The industry committee wishes to see these limits fully and properly implemented across the European Union and globally.
The Commission can then concentrate on ensuring this occurs, on perfecting the models that are used and perhaps come up with new proposals in two or three years' time on the basis of much more convincing arguments regarding the relevant costs and benefits.
Support the Purvis amendments and the United Nations Gothenburg table of national emission ceilings.
Mr President, it has become universally acknowledged that environmental pollution, and certainly air pollution, are cross-border issues par excellence.
The present draft directive on national emission ceilings tackles the key culprits where atmospheric pollution is concerned.
It contains maximum emission levels for substances which are responsible for acidification, ozone forming in the troposphere and the eutrophication of soil.
As the topic is reasonably technical, I will only single out the salient points on behalf of myself and my group.
The directive' s key goal is to reduce the emission levels of said substances to below the critical levels and, hence, pollution.
These goals must be met by 2010, with an interim assessment of the national programmes in 2006.
The most important - and you have heard so yourself just now - and most talked about component of the proposal is, of course, the table which specifies the permitted annual emission levels for each country.
The fact that, at UN level, 36 countries, including 15 EU Member States, recently agreed on less strict standards for the same substances played an important role in the discussion.
There are now Members who urge that this table, i.e. the European Commission' s table, be replaced by the UN' s so-called Gothenburg table, which permits a higher ceiling.
Mr President, I have to admit that this line of argument is rather weak.
Indeed, UN agreements are always less ambitious due to the fact that it is difficult for the situation in rich, prosperous and hence often more polluting countries to be lumped together with the situation in the developing world.
Moreover, it is incorrect that the European ceilings were established after completion of the UN negotiations.
Examining the proposal and the argumentation - as I assume other Members have done - I notice that, at the time when the European ceilings were being stipulated, the UN protocol was still being negotiated.
Add this to the fact that the environmental effects of SO2, NOx and the volatile organic substances, in particular, directly affect our own continent, I - and the majority in our group, I think - can go along with the Commission proposal regarding these substances.
Mr President, I do have another problem, namely that concerning ammonia.
The Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats would like to see the present ceiling adjusted.
Looking at the nitrate directive, I notice that hardly any Member State meets the standard specified.
It seems to me completely unfeasible to go beyond the Gothenburg standard.
In addition, the effects of ammonia emissions are partly local and, as such, a lower threshold seems acceptable.
On behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats, I have tabled an amendment which, where ammonia is concerned, is based on the lower Gothenburg standard and defers definitively setting the ceiling until the year 2006.
The reason for this is that I hope that, by then, the effects of the implementation and the pending European legislation on nitrate will be able to give us better indications.
I would like to conclude by making the following comment: legislation on ceilings is, in actual fact, the counterpart of legislation on large furnaces, for which I also happen to be rapporteur.
We completed the first reading even before last year' s elections.
The Council of Ministers, however, is still putting a spanner in the works.
Could we be informed on the progress made?
As a final remark, I would like to thank Mrs Myller, the rapporteur.
Mr President, I wish to begin by thanking Mrs Myller for her report and her ambitious treatment of the directive proposed by the Commission.
Even if the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy appears rather as if it had been caught napping and has only just woken up, the fact may, at all events, be conveyed that the problem of acidification is scarcely a new issue.
Instead, it has been with us for as long as industrialisation - for 100 years.
Research into the question has been going on for 30 years.
None of us ought to be in any doubt about what the sources of acidification are, nor about what we should be doing regarding this issue.
Some accuse the Commission' s proposal, and also the report, as being excessive and far too costly to implement and say that the calculations that have been made are utopian.
This is, however, wrong because we know that the Member States themselves have contributed to the report which serves as a basis for the whole directive.
There is more justification for criticising the fact that we have not included the energy scenario we have emphasised elsewhere, for example in the Kyoto protocol, and which involves burning fewer fossil fuels in order also to solve the climate problems we are facing.
With all due respect to the Gothenburg protocol - and despite the fact that it has taken its name from my home town - I have to say that it is, in fact, just not on to compare this with the directive which we have to take a decision on tomorrow.
One might well wonder why the Commission' s directive appears only a month later, rather like a punishment directed against this UN directive, but that has to do, of course, with nothing other than our own sluggishness in dealing with the issue.
If we had been a little quicker off the mark, the present directive would have been on the table - signed, sealed and delivered - long before the so-called Gothenburg Protocol.
The word "impossible" has been used about the directive.
I should like to say, however, that what is impossible is the situation which we have at present.
The impossibility lies, therefore, not in the directive but in the current situation.
Mr President, my congratulations to Mrs Myller who I know has thought long and hard about this report.
It seems to me that the debate comes down to this: do we believe that the Gothenburg Protocol was the best Member States can realistically achieve?
I recognise that the Commission and environmental groups believe that in practice much more can be delivered but nonetheless some Member States have committed themselves to significant reductions in air pollution - though that is certainly not true of all of them.
Some Member States seem to have gone into the negotiations with a few calculations on the back of an envelope and refused to compromise in any way to set themselves any realistic targets.
Others have not even used the same methodology, the same basis of calculation as others.
So the protocol in many ways is a nonsense.
It can give us no confidence whatsoever.
It is a messy political compromise and nothing more.
I do not know how much more the Commissioner can achieve but we should be seeking reductions in air pollution and we should be giving her our support in her efforts to negotiate them.
We should support this report and give her our backing.
Mr President, Mrs Myller has produced an excellent report, and our group too thinks we should go at lot further than the Gothenburg Protocol on this.
In all probability, drafting this directive was like a national auction, and the end result is very modest when we think what the real challenges are.
But, in any case, it is important that the European Parliament should now defend at least that policy which the Commission has chosen.
The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance proposes that even stricter goals should be set for 2010 than the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has recommended.
We want to emphasise that an integrated strategy must be adopted to reduce emissions.
We have to remember that, in any case, we have the implementation of the Kyoto commitments ahead of us, which will mean insisting on more efficient use of energy and simply using less of it.
So, in our opinion, this directive must take into consideration that added benefit is to be had from an integrated strategy as regards implementing its objectives.
We are very satisfied that the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy included issues of shipping and air traffic within the scope of this directive, and we are convinced that the benefits to be gained from adhering to an integrated strategy are enormous.
Mr President, in order to meet the objectives for air emission levels prescribed in the Fifth Environmental Action Programme, we need this directive on emission ceilings more than anything.
If we want to combat acidification, manure pollution and smog formation, we need to reduce the emissions of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, ammonia and volatile organic substances.
The Council' s conclusions concerning the EU acidification strategy have raised expectations which now have to be given substance.
This could even be done in a cost-effective way, as is evident from the explanatory note to the Commission proposal.
We all know by now that six months ago, higher emission levels were agreed at Gothenburg within a UN context.
These values, however, are the result of a political compromise between states, and the results of the model used by the Commission have been overlooked.
This model is sound and the results are well founded.
Also in view of the fact that, with these emission ceilings, the objectives of the EU' s Fifth Environmental Action Programme still cannot be met, a relaxation of the values is unjustified.
The first step towards achieving the emission ceilings is undoubtedly a dynamic implementation and enforcement of existing directives, such as the Auto-oil programme.
In addition, we need to lay down new legislation in this field as soon as possible.
In this connection, I would once more urge the Council to produce a common position on large furnaces as a matter of urgency.
Finally, additional policy, for example in the field of volatile solvents used in paints and varnishes, as well as in car spraying, will continue to be necessary.
Mr President, Commissioner, firstly I too would like to thank the rapporteur.
Now to the issues: it is obvious that there are differing opinions in this House on whether the proposal of the European Commission is too ambitious.
Many are saying that it cannot be implemented using current technology or only at an exorbitant cost.
The Commission itself says that the proposal can be implemented cost effectively.
I find it interesting that the European Commission is assuming in this that energy consumption in the European Union will increase by 8% in the coming years and that there will be no change in the proportions of energy forms used and therefore no reduction in the proportion of fossil fuels.
In my opinion this is not ambitious; if anything, the opposite.
We in this House have always agreed that we must reduce the proportion of fossil fuels and that we must save energy.
If we do not achieve this, then this is a declaration of environmental bankruptcy.
If the perceptions of the European Commission as regards this basic assumption become reality, then there is no need for us to talk any further in this House about climate protection.
We must increase energy efficiency, improve energy saving and promote regenerative energies whilst, at the same time, recognising that nuclear energy produces neither CO2 nor SO2 nor NH3, volatile organic compounds or NOx.
If we are honest about it, I think that the two ideas are not mutually incompatible and for this reason I would also like to expressly oppose certain Member States demanding exemptions under the directive if they renounce nuclear energy.
This cannot happen within the context of collective environmental responsibility.
All the same, I would like once again to stress the fact that the Commission proposal is not too ambitious, but if anything a little too unambitious.
I will support it tomorrow in the vote and I hope that the majority of the House will do the same.
Mr President, I certainly welcome this report and I gave it a lot of support in the Environment Committee.
I creates a proper framework in which we can work in the long term to reduce emissions.
The vast majority of the amendments I can support.
There are one or two that went through that I have some doubts about, particularly Amendment No 7, which I cannot see as being environmental at all, or as contributing to the overall attempt to reduce the amount of ozone-depleting substances at ground level anywhere in the Union.
I want to come to the issue which Mr Davies has addressed, namely, where we should start from.
With what targets are we to start?
Mr President, a series of quite practical and well-argued and debated figures were arrived at just before Christmas at Gothenburg under the UN/ECE protocol, and it seems to me that is the logical place to start.
It would not to my mind be the right place to finish, but it certainly would be the right place to start and it is the reason why I was convinced when I was there in the debate in the Industry Committee, as none of my colleagues from the Environment Committee were, that it was the right place to start.
It seems to me that the Commission figures are aspirational.
Yes, we could go there - we should be trying to go there, but I do not think we should be starting there.
We should be starting with the UN/ECE figures, with the Gothenburg protocol and revising them as is proposed by Mrs Myller in her report.
Mr President, Commissioner, I have, of course, nothing against the principle of the directive.
It is an important instrument for future environmental policy.
The Member States are given a clearer brief.
They know what they should be aiming for.
Upon examination of the table with the different ceilings for each Member State, however, I get the impression that there are double standards.
I note that, for example, my country, Belgium, has to meet the maximum possible level, rather than the economically viable level, but that, at the same time, areas in its vicinity which are just as polluted as my country can pursue a much laxer policy.
That is because a large country can use its better regions to offset its bad practices.
A small country is not in a position to do this.
I shall give you an example.
From your statistics and maps, it appears that in northern France, which is just as polluting and polluted as Belgium, matters can be processed at a lower level.
According to your calculations, the implementation of this directive costs each Belgian EUR 103 per annum, compared to EUR 15 for each person in France, including northern France.
That is eight times less.
This is partly due to the fact that we are a small country and we are surrounded by polluters.
One per cent of the GDP per annum is too much of a strain for my country.
I would therefore ask you to give me your backing for Amendments Nos 16 and 17, in which I request that the Belgian Government be given the chance to re-evaluate the situation based on the annual reports.
Mr President, the biggest environmental problem in my own country is the acidification of land, forests, lakes and watercourses.
Acidification leads to the death, or reduced growth, of forests and causes fish to die and fewer plants to grow.
Acidified water also releases heavy metals which constitute a health problem.
The countryside in the Nordic countries is particularly vulnerable to acidification because these countries are largely lacking in means to protect themselves against it.
Acidification occurs due to acid rain, caused by air polluting emissions produced by the burning of fossil fuels.
In Sweden and Finland, we have taken extensive measures in order to reduce national levels of air pollution.
We are making major efforts to add lime to lakes and wetlands.
We are, for the most part, complying with the emission targets proposed in the now current directive.
However, more than 80 per cent of the acid rain over our country comes from air pollution not in our own countries but in other West European countries.
We are therefore appealing for your help.
Many North Europeans believe that it is only through environmental cooperation with other EU countries that our problems with acidification can be solved.
To the members of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy I want to say that the UN resolution in accordance with the Gothenburg Protocol is far from being adequate.
I am convinced that the EU can be better than the UN at solving the environmental problems in Europe.
The proposed EU directive against air pollution can, in fact, constitute an important step towards combating the acidification of the countryside, mainly in the northern area of the EU.
In addition, significant reductions in the percentages of unhealthy ground-level ozone, mainly in big cities in the southern part of the EU, can at the same time be attained.
We ought therefore to have a common interest in applauding the present EU draft directive.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, a fair wind is blowing the way of the environment and the European Parliament welcomes this.
Indeed, by virtue of an unusually fortunate coincidence, directives on waste incineration, on limit values for national emissions of certain atmospheric pollutants, and ozone in ambient air all feature on today' s agenda.
Previously, atmospheric pollution used to be associated with roads and traffic.
Today, however, on a large scale, it refers to the whole world, and on a small scale, it even means the house we live in.
In short, it means our whole ecosystem, and action must be taken.
Setting emission limits for the four main pollutants is a sure way to help to reduce pollution, combat acidification and limit the harmful effects of these pollutants on human health and on plant life.
In its proposal for a directive, the European Commission proposes quantified national emission ceilings, which must be met by 2010 for the four pollutants I have just mentioned.
Furthermore, it estimates the costs for each Member State of complying with these limits.
I think that this is a good strategy.
Mrs Myller' s excellent report makes a lucid evaluation of the European Commission' s proposal and considers it to be balanced; the report also seeks to strengthen the proposal in some areas.
In particular, the committee approved a compulsory review of the directive by 2004, which will enable there to be a review of the limit values stipulated and measures adopted to ensure that these limit values are respected.
All of this seems quite reasonable.
Nevertheless, I must ask a question here.
Why should we not allow a Member State to prove that it is being treated particularly unfairly because of the way the directive is implemented, as a result, for example, of its geographical situation and its climate and the fact that these leave it at a major disadvantage?
Would this not be wise?
The EU system for combating atmospheric pollution is thus being extended, strengthened and refined.
EU environmental policy is becoming more and more the environmental policy of each Member State, with obvious advantages for all Europe' s citizens.
Mr President, Commissioner, the emission ceilings in the Commission' s proposal are very ambitious, more so than those agreed in the UN Economic Commission for Europe under the so-called Gothenburg Protocol, and so they should be.
For my own part, I am ready to endorse the compromise prepared by the PPE-DE Group in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, according to which we shall comply with the Commission' s proposal except with regard to the area of ammonia emissions, as the proposal will not cause great problems for my own country, Finland, or our neighbour, Sweden, as has become evident on many occasions in this discussion.
However, I also understand those views that advocate electing the ceilings proposed under the Gothenburg Protocol.
However the voting goes tomorrow, I believe the Commission should continuously monitor developments in all Member States, and promote action to help industry to make the necessary changes.
It is important that the environmental objectives are achieved as cost-effectively as possible throughout the whole Community.
Air quality in Europe has improved considerably in recent years.
Emission levels have decreased significantly, at least in the energy sector, in transport and in industry.
In recent years, there have been more and more EU acts in the area of the environment and new targets have been set for industry.
I think it is something of a problem that the targets are repeatedly changed before any proper assessment has been made of the effects, in practice, on the environment and the costs to industry of the legislative measures that have been adopted.
Before further obligations are imposed it is important to ensure that the action that has already been agreed is implemented in the Member States in every respect.
These two goals are not, in my opinion, mutually exclusive.
Finally, I believe there should be international agreements on ceilings for emissions for shipping and aircraft, and, at this stage, they should not fall within the scope of the directive.
Regarding long-term goals, I am of the opinion that there should be no strict deadline, but that Member States should endeavour, in accordance with their own goals, to meet the norms by the time stipulated or earlier.
Mr President, honourable Members of Parliament, we have made great strides in tackling acidification and also pollution in recent years.
I hope that this proposal will be another important step in this direction and that is why I especially want to thank the rapporteur Mrs Myller for her valuable work.
The Gothenburg Protocol is a step forward.
However, it is nowhere near enough.
The protocol goes only halfway towards the goal for acidification already agreed by Parliament and the Council.
A substantial number of people will die early if we do not adopt the measures proposed by the Commission.
The protocol is the result of a process in which there is too little pressure on the reluctant to do what they should.
We cannot let this deflect the Community from agreed goals.
The costs of the Commission's proposal must be kept in perspective, even on the Commission's highly pessimistic estimate which would not take full account of Kyoto or non-technical solutions.
They amount to only 0.08% of Community GDP in the year 2010.
Member States will have to do some of the things that will let them meet proposed emissions ceilings more cheaply if they are to live up to their Kyoto commitments.
Saying that the ceilings are too difficult is dangerously close to ignoring Kyoto.
Let me now turn to the amendments.
The Commission can accept fully Amendments Nos 3, 8, 9, 13, 19 and 21.
The Commission can accept in part the principle underlying Amendments Nos 1 and 2.
We will draft a recital which does not appear to restrict the Commission's right of initiative, for inclusion in our amended proposal.
We will also include a reference in Article 9 of the directive in order to make the new recital operational.
It follows that the Commission does not accept Amendment No 27.
The aim of the Commission's proposal is to leave as much flexibility as possible to Member States, but we cannot rule out further Community action if this would help Member States to meet emission ceilings more cost-effectively.
The Commission can also accept in part Amendment No 11 which would make further changes to Article 9.
We agree that review of the legislation should take account of aircraft emissions, further emission reductions in regions bordering on the Community, measures taken in applicant countries and transport factors.
The Commission cannot however agree to bring forward the dates for reports to Parliament and Council.
In 2003 the Commission will have almost no data from Member States on which to report and base any decisions.
The Commission will not know in 2011 whether or not ceilings were met in 2010 because of the time that must be allowed for Member States to compile inventories.
We accept in part the principles underlying Amendment No 12.
We will therefore redraft Article 9(3) to incorporate much of the material in the proposed amendment.
The Commission accepts the principles of Amendment No 23.
The reference to countries outside the UN/ECE process must be restricted to those who have supplied data and whose emissions are relevant to pollution in the Community.
The Commission accepts Amendments Nos 24, 25 and 26 in principle, and will also take them into account when it redrafts Article 9 as part of its amended proposal.
The Commission has a great deal of sympathy with the concerns underlying Amendments Nos 16 and 17.
Allowance should be made for the fact that smaller Member States have less room to spread the load.
However we are dealing here with transboundary pollution, so the Commission considers that adjustments to ceilings for individual Member States can only be made as part of a general review of ceilings.
We will therefore propose a new recital and changes to Article 9, which will ensure that effects on smaller Member States are properly taken into account on review.
The Commission can accept that part of Amendment No 20 that would insert "an appropriate" into Recital 9.
We do not accept the remainder of Amendment No 20.
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 15, 28, 29 and 32.
They seek to replace emission ceilings that are designed to meet the agreed Community target for acidification, and to protect our citizens' health, with the emission ceilings in the Gothenburg Protocol.
Gothenburg ceilings fall far short of what is needed as has already been said.
The Commission considers that, if Member States take seriously the Kyoto commitments, the emission ceilings that it has proposed will not be difficult to implement.
We may well be able to go further by 2010, but this is something that can only be decided when we know how Member States will meet their Kyoto targets.
We cannot therefore accept Amendment No 31.
The Commission cannot accept Amendments No 4 and 14: under the principle of subsidiarity it is for Member States, not the Commission, to determine penalties for breaches of national legislation.
Furthermore, Amendment No 14 seeks to restrict the Commission's discretion under the Treaty to decide when to bring infringement proceedings.
Amendments Nos 5, 18 and 30 are also unacceptable.
The Commission is committed to pursuing long-term objectives for protection of the environment and human health, but we simply do not have enough information today to predict when long-term objectives might be reached.
The Commission must reject Amendment No 6.
Emissions from international maritime traffic and cruising aircraft cannot be wholly controlled by individual Member States, nor even by Community action, and cannot therefore be included in national emission ceilings.
Action where appropriate must be taken in the International Maritime Organisation or the International Civil Aviation Organisation.
Last week, the IMO agreed to a proposal from the Community to declare the North Sea a sulphur dioxide control area.
The Commission will examine whether further such proposals should be made to the IMO, and whether international action is also needed on aircraft emissions.
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 7.
It is based on a misleading comparison with the solvents directive, where processes may involve high temperatures.
Non-volatile organic compounds are automatically excluded from the definition of "volatile organic compound" in these proposals since they are not found in the air in ambient conditions and do not contribute to ozone formation.
The proposed definition is identical in the Gothenburg Protocol.
We must maintain technical consistency.
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 10.
It would remove an essential obligation for Member States regularly to update emission inventories.
Finally, Mr President, we do not accept Amendment No 22.
The Commission's proposed wording on the key issue of public information is in line with agreements on the first two air quality daughter directives.
Finally, I should like to answer Mrs Oomen-Ruijten because she asked about the proposals on large combustion plants.
The answer is that the Council failed to reach a common position in December and the Commission is supporting the Portuguese presidency in its effort to make progress in parallel with the progress on this proposal.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Environmental legislation
The next item is the joint debate on two oral questions to the Commission on structural fund programmes in the Member States and national implementation of EU environmental laws (B5 - 0014/2000 and B5 0208/2000).
Mr President, I would like, on behalf of the committee, to move at least one of the oral questions.
First of all, I sympathise with the Commissioner's desire to get better implementation of European Union law.
That is something which the committee as a whole is keen to see.
I want to quote from an article in the United Kingdom Sunday Telegraph this last Sunday.
The opening paragraph is "The European Commission has told Britain that it will lose up to 200 million pounds in grants for poorer regions unless it implements European Union laws to protect birds and their habitats".
I would like to know if the Commission is making these threats and, if it is, whether it feels that it has an entitlement to do so.
That is a question which my German colleagues who are moving the other question want to follow up.
The Environment Committee is very interested in finding ways of incorporating environmental considerations into other policies.
The question is: is this a constitutionally viable way of doing that?
What we are exploring here tonight in this crowded House is the question of linkage.
Linkage, in other words, using the threat of the withdrawal or withholding of funds to try to get better implementation of legislation in what may sometimes be a rather unconnected sector but in this case is quite a closely connected sector, is one that from time to time European Members of Parliament look at and then veer away from when they realise that it might affect the regions that they represent.
That is something which we find reflected in the views not only of some of the German Members here tonight but also in some of my British colleagues.
We need to ask to what extent the European Commission is prepared to use the provisions of Articles 12 and 41 of the general regulation on the structural funds to delay granting money where there is inadequate information on the impact of the projects which have applied for the money on the environment.
At its worst, we want to avoid the possibility that the aims of the structural funds and the European Union's concern to protect its natural habitats may collide.
For instance, you may want to build a motorway across one part of the European Union in order to spend structural fund money and bring jobs to that part of the Union, but should you not be careful if that motorway is being driven through what should have been designated a protected site by the national government?
Such possibilities have arisen in the past, especially in relation to major infrastructure projects.
We want to avoid that, but we believe that such collisions could result form the failure of the Member States to implement the habitats directive and the birds directive also, and in particular to submit to the Commission by as early as June 1995 a list of sites potentially of Community importance, either as hosting natural habitat types or representing the habitats of animal and plant species of Community importance.
We must ask: without such information, how can the Commission be certain that structural fund projects, which are usually large, will not damage sites potentially of European Union-wide importance?
Future generations will not forgive us if we allow irreplaceable habitats to be destroyed, whose preservation we actually voted for eight years ago when we adopted our report on the habitats directive and then again in 1997 with the changes to the annex of the directive.
The fault lies with those Member States which have failed to observe the directive, and that includes my own.
If doubt hangs over their entitlement to structural funds, that is the fault of national governments.
That doubt has now fallen over the position of the United Kingdom and its entitlement to Structural Funds because the United Kingdom government has not fully implemented or complied with the provisions of the habitats directive.
It is in the power of the United Kingdom government, the German government and other national governments to remove that threat by complying with the habitats and birds directive.
In the United Kingdom, structural funding for counties such as Cornwall, which I represent and which has recently been granted Objective 1 status, faces a twin threat from government indolence on this directive and from government incompetence and meanness.
Even if the European Commission uses its best efforts in the United Kingdom there is no guarantee that the scrooge-like United Kingdom Chancellor will find matching funding.
Mr President, the FFH directive is an issue which has concerned us for some time now and we are currently experiencing a few teething problems.
However, to begin let me say the following: the FFH directive is an important directive and creates a new climate in Europe for the protection of nature, the environment and birds.
I would not want to change or spare anything in achieving this.
I also find it encouraging that the Commission is consequently taking care that EU legislation is being implemented.
All the same, in the case of the FFH directive the question arises as to whether the legislation which we have adopted is actually implementable and I can see obvious weak points.
As I see it, the FFH directive is an instance where the legislation is not matched to the feasibilities of the regions.
I see a problem in the various legal interpretations in the Member States due to the partially unclear definitions in the EU legislation, whilst, on the other hand, there is a lack of strong subsidiary aspects and approaches.
Revision of the FFH directive, including the current difficulties in implementation, should not, I think be excluded.
Alongside this general criticism of the FFH directive, however, I also see a particular problem with the amalgamation of the EU environmental and structural policies.
Article 12 of the structural funds regulation adopted on 21 June 1999 provides for the possibility of sanctions in the event of violations in the following areas: implementation of environmental legislation, breaches of public contracts and failure to observe equality between men and women.
To date, the Commission has only threatened sanctions in the case of the FFH directive.
Does it also intend to initiate sanction mechanisms in the other areas?
In my opinion, this is a very problematic course of action.
The EU has a quite different means of enforcing sanctions, i.e. the European Court of Justice.
The possible cutting or withholding of money from the Structural Fund is a form of sanction whose effect on the regions concerned cannot just be disregarded.
What will happen with projects which are already under way and what will happen, above all, in those cases where a region does not receive any money from the Structural Fund?
What sanctions will the Commission then impose for non-implementation of EU environment law?
That the Commission is also totally unsure is shown by the fact that it initially wanted to include the entire state in the sanctions, then only a region, as you pointed out to Environment Minister Trittin, Commissioner.
I would ask that we make this point absolutely clear here.
Mr President, hearing the debate unfold and watching my colleagues and the clock, I am not sure what I want any more: protected areas for fauna, flora and habitats or protected areas for ecologically minded delegates.
At the moment, I am more interested in protected areas for delegates, but that is another matter.
Our question to you, Commissioner, has another purpose.
I would have liked to hear your answer first, but you have chosen to speak at the end of the debate.
We are discussing something here of which most know the history.
The fauna-flora-habitats legislation should have been implemented by 1994 - it is now the year 2000.
The European Union list of the relevant nature conservation sites should have been ready in 1998 - it is now the year 2000.
The Member States should have notified the Commission of their sites by 1995 - it is now the year 2000.
Many Member States, including my own, did not do as required.
Germany, for example, implemented the legislation in 1998 instead of 1994 - only four years late.
But what does it matter?!
As a result, the European Union list is obviously not ready.
And how could it be?
Many Member States and many regions have not announced their sites.
Now Mr Schnellhardt has even suggested that perhaps we made a mistake with the fauna-flora-habitats directive.
Perhaps, Mr Schnellhardt, you are right that it wasn' t totally practical, it wasn' t perfect, it wasn' t quite right.
Unfortunately, however, it is not the procedure in the European Union that if you don' t like a piece of legislation you don' t bother observing it.
If that were the case, then there would also be areas and matters which you and I would not like.
But we do have this unfortunate system in the European Union - what you call legal certainty.
We do have this unfortunate system - it is what you call legislation, which has been adopted in this European Parliament with the consent of the Member States.
It must be observed!
It might perhaps be a bit too strict and too legalistic, but that' s the way it is: we are living in a European Union with a legal system.
Mr Jarzembowski is the one who supports this most of all because he comes from Hamburg which is one of the few regions of Germany to be nominated, along with Berlin, my own area, although as city states we have it particularly easy, I think I can say with some justification.
However, I do not want to pass sentence on Mr Schnellhardt, who comes from one of the new federal states who do not have things quite so good.
That is an internal German problem which we will resolve at another time and in another place in the House.
Today, Mr President, we are talking about the fact that Europe is losing its countryside and about the fact that Europe must observe legal certainty.
I shall come to my final point: Commissioner, it you do not succeed in going to the European Court of Justice and bringing to account those Member States which are not properly implementing legislation, you will lose your authority and your legitimacy.
You must do it!
If you think the legislation is no good, let us revise it.
If you think it is sound, go to the European Court of Justice, and be quick about it!
Mr President, it is a pleasure to face the Commissioner for the fifth time today at this unearthly hour.
I congratulate her for her efforts in trying to make sure that the habitats directive and associated directives are properly implemented.
I wish her well.
I have heard that some in the Commission believe that they have managed to squeeze more out of Member States in the past six months than they had in the previous six years.
If that is the case then it is good news indeed.
But the Commissioner is riding between two horses: one seeks to protect endangered species, the other seeks to assist the poorest parts of Europe.
In fact, it is a position in which I too find myself to some extent.
Some simple questions: how long is the Commissioner prepared to perform this balancing act?
Just how much must Member States do to meet her requirements?
Is she really prepared to tell people such as those whom I represent in Merseyside and the North-West of England that they must lose Structural Funds because their governments have failed to comply with the habitats directive?
That is the balance I suppose.
Fundamentally and finally, is she prepared to compromise to find solutions, if the undertakings being given by government or the work being undertaken by governments takes longer than we would wish?
For example, if a Minister goes down on his knees, cut his wrists and writes a pledge in letters of blood that he will deliver the habitats directive in full within an agreed timetable, is she prepared to assist the region and provide structural funding in such circumstances?
- The question on how the Structural Funds respect our environmental legislation is a critical one and I appreciate the interest expressed in this matter by Mrs Jackson, Mr Poettering and Mrs Schnellhardt.
We had a discussion on this subject in the Commission meeting today particularly as regards the link to the habitats and the birds directives.
The main principle is clear: the actions cofinanced under the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund should contribute to the protection and improvement of the environment in the European Union.
This is confirmed in the new regulatory framework for the Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund and in the Commission's related guidelines.
We should remember that both the Cohesion Fund and the Structural Funds finance important investments into environmental infrastructure such as waste water treatment facilities or waste management systems.
Let me make one thing clear first to avoid misunderstandings.
The general regulation on the Structural Funds states that 'operations financed must be in conformity with the provisions of the Treaty, with instruments adopted under it and with Community policies and actions' .
Contrary to the suggestion in one of the oral questions, this does not represent a new obligation on the Member States.
In fact, it is based closely on the previous framework regulation on the Structural Funds for the programming period 1994-1999.
The Structural Funds Regulation has been approved by the Member States and the Council.
With regard to protection of sites under the habitats and birds directives, it is important that we do not give money to measures which adversely affect sites deserving protection - paying out money with one hand and maybe fining a Member State with the other hand.
This is what we confirmed in the Commission this afternoon, and Michel Barnier will set out our decisions in a letter to the Member States in a few days.
In this regard, the Commission intends to use all the possibilities offered by the new regulatory framework for the Cohesion and Structural Funds.
In following up the letter sent to Member States by Commissioners Wulf-Mathies and Bjerregaard on June 23 1999, the Commission will insist that, in the programming documents for the period 2000-2006, there must be a firm and irrevocable commitment guaranteeing that the programmes are consistent with the protection of sites under Natura 2000.
Member States will be required to notify sites if they have not already done so within an agreed timetable, and to guarantee formally that they will not undertake action leading to the deterioration of potential Natura 2000 sites.
The Commission will then use all the means at its disposal to ensure that commitments entered into the programming documents are fully respected.
It intends to monitor the situation in the Member States, including the use of on-the-spot checks.
The Commission's representative in the monitoring committee for each programme will also seek to ensure that Member States' obligations with regard to Natura 2000 are fully respected.
In addition, should a Member State not honour its commitment to provide the lists under the habitats and birds directives within the timeframe set in the programming documents, the Commission will take immediate action.
This includes in particular excepting specific situations and with respect to the principle of proportionality - possible recourse to the provisions of the Structural or Cohesion Fund regulations in relation to the suspension of payments.
Of course, all this is in addition to the ongoing infringement procedures against a number of Member States for their failure to implement these directives.
In summing up, what we decided in Commission today is that we will insist that Member States send us their Natura 2000 lists: they should already have been sent, as has been stated many years ago.
We will use the means at our disposal to ensure that they honour the commitments that they have entered into.
Without the lists neither the Member States nor the Commission can ensure that we protect important nature sites when carrying out Structural Fund operations, for the simple reason that we do not know where these sites are.
One more word on the habitats directive.
The Commission does not agree that there is a lack of clarity in this directive.
The directive is intended to establish a frame of reference which, in accordance with the subsidiarity principle, leaves the detailed implementation to the Member States.
While the Commission has no plans to revise the directive, its services are ready to provide guidance to the Member States on its implementation and we are finally starting to move on this.
The only sites which the Commission takes into account under the habitats directive are those put forward by the authorities in the Member States.
So-called shadow lists can only help in efforts to identify sites inside the Member States.
At Community level, they can contribute to scientific reference material in the creation of inventories of natural habitats and existing species.
Thank you for clarifying that matter, but we are still rather distressed at the statement you have just made because we were under the impression that the previous Commission was working on the simple principle of 'no lists, no funds' .
You are now going back on that principle; you are going back to the Member States to ask them to provide the lists.
They are seriously late.
They have completely failed to meet the requirements of the European directives.
So, today, it is still not clear to us whether you intend to utilise the technical, legal and political means available to you in order to enforce European directives.
As a result, I can see the Member States laughing their socks off at this new position because, in the final analysis, once again they have gained a little more time and it is nature conservation which is going to suffer.
From reading the various reports of the European Union, and the European Environment Agency, it is clear that environmental damage is still continuing.
The question I am asking, then, is as follows: today, when accepting the draft Community support framework for Portugal, did you demand the list of protected sites under the terms of the directives?
Mr President, my first report as an MEP was on precisely the same topic as that which we are discussing here today: the environment and the Structural Funds.
And, of course, I came to the basic conclusion that projects financed by the Structural Funds should not, under any circumstances, damage the environment of the Member States and, to that end, greater consideration should be given to the environmental dimension at all levels when programming and implementing the relevant Union policies.
I still believe this today; our main objective must always be sustainable development, i.e. development which respects and promotes the environment.
Therefore, Parliament should take this line and call on the Commission, in its vote, to implement the Structural Fund programmes in a way which takes account of Community environmental legislation, particularly with regard to directives on the preservation of natural habitats and wild birds.
At the same time, however, we should avoid over-reacting.
We should not suspend all the programmes or refuse to approve any of them just because we cannot guarantee that the odd regulation will be upheld.
This reminds me of a Greek proverb: you cannot chop off your head just because you have tooth ache.
I am not suggesting that we contravene legislation.
Rather, I am suggesting that we go ahead and implement the programmes and, at the same time, monitor the implementation of legislation and ensure that the Commission keeps Parliament informed.
It is important to remember that very important measures and projects are financed under the Structural Funds in the most problematic countries and regions of the Union, countries and regions which desperately need help in their endeavours to develop and converge with the more developed Member States.
We should also bear in mind, Mr President, that measures promoting the environment are often financed by the Structural Funds.
If we were to suspend all the programmes without exception for the reason given by a number of speakers here, we would be doing our environment more harm than good.
Mr President, there is no disagreement on the fact that we want to comply with this piece of legislation.
I was surprised to see you quoted in my press as threatening to cut off European funding.
I consider that to be a disproportionate action for what we are trying to achieve.
You will know that in the case of the UK, at a moderation seminar, the Commission agreed a timetable to allow for review and inclusion of additional sites.
In Paris a timetable was set to allow for a revised list to be presented in July with another moderation in October 2000.
We are determined, after years of foot-dragging by the previous Conservative Government - Mrs Jackson's party - to meet our requirements in the UK, in good faith, to follow the proper legal and proper consultation to ensure this directive is complied with.
This process is ongoing and I have no reason to believe that any plans submitted for regional funding breached the EU habitats and wild bird directives at this stage.
Therefore, I fail to understand or accept the linkage that is trying to be established through this resolution.
But let us be clear.
Any refusal by the Commission to approve the programme - for example, in Merseyside - thus undermining £2 billion worth of investment, or any other Objective I area, including Cornwall, involving 5 million people in the UK, would actually breach - you said this Commissioner - the well-established Commission principle of proportionality, namely the obligation to pursue the least restrictive way of ensuring compliance with EU legislation - in this case the habitats and wild bird directive.
We therefore need to have a balanced relationship between means and ends.
In the final analysis any breach of EU legislation must actually go the European Court of Justice.
I cannot accept that such a balance means the cutting off of vital lifelines of EU funds to the poorest and neediest regions.
Commissioner Barnier probably said to you today, Commissioner Wallström, that all European programmes should be able to start without undue delay because it can be extremely difficult to make up for lost time later on.
I therefore ask the Commissioner to take collective responsibility for ensuring that Structural Fund programmes are implemented in time.
That is your responsibility as a member of the college.
Unlike the last speaker I would like to congratulate you, Commissioner, on your threat to cut off European funding.
It should not just be an idle threat.
You should carry it out if Member States do not act responsibly.
I come from a Member State which benefits from European funding but I am appalled at its track record on the implementation of the wild birds directive, on the habitats directive and many other directives.
We are, per capita, the worst country as regards complaints.
It is about time the European Commission took action and decided that if you are not willing to abide by the rules then the funding has to be cut off.
If this affects my own country, then so be it.
Member States have to comply with European regulations.
Former commissioners wrote to the Irish Government saying: "If you do not have on your list habitat areas to be protected then when you put in your national plan how are we going to assess whether it is in compliance with European directives?"
You must stick to that.
If Member States are not willing to comply with the directives, cut off the funding.
I would support you one hundred percent.
- (PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, there are too many projects and programmes funded by the EU that do not comply with the objectives of sustainable development and nature conservation required by the Treaties and by secondary legislation.
It is easy to demonstrate this: on the one hand, we allocate almost half of our resources to agriculture, but we nevertheless continue to fund an intensive form of farming designed to achieve high levels of productivity, whatever the cost, ignoring the support available for organic farming and extensive farming.
On the other hand, we spend a third of our resources on the Structural Funds, but the projects funded under those funds are the first to contravene directives on habitats.
Portugal is a perfect example of what I have just been talking about, and as it is a perfect example, it merits a thorough explanation.
In Portugal there is not only no definitive list of protected sites of Community importance for inclusion in the Natura 2000 network, but even though it is compulsory, there are no plans, rules or mechanisms for the management and protection of sites that have already been selected.
In other words, the Portuguese sites that already form part of the Natura 2000 network are completely at the mercy of unscrupulous groups of financiers and construction companies, because of the lack of instruments to protect them.
The most serious case is that of the tourist development that has been approved for the Abano area of the Sintra-Cascais national park, and I call on the Commission to intervene in this as a matter of urgency.
In Portugal, however, it is the state itself that is currently preparing to carry out projects, some of which are being funded by the Structural Funds, for sites which have been or will be classified by the EU as part of the Natura 2000 network.
Unfortunately, what is happening in Portugal is not unique - it is merely a good example.
I therefore hope that the Commission will bring its legal authority to bear and refuse to approve any funding for the third Community support framework until Member States send in their lists for the Natura 2000 network.
Mr President, what is at stake in this debate is whether the EU's commitment to sustainable development in theory, actually means something in practice, whether when push comes to shove, we are prepared to make some very difficult decisions.
Sustainable development is supposed to be about integrating economic development with environmental concerns.
That is what the EU has signed up to in countless treaties from the Rio Earth Summit onwards.
That is what Article 6 of our own EC Treaty obliges us to do - to integrate those policies.
At the heart of this debate is the issue of economic development coming right up against environmental constraints.
We are going to be increasingly faced with hard decisions on this.
It will be a very good test of what our commitment to sustainable development really means.
At a recent plenary session, we talked a lot about coherence in EU policies.
Members from all over this House were rightly emphasising how important policy coherence is, yet here we have an outstanding example of policy incoherence.
That is why the Greens are supporting very strongly this resolution from the Environment Committee.
Mr President, Commissioner, I have listened to your address very carefully, but I have not fully understood it.
I will read the communication from the Commission very carefully, but perhaps you can help me to understand matters.
Are you of the opinion that the Commission can block entire approvals for plans, or is it just payment of funds for individual projects?
That was not at all clear.
Let me say two or three things.
Firstly, I think that Community law must be seen as a whole.
Community law provides that if a Member State fails to implement legislation, or implements it incorrectly, the State will be brought to justice.
You should do that!
You should not try to achieve through the back door, through the non-payment of money, what you are unable to achieve through legal action and orderly process.
This is something which I do not think is quite right.
If you are saying that Member States are contravening Community law, breaching Community law, then bring these Member States to justice!
But to fail to do this in favour of the back-door approach of trying to stop the payment of money in order to indirectly force the hand of the Member States is something that I quite simply consider to be wrong and even cowardly!
Secondly, Commissioner, the Structural Funds are not given out to damage the countryside.
They are given out to create jobs and to kick-start the regions.
We must not therefore, in order to achieve another objective, obstruct or abandon the original aim of supporting disadvantaged areas.
What is more, it should not be the case that one Commissioner sets himself up as some sort of Supreme Commissioner who can then dictate to the other.
None of us want anything for the environment to be left undone.
But it isn' t on, Mr President, Commissioner, that regions might suffer because Member States are failing in their duties!
Here too we must watch out!
- (PT) Mr President, following the words of my colleagues which prove how necessary the resolution we are discussing actually is, I should like to use my speaking time to condemn two particularly damaging cases which affect my country, Galicia, but which could equally be taking place in other European countries.
In Pontevedra, practically within the city limits, and occupying a particularly sought-after location by the sea, the huge industrial chemicals complex built by the public companies ENCE and ELNOSA, which produce cellulose pulp and chlorine, is contaminating water and air with the connivance of the Galician and Spanish authorities and in spite of the continuing protests of the local population.
In Vila Garcia de Arousa, repositories have been installed in a wharf financed by the ERDF to hold 80 000 cubic metres of hydrocarbons, which pose a serious threat to fishing and related activities which provide jobs for 18 000 people, if these hydrocarbons are handled on a regular basis or if accidents with transporting vessels occur.
Mr President, I believe the issue of ensuring integrated and correct implementation of the Community' s environmental policy is perhaps the greatest challenge facing the Member States today.
Unfortunately, however, the requirements of environmental policy are not being respected and are not being properly incorporated when programmes and projects are formulated and approved in the Member States.
The problem is in fact much worse; in addition to the fact that environmental legislation is being contravened in projects and programmes which have received Community approval and funding, it is also being contravened during the implementation of projects and programmes in receipt of private or national funding.
I should just like to draw your attention to paragraph b and point 3 and 8 of the resolution which takes account of precisely this issue.
It is absurd for EU environmental legislation not to be applied or respected for all projects in the Member States, irrespective of whether they require Community or some other type of funding.
We should make it quite clear to countries which contravene environmental legislation that the Commission, which is the guardian of primary and secondary Community law, will ensure that the environment is not damaged when projects are constructed.
This flagrant violation of our basic environmental laws must not be allowed to continue.
We need, once and for all, to come out and say what is happening in the Member States, because transparency, courage and the truth are the best policy.
And the truth is that the directives for the Natura 2000 network have been inadequately implemented both in my country and in other Member States.
For example, despite the fact that the Maliakos Gulf and the wetlands of the Sperkhios river have been designated as conservation areas under the Natura 2000 network, there are proposals to bridge the Maliakos Gulf, in violation of Community law, despite the fact that an alternative solution could be found.
I therefore insist and we call on the Commission to ensure that EU environmental legislation is properly implemented and respected in all projects and, if need be, to take recourse to the European Court, as another speaker has suggested, and propose huge fines and take a strict line.
Mr President, I cannot resist starting by saying it is well-known that my Irish colleague across the way lives in the capital city of Dublin where these sites will not be troubling her too much.
Having said that I support the thrust of what is before us here today and the ability of the Commission to use as a carrot-and-stick approach the Structural Funds to encourage in perhaps the most effective way recalcitrant Member States such as Ireland, to get their house in order in relation to the Natura 2000 sites.
No Member State has fully met the requirements of the habitats directive, for example, let alone met them within the legally-binding timetable.
Commission procedures are under way against nearly every Member State - 12 Member States in fact - under the habitats directive at the moment.
Twelve European countries are before the European Court.
The wild birds directive is little better with 13 countries currently facing a legal challenge for failure to comply with the directive 20 years after it was agreed.
It looks as if there are six countries currently at risk for delays or rejections of proposals for the use of Structural Funds, including my own, the UK, certain German Länder, France, Sweden and Belgium.
Only last December I raised this issue in the Irish Senate and cited all the various directives - mainly environmental directives - we had failed to transpose within the timetable or years after the deadline for transposition had taken place.
Constitutional challenge is often quoted in Ireland as one of our reasons.
Indeed our written constitution with protection for property rights has proved very difficult for the government to get over many of the issues in relation to designation of sites.
But with the principle of proportionality well respected, proposals to use the structural funds in this regard will help countries like Ireland to focus on what they actually need to do.
In this regard I have proposed tomorrow two amendments to item 2 and item 3, adding a word: "to ensure that EU-funded programmes do not cause 'unauthorised' damage or destruction to actual or potential protected sites".
Perhaps you will take those on board in items 2 and 3 of the motion.
Mr President, Commissioner, implementation of the flora-fauna-habitats directive is causing quite a stir in many regions and also running into major difficulties.
Vaguely formulated application criteria are also the cause of the nine-year plus delay in implementation.
In my home region, a dialogue was begun prior to identification of the FFH sites.
The process brought the following problems to light in particular.
Small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises are experiencing a restriction in the utilisation and cultivation of arable and grazing land as a result of the directive.
This means indirectly a reduction in the value of this land.
In municipal areas the directive in its current form is leading to the obstruction of important infrastructure measures.
The threat of withholding Structural Funds in the event of non-implementation is an attempt by the Commission to put pressure on the Member States and is undoubtedly the wrong approach since stopping the payment of Structural Funds due to non-implementation also carries the risk that on-going projects may be jeopardised, thereby stopping or jeopardising the economic development of a region in general.
Without any doubt, this cannot be in the interests of the Commission.
It would be sensible to re-examine and revise Directive 9243 to provide more certainty and clarity.
Citizens have the right to know the consequences which they can expect.
Before notifying a site an owner must know which conservation objectives will be achieved using which measures.
For this reason, I ask that you support the amendment which I have tabled jointly with Mr Schnellhardt.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to make a few final comments.
This is not about the implementation of the habitats directive.
Remember that the directive is not an effort directive, it is a result directive.
This is about meeting our obligations under the Structural Funds regulation and without these lists we cannot ensure that we protect important natural sites during Structural Funds operations.
That is what this is about.
If for example in a country which we have discussed today there are 40 projects currently under way that would affect sites to be protected, how can we check that if we have not got the lists?
It is the obligation of the Commission to ensure that these sites are protected.
So does this mean that we will not approve the operational programmes to answer your question?
We are reasonable.
We do not want to delay the process of approving the operational programmes under the Structural Funds but the programmes must include a firm commitment by the Member State that they will send us their list by a certain point in time.
That is a clear timetable.
If they do not do so, we will launch the procedure for suspending payments without delay.
That is the decision we have taken today.
To make it very clear also to Mrs Isler Beguin that means that what was written in the common letter by Mrs Bjerregaard and Mrs Wulf-Mathies is still valid.
We have to understand that this is an opportunity for us to live up to our obligations under the regulations for the Structural Funds.
This will be a very important tool.
Of course, we hope that this will not be necessary because the Member States will provide us with their lists.
That is what we have to hope for and maybe pray for too.
I have received one motion for resolution pursuant to Rule 40 (5).
The debate is closed.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon.
(The sitting was closed at 12.09 a.m.)