# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
That opportunity is what I think the present report is giving us.
Mr President, like many others, I want to thank Mr Katiforis for an interesting report.
When I read the report and see the picture of the EU' s economy that is described there, I think it is quite a worrying picture.
Investment levels are too low, unemployment is still too high and there is insufficient growth.
It is not, therefore, perhaps so strange that the euro is continuing to lose ground to other currencies, in spite of rumours to the effect that the European Central Bank is purchasing the euro on the quiet in order to support it.
The rapporteur observes that stability is not an end in itself, which is something I agree with.
There is far too much talk about stability, convergence and coordination and far too little about the factors which give rise to innovation and development.
As far as I am concerned, EMU cooperation looms ponderously large as a colossus which will have difficulty keeping afloat in the present swelling economy.
My conclusions about this differ completely, however, from those of the previous speaker.
I believe we have to place our confidence in human resources, partly through a macro-economic policy which creates demand and potential new jobs and partly - and perhaps above all - by relying upon measures in the workplace such as training, democratisation and good social conditions.
In this context, I can, in fact, see the EMU project' s main weakness, for it is true that you cannot act like Superman and raise the European economies from above.
Instead, you have to mobilise working people and the people out there in the Member States.
Mr President, Commissioner, I have the feeling that some of the previous speakers have not read the 1999 annual report on the Union economy in its entirety and have made a conscious decision not to listen to my Group' s spokesman, Karl von Wogau, for the document that we are debating today, and which has had a report written on it, points to the fact that the introduction of the euro has been a success.
It points to the problems experienced in 1999, when, notwithstanding the problems, there was currency and price stability, increased employment, the beginnings of a period of upturn, and it was possible to make a start on reducing unemployment.
In terms of outlook, the document points to an upswing, to long-term prospects and the measures required to achieve this, which Karl von Wogau then proceeded to enlarge upon.
I am pleased that the debate we have been having here has been a tough one, for it underlines the fact that there are various approaches to economic policy.
We want to continue along the successful European path to growth and employment and a functioning internal market, to hasten our progress and supplement this with the necessary measures.
The left-wing of this House does not want to continue along this path, rather it makes dramatic statements such as: what we need is state intervention, not the extension and consolidation of the market economy.
State intervention has always led to a high level of debt, and a higher level of debt has always damaged growth and employment, as well as social justice.
That is what the debate we are having is all about, on the subject of which I have this to say to you: we need more freedom and less state intervention.
It is sound framework conditions and not state intervention that enables enterprises to create growth and employment.
Mr President, I would like to respond to you straightaway, Mr Karas.
The Socialists in this House want the internal market too.
We too are campaigning for and arguing in favour of the euro, but we want a social market economy and not a US-style market economy.
In any case, hitherto this House was agreed, with a few exceptions, that we did not wish to model ourselves on America, but that we wanted Europe to pursue a different path, hence my disappointment at the fact that we are unlikely to reach a consensus of opinion.
We have seen, Mr Mann, that it will not be enough to deliver fine appeals and issue demands, for what we need are quantifiable objectives.
This method has proved its worth as regards the euro and is proving its worth at the moment as far as measures to combat youth unemployment are concerned.
All 15 countries have instituted specific measures to this end and there will be a need for this across the board.
We are also expecting that in future there will be a more comprehensive debate on employment policy in the Member States, involving the two sides of industry, regional partners, those in charge at local level - for that is not yet the case - and of course we expect - and we are also agreed on this - that there will be socio-political convergence, in the light of modernisation of the social systems of course.
But when Mr von Wogau says that we are way behind on the reform front in Europe then I am left wondering whom he is actually comparing us with.
Surely not with Japan?
And surely you do not seriously mean the American system?
Take a look at the health care system there.
Nowhere in Europe is it as expensive as it is in America, or as ghastly.
And of course we want to afford women opportunities on the labour market.
Insufficient consideration has been given to this aspect in the various employment policy options as well.
Finally, there is one point which I will agree with you on, namely that concerning qualifications.
It is indeed a shortcoming that Germany is having to bring in experts from Asia and India.
We ought to have begun attending to the question of qualifications and training opportunities years ago.
Unfortunately, however, Germany has rested on its laurels in this respect over the last 16 years.
Mr President, the economic situation of the European Union from the viewpoint of the workers is eighteen million unemployed people, it is the generalisation of insecurity, of low wages, of deteriorating working conditions.
The Commission has the cynicism to consider wage restraint as a positive factor, whereas in France alone, over three million workers receive a salary that is close to the poverty line and they barely survive any better than the other three million people kept unemployed by an insane economy.
But you never speak of restraining the income of shareholders that is infinitely higher from the outset and which increases shockingly every year.
What you have as a result are all these major trusts that cut jobs while their profits are high, and which often make staff redundant simply to make their share price rise on the stock market.
Eleven thousand job losses at Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc, twenty two thousand at Unilever, ten thousand at ABB/Alsthom Power, not to mention all the others.
The economic growth on which you pride yourself only benefits a fortunate minority, the owners and shareholders of the large industrial and banking groups.
But beware of the backlash from the workers and the unemployed, who we keep telling that everything is getting better and better while they find that their lives are not improving but, on the contrary, are getting worse.
This is the key ideological struggle for Europe facing us.
This debate, I think, has summed it up.
The key political divide has been very obviously stated this evening, and it is no surprise that this issue has polarised the debate in a House which is known for its consensus and its carve-out politics, and I am delighted to see this difference of opinion made so clear, because this report is a radical one.
This report is a wake-up call to Europe.
This report recommends radical measures, which in essence will make it easier to employ people.
It is as simple as that.
The reason why we have such crippling unemployment rates in Europe is that it is too difficult in many cases to employ people because of the red tape and the regulation and the inflexibility of the labour markets.
This is the only way to go forward, because the real way to deliver social justice in Europe - and after all that is what we are all here to do - is to deliver prosperity and opportunities and jobs.
This report signals very clearly the most effective way to do that, because Europe has to wake up.
It cannot create jobs just by government spending.
It cannot create jobs by legislating to cut working hours, as if jobs were a cake that you carve up and divide between people.
The real world simply does not work like that.
And if Europe wants to be left behind, left behind to stagnation and to unemployment and to statism and to corporatism, than yes, vote against this report tomorrow.
But if you want Europe to go forward and to start delivering to the people of Europe, then I would call upon you all to give your support to this report, because it will deliver those jobs, and it will deliver those opportunities, and it is the only way to do so.
Mr President, the original version of the Giorgos Katiforis report had the great merit of making strong recommendations, based on the precise observations of the Commission report on the economic situation in Europe, for a European Union strategy capable of giving continuity and stability to the sustainable development prospects emerging this year for all the countries of our continent.
These recommendations concerned the need for effective coordination of the Union' s economic policies and the need to overcome the way that economic policy is managed separately from social policy, which has hitherto been a serious barrier to the definition of a coherent strategy for fighting unemployment and moving towards full employment.
It is this absence of management of the European economy which is responsible, my dear Mr von Wogau, for the fall of the euro.
The report also contained recommendations concerning the creation of a European research area and the promotion in all countries of the Union of converging measures on research, lifelong learning and employability which would overcome any sort of unfair competition between the States in the field of taxation.
Lastly, the recommendations also incorporated an updated version of the proposals in President Delors' White Paper on the promotion of a European project for the development of a common network of infrastructures and services.
These recommendations, which, for the most part, are consistent with the guidelines in the Portuguese presidency' s work programme and which will therefore be discussed at the Lisbon Summit, have been rejected or distorted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of this Parliament, by a majority which only managed to achieve a fragile unity in its rejection of the idea of a European Union which is founded on the convergence of national policies and not just on the grouping together of markets.
Mr President, this Parliament, which has shown itself to be highly Europeanist so many times, must, on this occasion, show that it can express a majority vote for a political union of Europe which is capable of dealing with market weak spots and failures.
Mr President, I am certainly now unsure as to whether we have all read the same report.
As far as I am concerned, practically all measures pertaining to proactive economic and employment policy have recently been dropped from the draft report by Mr Katiforis.
It might still bear his name but it no longer bears his hallmark.
I believe that in the face of such an unfortunate coalition in the Committee on Economic Affairs - allow me to use the term "aberration" - in the face of such an aberration, the facts, as presented by the Commission, speak for themselves.
We have an employment reserve in the European Union totalling not 15 but 30 million people, who would be more than happy to participate and get involved.
According to the Commission, this employment shortfall costs the European Union between 12 and 20% of its GDP every year.
Ideological questions of the 'should there be more or less state intervention' variety have no place in situations of this kind.
In such situations, there is a need for joint efforts on everyone' s part to overcome this deplorable state of affairs and to translate proactive ideas into action.
There is sound evidence as to the accuracy of this theory.
Ladies and gentlemen, those of you who voted against the Katiforis report in its original form in the Committee on Economic Affairs, please take a look at what the Commission put forward itself last Monday in the way of proposals for the Extraordinary Summit in Lisbon.
What will you find in the Prodi paper?
If you read these proposals - I have read them too, Mr Karas - if you follow them carefully, Mr von Wogau - unfortunately, Mr Gasoliba i Böhm has now left - then that is where you will find the things you voted against, namely concrete targets for increasing employment levels to 70% by 2010.
This is precisely the logic that Katiforis used.
You will find concrete targets for reducing the unemployment rate to 4%.
That is exactly what Giorgos Katiforis wanted in the original wording of his report.
You will find a clear statement to the effect that full employment is not one issue amongst many but the core issue of European economic policy.
That is precisely the intention behind our proposed amendments.
Hence, we would hope to receive the broad support of this House, for Parliament should not go back on something the Commission has already recognised with regard to Portugal.
Mr President, Mr Katiforis' s report is exciting.
In its original form, it points the way towards a renewed economic policy which aims at something more than merely tightening up and balancing the economy.
Now, finally, the EU' s position is, of course, such that we can achieve high growth and seriously take up the fight against unemployment without jeopardising objectives such as price stability and a balanced budget.
It is therefore sad that, in committee, the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats and the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party should have voted down the proposals which take the fight against unemployment seriously.
The debate and vote here in plenary ought to correct this.
It is nonetheless gratifying that we should have united behind some of the strategically important proposals, namely that the Union' s economic policy ought to prioritise investments, partly in order to involve all the Union' s citizens in the information society, something which can also be of major significance from an economic point of view.
I am also thinking of the importance of strengthening the applicant States' links with trans-European networks in the shape of both physical forms of transport and IT infrastructure.
This is important for growth but also in order to avoid gulfs developing between people, both within the EU and between the EU and the applicant States.
The applicant States ought not merely to tag along behind but, instead, share the EU' s ambition of becoming a world leader in the communications field.
Society needs, therefore, to take responsibility for the rapid and vigorous expansion of a modern IT infrastructure which also reaches small companies, poor regions and ordinary citizens.
We have that opportunity right now.
Let us grasp it.
Mr President, the advantage of speaking at the end of such a debate is that you can react to what has been said before.
I would like to say that I strongly disagree with Mrs Villiers' view that this is such an interesting debate.
I think that the European Parliament is doing itself absolutely no favours by thinking only in terms of old categories and churning out old political concepts and visions.
It would have been much better if we had actually made the effort to reach compromises and to develop a common vision.
I think that, in this way, the European Parliament is excluding itself from the discussion at the very moment that an extremely interesting development is taking place in the European Union where a very wide, socio-economic agenda is being drawn up much more clearly.
The Portuguese presidency has submitted a wide agenda of this kind for the extra summit in Lisbon.
The Commission has done this in its five-year plan by listing one of the four priorities.
The Commission document too, which is being drafted for the summit in Lisbon, takes precisely such a wide approach which covers different areas.
I think that in adopting this wide socio-economic approach, the European Union is taking exactly the right line, not least because that is the economic entity on the basis of which policy is drafted.
In this light, I think that the European Parliament' s role will be limited in Lisbon, but also in the forum in June for which we might have an invitation, but are unsure as to the input we can have.
Are we going to have nothing more to report than the fact that we are still stuck in a mould of old political contradictions?
.
(ES) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I must thank this House for its serious and detailed work.
There is no doubt that the hearings of experts and the debates in committee have provided us with additional high-quality information.
There is also no doubt that, throughout the debate this afternoon, we have heard differing opinions about the possible policies.
However, I believe that there are also some elements of consensus.
We all agree that the current economic conjuncture is good.
We also agree about trying to further and benefit from this situation in order to improve conditions and about aiming for a definite improvement in employment.
I will briefly comment on these issues before concentrating on the last point which I regard as the essential issue in today' s debate.
Yesterday, as some of you have noted, the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs referred to the improvement in the economic situation in Europe.
We currently believe that this improvement, which we highlighted in the perspectives in November, may lead to even better results than initially forecast.
Employment is growing at a good rate.
Despite yesterday' s figures, we certainly consider that the fact that inflation was around 2% in December shows that this is an issue which must be pursued.
However, the rate of underlying inflation demonstrates that the inflationist tendencies are due to certain very specific elements such as the rise in oil prices and exchange rate developments.
When we submitted our report, we referred to the risks posed by growth.
We basically highlighted the possibility of encountering difficulties in terms of growth in the USA, and therefore in other parts of the world, and of a sudden rise in inflation.
This latter issue may be particularly significant if it causes cost-push inflation.
This is why we are continuing to talk about the need for a wages policy compatible with the definitions of inflation which we want to establish.
Parliament' s analysis has highlighted another issue which is the development of risk in the stock markets.
The Commission regards this as significant although we do not believe that this is the basic problem.
Anyway, we currently have some excellent opportunities to do more.
We all agree that, after a decade of very weak growth and intolerable unemployment, certain action must be taken.
We need public and private investment.
Our levels of research and development are too low compared with our competitors and our low level of employment reflects, among other factors, the imbalances in our labour market.
Our aim must therefore be to make this reactivation of the economy long-lasting with strong growth and job creation.
The latter element continues to be the Commission' s fundamental objective, as we indicated in the Prodi document submitted for your debate at the Lisbon Summit, in that we are aiming for full employment in the medium term.
What policy should we use to achieve these objectives?
In our opinion, the Union' s economy is reactivating but we still have idle production capacity, not only in terms of physical capital but also new sources of jobs.
The policy mix to be applied should specifically allow this capacity to be fully absorbed.
We must define a macro-economic policy which aids growth.
This is not an expansionist policy in the sense of growth for growth' s sake.
It is simply a budgetary policy which can be coherent with price stability but which also allows us to have an appropriate monetary policy which contributes to growth.
This policy mix will undoubtedly be good for investment and will lead to growth.
The EU' s potential for growth must pay particular attention to certain factors, on most of which I believe we agree with Parliament' s analysis.
Firstly, private investment must be assisted.
The Union must help to promote the spirit of enterprise and to generate employment in this way, but without forgetting public investment.
This has been the major victim in recent years and any improvements in public finances must lead to improvements in public investment.
However, this must be carried out with respect for our tax consolidation commitments.
Our main support in the future must be for research and development and human capital.
These are two of the principal challenges for the Lisbon Summit.
It is essential that we tackle these challenges with quantified objectives and specific definitions.
This will ultimately allow us to achieve our goal of clear improvements in productivity, thus enabling our society to grow, together with a rise in employment which will go some way towards making up the ground lost in recent years.
This is the policy which the Commission has defended and will continue to defend in Lisbon.
Common fisheries policy
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
A5-0038/2000 by Mrs Attwooll, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a Community framework for the collection and management of the fisheries data needed to conduct the common fisheries policy (COM(1999) 541 - C5-0302/1999 - 1999/0218(CNS));
A5-0037/2000 by Mrs Attwooll, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a Council decision on a financial contribution from the Community towards the expenditure incurred by the Member States in collecting data, and for financing studies and pilot projects for carrying out the common fisheries policy (COM(1999) 551 - C5-0303/1999 - 1999/0224(CNS)).
The proposals for a Council regulation on the collection and management of fisheries data and for a Council decision on a financial contribution in this respect are both very welcome.
So is a joint debate on them since each can only be fully understood in the light of the other.
I understand that they have been some five years in their gestation.
With the review of the common fisheries policy due in 2002, it is important that swift progress is now made.
To take first the proposal for the Council regulation, this makes provision for Member States to collect a wider range of data relating to fisheries than required under previous regulations.
Both biological and economic information are included.
The proposal also makes provision for Member States to produce such data in aggregated form.
Exactly which new data are to be collected and what is to be aggregated from these and existing data will be specified by an implementing regulation.
The implementing regulation will establish a minimum Community programme and an extended Community programme.
It appears that these programmes will not cover the whole range of potential data but will be selective, for example, by type of fish stock.
The proposal for the Council decision allows for the making of the financial contribution by the Community to Member States engaged in the collection and management of data.
It also allows the Commission itself to finance studies and pilot projects.
The only apparent sanction for Member States that do not completely fulfil the requirements of the minimum programme under the regulation is that they will not be eligible for any financial assistance in respect to the extended programme.
Two major areas of concern about the proposal were considered by the Committee.
The first relates to the degree of involvement of the Commission.
The original proposal simply allowed for the information being gathered to be transmitted to international organisations.
The Commission would only receive a copy of any such transmissions if it requested one.
Since, however, the Community is funding the exercise, it was felt appropriate for it to see a direct return on its investment.
Thus, Amendment No 6, while maintaining the freedom of Member States to transmit the data to international organisations, requires that it also be sent annually to the Commission.
This change is taken in conjunction with Amendments Nos 1, 4 and 7.
Amendment No 1 clarifies the point that, although the data are to be scientifically based, they are being collected for wider decision-making purposes.
Amendment No 4 makes it clear that the object of the exercise is the evaluation of fisheries resources generally.
Amendment No 7 calls on the Commission to report annually on the use it has made of the data collected under the regulation.
It is also designed to give greater momentum to the process with earlier and more frequent reporting back by the Commission on the progress of the data collection programme as a whole.
The other area of concern related to the range of data to be collected under the regulation.
First, in respect to economic data, Amendment No 2 makes two changes.
One attempts to ensure that the data sought are no more detailed than necessary to serve the objective being pursued.
The other replaces a reference to income from sales and other revenue, subsidies, interest received, etc., with a reference simply to volume of sales.
It is considered that without these changes undesirably high costs in the collection of data could be incurred in Member States and that there could also be serious problems of confidentiality.
In conjunction with these changes, Amendment No 5 deletes a reference to accounting headings accordingly.
Secondly, in respect to the environmental data, the original proposal speaks only of biological and economic information.
The Commission has, however, made it clear that it intends itself to engage in studies and pilot projects of a wider environmental kind.
It has also made it clear that it may wish to extend the range of data being collected by Member States at a later stage.
Amendment No 3 brings into the ambit of the current regulation data of the kind needed to monitor changes in aquatic ecosystems.
This will certainly facilitate the introduction of a new regulation concerning environmental data and may even render this unnecessary.
It should be stressed that the Amendment does not in any way require the Commission to include the collection of such data either under the minimum or the extended programmes it establishes.
It merely permits the Commission to do so should it so wish.
As already stated the proposal for the Council decision falls into two parts.
The first is concerned with financing the Member States in implementing the Community programmes.
The second is to allow the Commission itself to finance pilot studies and projects.
There are some minor amendments: Amendment No 2 aims to ensure that the financial contribution to Member States can cover not only the costs of collection of data but also those of its management, compilation, aggregation, etc.
Amendments Nos 3 and 6 aim to smooth the timescale given that Member States will have to wait until the implementing regulation is in place to know what the programmes actually involve; and also to bring the timescale into line with the dates and the regulation.
Amendments Nos 4 and 5 aim to ensure that financial information is forwarded continuously to the budgetary authority.
More significantly, under Amendment No 1, the Fisheries Committee accepts the recommendation of the Budgets Committee that the funding should be placed under heading 1(b) rather than heading 3 of the Financial Perspective.
Although in its preliminary draft budget the Commission entered the appropriations under heading 3 'Internal Policies' , Parliament created a new budget line B1-500 to finance the measures under discussion.
This provides a safeguard to ensure that the necessary resources will continue to be available.
) Mr President, I believe we totally agree with Mrs Attwooll' s statement at the beginning of her excellent report that these two Commission proposals, intended to shed more light on the scientific and socio-economic situation of the fisheries sector, come at a critical time.
The proposed exhaustive collection of data and the appropriate management of this data will be very valuable in helping to tackle the revision of the common fisheries policy in a more rigorous manner.
This will only be true, of course, if the data can actually be obtained because, as rightly pointed out by our rapporteur, the Commission' s proposal does not establish any element of compulsion on the Member States.
The sending of data is completely voluntary and failure to do so will only mean that certain financial assistance, which is not very significant anyway, will not be received.
In view of our experience of the submission of data in the fisheries sector, as evidenced by the reports on compliance with the MAGPs, I believe that instead of obtaining a full picture of the situation in the sector, we will end up with total confusion.
For example, some Member States will provide scientific data but not employment data while others will provide data on employment but none on the situation of resources, according to whether they can or want to obtain and send this data.
I am very much afraid that some will prefer to receive no financing rather than reveal their poor management.
This has already been seen in cases where the sending of this data was compulsory, as with the MAGPs.
In view of this problem, which seems to me to be the most serious, the Fisheries Committee report improves the proposal in certain important points, particularly with the rapporteur' s suggestion of more reasonable submission deadlines and the request for monitoring by the Commission.
My Group has included two reasonable requests.
The first is that data originating from studies and samples should be used as a source of data whose collection could otherwise be interminable.
The second is that the requirement for data referring strictly to the taxation of enterprises should be removed from the Commission' s proposal, bearing in mind that this tax data does not come within the Community competence.
As a result, this report is very satisfactory and, on behalf of my Group, I therefore ask for its approval.
Mr President, the first common regulations in the fisheries sector were adopted as early as 1970.
Over the years, the Commission has provided the Council and Parliament with a steady stream of communications on the market situation for fisheries products.
The object of the exercise was to debate the future prospects of a sustainable European fisheries policy, or rather, to redetermine the content, with regard to production, trade, marketing and various other spheres.
I can only make brief mention here of key words such as competition, security of production, quality of production, and others.
The report, which I endorse, also leads one to form the conclusion that the Commission is still a very long way off the realisation of its goal, that of developing a sustainable fisheries policy.
Several Articles and proposed amendments refer to the difficulties that have not yet been resolved.
The implementing regulation will clear a few matters up.
I also support all those evaluations that refer to the fact that the 265 000 fishermen working in the EC, who often live in remote coastal areas and who work and secure an income on the bottom rung of Objective 1 Regions, are not sufficiently well-prepared for the establishment of a common EU internal market, in view of the opening up of the world trade market.
I would also like to draw your attention at this point to the structural problems in pond management, and to the question of how it relates to agriculture.
Since I am unable to go into the current grey area in greater detail, I would propose that we use a new fisheries policy to make clear decisions in this regard as well.
I wish at the outset to congratulate Mrs Attwooll on the preparation and presentation of her report.
I welcome the establishment of a Community framework for the collection and management of fisheries data which I believe is absolutely essential if we are to properly assess the level of stocks of the various species of fish.
It is important, of course, that the data is both of a biological and economic nature and the information to be provided from the various Member States must be standardised across the Community and, as stated by the rapporteur in her report, must be in compliance with international provisions.
I welcome the availability of funding for national programmes, even taking into consideration provisions concerning the minimum programmes to be met.
I agree with the proposals that information provided to international organisations should also be made available to the Commission.
Otherwise the purpose of collecting and collating data would be defeated and if the information is not available then the precautionary approach would continue.
Sound, factual information is in the best interests of the industry.
I believe that the streamlined information to be made available will be of major benefit and importance to the decision makers and to their advisers and will go some way to ensure a more sustainable fishery that will continue to provide jobs in parts of the Union where there is no alternative source of employment.
I am pleased to confirm that in my country they are working to ensure that the detailed practicalities, the logistics and utilisation of information are developed in the best interests of the resource of the industry and decision makers and our Group has no difficulty in supporting these reports.
Mr President, behind the report, which is an honest one, by Mrs Attwooll, which we shall vote for, we see the European fisheries policy.
It is not easy to manage because clearly in an open sea, which is immense and without borders, it is not easy to manage fish on the move.
We are trying to manage a policy of catches and in so doing we are creating injustice.
It is indeed a good idea to wish to prevent the depletion of fragile resources, but what is the point if Europe restricts its catches and world catches increase?
What is the point of banning European drift nets in the île d' Yeu or elsewhere, if Japan, Korea and Tunisia use them and land fish here which we are not allowed to catch?
What is the point of destroying the French fishing fleet, at Sète or elsewhere, for example, if every year France has to spend two billion euros on importing fish caught and landed, while our fishermen are not allowed to catch it.
What is more, the movement of fish is like CO2 or like capital, it is not European, but world-wide.
Brussels, which wanted to do away with nations on the pretext that they were unsuited to the task, now in turn finds itself unsuited to managing a resource which itself is an international asset.
Together with Mrs Attwooll, I am in favour of collecting scientific data, and of fair and accurate checks, on condition that they do not vary according to the severity or the laxness of the administrations.
I am in favour of enlightened management by marine scientists, like Professor Aubert, or others, that will make it possible to discover that the basic problems are not so much to do with industrial fishing - although it plays a serious and negative part - but more to do with plankton, the large underwater hot mass or cold mass rivers, which have a much greater effect than human influence.
But to enlighten the decision makers, let us practise honest science, without the ulterior motive of having the European Union finance excuses to destroy our fishing boats.
For if we must preserve the shoals of fish, we must also preserve the ports and the fishermen.
Instead of always following behind the United States, in Seattle, in Kosovo, in Iraq, perhaps the Europe of Brussels could suggest, over and above the international fishing organisations that exist in the North Atlantic, in the Pacific, over and above the regulation of tuna, cod or other things, that Europe should take the initiative and organise an international conference on fishing, a kind of Montego Bay of the fisheries resources which would be held between Peruvians, Japanese, Canadians, Russians, Europeans, and we could manage the fisheries resources scientifically as an asset common to humanity.
That would be good internationalism as opposed to the bad internationalism, as practised with the free exchange areas and other false friends of the OECD.
Mr President, Commissioner, to be able to adopt a credible fisheries policy, the Commission needs comprehensive and reliable data on fish stocks and fisheries fleets at its disposal.
The Commission relies on the Member States for the collation of this data.
A Community framework for the collation of this data adds some structure and improves accessibility for the purpose of scientific evaluation.
The question, however, is whether or not the Member States would be prepared, under this new regime, to make the necessary data available at the requested time.
Effective sanctions and/or incentives, which aim to encourage Member States to adopt a more serious approach, are lacking from the Commission' s proposal.
Moreover, can we rely sufficiently on this information?
How reliable is fishing data, as long as there are still large amounts of fish being caught illegally, as British fisherman David Cox recently admitted in Fishing News?
And what should we make of the data on fleet capacity?
Further to the Court of Auditor' s criticism, in January this Parliament adopted my amendment to the Cunha report with a large majority.
The amendment requests independent verification of fleet capacity data.
I would like to know from the Commission how it has processed this recommendation, which is also endorsed by the Advisory Committee.
Finally, radical decisions are sometimes mainly based on opinions presented by biologists.
We therefore have everything to gain from improving the accuracy of biological predictions, for example by certifying the drafting of these opinions.
Furthermore, the Commission must provide sufficient financial means for the inspection of stock levels.
It is also recommended that more use be made of the expertise and experience gathered by fishermen when biological opinions are drafted.
The Northern Ireland fishing industry has received many hard blows from this Union.
They have seen their own waters plundered by others while they have had to put up their own boats and desist from fishing.
The recent decisions on the cod quota for the Irish Sea is yet another hard blow which could well prove to be a mortal blow to the Northern Ireland fishing industry.
I see the Commissioner smiling but I speak with the authority of all the political parties in Northern Ireland, a diverse crowd but all agreed on this one issue.
The European Union needs to recognise that when such drastic decisions are taken against conflicting scientific evidence submitted by the fishermen themselves, which have been totally rejected out of hand, for the conservation of their own fish stocks, then serious trouble can only result when these men are not heard.
At a recent visit in Brussels these fishermen' s representatives, duly accredited, travelled from Northern Ireland and they were threatened with expulsion from the meeting when they sought to argue a case that they had very well prepared.
That is scandalous, their case ought to be heard.
It should be put on record, and I want to put it on record today.
I sat in the meeting where the scientists told us that haddock would soon be extinct in the Irish Sea and at that very time haddock had a special, spectacular increase of breeding in the Irish Sea so the scientists can be wrong.
As I have said all the Northern Ireland parties are united on this issue and those responsible for this cod quota regulation should reconsider this decision which can only spell not conservation for the fish but ruination to Northern Ireland fisheries which will affect all the fisheries of this Union.
Mr President, Mrs Attwooll' s reports are extremely important as indeed is the prospect of having as much data as possible on the fisheries sectors of the Member States.
This is particularly true given that the Commission must soon prepare a report on the revision of the common fisheries policy in the year 2002.
However, the fact that the updating and sending of data are purely optional and that this involves a very wide range of data and sectors may distort the final objective of the Commission' s proposal.
This has happened, as previously mentioned, with the MAGPs.
These have seriously prejudiced the countries which have strictly complied with them and provided the corresponding data to the Commission, compared with other countries which have failed to comply or simply not provided the data.
It should be pointed out that not all the Member States have the same amount of data.
Some have different sectors and, in view of the volume of data to be sent, could be prejudiced compared with those which have a smaller volume of data, if the same deadlines are set.
These deadlines for submission must therefore be staggered accordingly.
Much of this data is confidential, as has also been mentioned, which could affect the competitiveness of the sectors involved and their enterprises.
We must therefore act very carefully in this area and guarantee the confidentiality of this data.
Some of the data is also irrelevant such as that referring to the taxation of enterprises.
Finally, Mr President, as I must be brief given the time constraints, I must congratulate our rapporteur, Mrs Attwooll, on the important work which she has carried out within our committee.
I too want to congratulate Mrs Attwooll and say that I agree with most of what she said.
I regard it as a weakness in the proposal that reporting is not mandatory in all Member States.
I cannot understand the proposal to make a regulation out of which it is possible for some Member States to slip without any penalty and I cannot understand either that within a European Union where we are only 50% self-sufficient in fish for our domestic needs that there is any highly sensitive information, that by making the reports that are necessary that the national interest or the regional interest of some states or fishing communities is going to be put at risk.
In view of the coming review of the policy in 2002 it is important that we have all possible information, economic as well as biological.
In the past somebody said to me I have been defending the decisions the Commission makes.
It is not very easy in coastal areas anywhere in the Union to defend the European Union in the whole area of fisheries, but I have been defending them on the grounds that decisions are made on properly based scientific knowledge.
I am informed when I take a closer look that the information is in fact quite higgledy-piggledy with bits coming from here and there and no clear, proper economic and biological picture emerging.
If we do not have this picture then it will not be possible to make reasonable decisions in two years' time about the future of the policy.
It is not easy, indeed I could speak for everybody in my constituency that live in the coastal areas too and say that they are agreed on one thing, that the European Union is the source of all their problems and all their difficulties.
Well, I do not agree with them but I think if we do not base our information and our decisions on good scientific information, and if there is not an equal obligation on everyone to give it, then we will have bad decisions.
Mr President, Commissioner, no one could dispute the usefulness of implementing the qualitative and quantitative data on the fishing industry, particularly in view of the reform of the CFP in 2002.
We are also of the opinion that Community funds should be set aside to fund these activities.
A common fisheries policy must coordinate as well as possible the requirements for conservation of species and resource management with economic and market requirements.
To this end, more extensive, compatible, uniform data is required, and we expect this to provide us with more general information on the Union' s fishing industry if properly collected and interpreted.
However, we also expect there to be greater awareness and appreciation of the peculiarities, differences, varying situations and traditions of the fishing industries, and that they will not be disregarded, penalised or even eliminated due to the misinterpretation of the concept of harmonisation of fisheries policies, as has sometimes occurred in the past.
A case in point is the Mediterranean, including my country' s fishing industry.
After years of the CFP for the Mediterranean restricting itself to trade regulations and company aid, Regulation 1626 at last introduced a responsible fisheries policy, with measures protecting vulnerable fishery resources in order to ensure sustainable exploitation.
This is a worthy objective, the implementation of which, however, has sometimes revealed an ignorance of the biological characteristics of Mediterranean species of fish.
A subsequent regulation, Regulation 1448, adopted, not by chance, in 1999, permitted certain exemptions, in particular for special cases.
The time period will elapse on 31 May next, to be precise, when the Commission will present a proposal.
We hope that the presentation of the proposal will take into account the fact that this fishing system is vitally important for the economy of huge Italian coastal areas and that the scientific data hitherto collected demonstrate that, from the point of view of biological implications, resources are, to some extent, sustainable.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to start by thanking you warmly for your report Mrs Attwooll.
However, I would also like to thank all of you for your great interest in, and support for, the two Commission proposals.
One thing is certain: there will be no common fisheries policy if it is not based on a common data support framework.
Reliable and complete data are a fundamental prerequisite for credible fisheries management, still more so for creating what we constantly refer to as a level playing field.
Firstly, a few comments on the first report.
I completely understand why you have proposed, as expressed in the Amendment, that ecological data should also be included.
However, I could only support the collection of data of this kind if a clear data framework was to be put in place first of all and, above all, if the necessary additional budgetary funds were to be made available.
As far as Amendment No 2 is concerned, I would point out that we set great store by the collection of economic data.
However, if we were to accept your Amendment and not collect data relating to income from catches but only data relating to the volume of catches, then this would actually weaken the proposal, for we need data about income, particularly if we are to be able to assess the economic situation of fishermen.
On the other hand, we support your proposal to the effect that more precise statistics should be collected on the employment situation.
I have the following to say to you on the subject of Amendment No 6, namely all recorded data to be automatically transmitted to the Commission: the Commission will automatically receive all the necessary data on request.
There is no point in setting up a central database in Brussels when much of this data is needed for international meetings a long way from Brussels.
Tried and tested methods for the transmission of scientific and technical data should be retained because they work well.
I can accept parts of your Amendment No 7 in the first report and 6 in the second report.
I believe it is an extremely good idea for us to record how we have made use of the data collected, in our report to Parliament and the Council.
I also agree with you that we should present our first report in good time after 2002, against the background of the common fisheries policy.
Turning now to the second report by Mrs Attwooll: in Amendment No 1 you recommend placing the funding under heading 1b and not under heading 3 of the Community budget.
However, expenditure on supervisory and information activities for fisheries also comes under heading 3.
I therefore believe that data collection, which, at the end of the day, is also of use for supervisory purposes, also belongs under this heading.
However, this issue has yet to be definitively resolved.
It will need to be revisited in further detail in April, within the scope of the draft budget procedure for 2001.
Amendments Nos 4 and 5, according to which the Commission is to transmit all financial, and also all situation reports produced by the Member States, appear to me to be superfluous, for after all, we have given a commitment to prepare a report evaluating the measures adopted by the Member States, and this report will contain an assessment of the entire data collection system.
Several other amendments relate to the schedule we have proposed.
I wholeheartedly endorse these amendments.
The deadlines that we originally put forward in our proposal were on the basis of an earlier adoption of the proposals and are no longer realistic.
The Commission, in cooperation with the Council, will see to it that a realistic schedule is established.
However, I must make clear reference to the fact that we must meet tight deadlines, and that that there will be absolutely no question, for example, of granting six-month deadlines for the presentation of data collection programmes.
Lastly, the remaining amendments help to clarify the wording and the Commission accepts them in their entirety.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Fischler.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Combating certain fish diseases
The next item is the report A5-0036/2000 by Mr Hudghton, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 93/53/EEC introducing minimum Community measures for the control of certain fish diseases (COM(1999) - C5-0168/1999 - 1999/0191 (CNS)).
Infectious salmon anaemia is a contagious viral disease which was first recorded in Norway in 1984, then in Canada in 1986 and first found in European Union territory in May 1998 in Scotland.
Although the virus has been found in other species, the disease itself is so far confined to salmon.
The virus is known not to survive above 25o Celsius and scientists have therefore agreed that no threat to human health exists; it simply cannot survive in warm-blooded creatures.
The Scottish salmon-farming industry is the biggest in the EU, spread throughout some of Europe' s most peripheral communities.
It sustains some 6 500 jobs and generates around EUR 800 million annually.
It is obvious therefore that this issue is especially important to Scotland but it is vitally important to all parts of Europe that the disease be brought under control and, if possible, eradicated.
The current directive prohibits the use of vaccination and requires that all fish in an affected farm be slaughtered whether affected by the disease or not.
The intention in adopting the current regime was to eradicate ISA and to do so as quickly as possible.
The reality is that the compulsory slaughter policy has failed even to contain, let alone eradicate ISA, and while failing to deliver its objectives, the present rule has had a devastating economic effect on the industry with no compensation being paid and no possibility of commercial insurance.
The proposed changes are twofold: the first would permit the use of vaccination as a weapon in this battle.
This is a necessary change and should be accompanied by a commitment at European level to instigate and fund research into developing an effective vaccine.
The second proposed change would permit a phased withdrawal of fish from affected farms, working to a plan based on the severity of the problem in any particular farm.
This approach has been used very effectively in Norway where new reports of ISA are down to a handful of cases a year having peaked at some 80-90 cases per year in the early 1990s.
I therefore support the Commission' s proposed changes and I am calling for their urgent adoption and implementation.
I also highlight the issue of compensation and call for the amendment of Council Decision 90/424/EEC by specifically including ISA in its appended list of diseases, thereby enabling compensation to be paid at 50% Commission, 50% Member State.
I thank colleagues in the Fisheries Committee for their overwhelming vote in support of my report and I in particular thank my Scottish colleagues in the committee for their input to this whole process.
I am opposing Amendments 7 to 13 which were decisively rejected by the Fisheries Committee.
Most of their content is either unnecessary or already referred to in my text.
In particular, I have drawn attention to the need to study the extent and effect of interaction between farmed and wild salmon, the need to investigate the source of ISA and the need to test more widely for the virus in wild stocks.
These amendments by the Green component of the Greens/European Free Alliance Group are designed to provide justification for Amendment 13.
This amendment is completely unacceptable and inappropriate as it seeks not only to retain the requirement for immediate compulsory slaughter of all fish but also to prevent any fish, whether diseased or not, from an affected farm from being sold and I must emphasise that under current policy no diseased fish are sold.
There is no proposal to change that and under the proposed new regime there is no question of diseased fish being sold.
Amendments 7 to 13 simply fail to take account of the reality as evidenced by the starkly contrasting statistics from Scotland and from Norway.
In Scotland we have endured a draconian regime which has failed to achieve its objective.
In Norway, with their much longer experience, compulsory, 100% culling was abandoned some years ago and a range of measures have led there to a dramatically improved situation.
It is in all of our interests to ensure that in Scotland too we contain ISA and prevent its further spread.
Last week saw the publication in Scotland of a report by a joint government and industry working group on ISA.
This comprehensive document takes account of a wide range of possible risks and recommends action to combat them in areas such as site-to-site transmission, security measures to curtail escapes, treatment of waste and effluent, methods of detection and diagnosis, farrowing and rotation, disinfection of equipment and many, many more.
Some can and will be implemented immediately by local authorities using existing powers, others will be incorporated into codes of practice.
All will be beneficial, not just in relation to ISA but in achieving better standards in aquaculture generally where required.
Your votes, colleagues, in favour of my report in full, as endorsed by the Fisheries Committee, will be a very important part of a wider ISA control package based on the reality of Scotland' s situation and the lessons learned from the success of others.
I congratulate Mr Hudghton and fully support his report and would urge the honourable Members of Parliament to do likewise.
As he said, fish farming is a critically significant source of employment in remote parts of rural Scotland and at a time when the rural areas of Scotland are suffering their worst recession in over a hundred years, the aquaculture industry provides an essential boost to the rural economy on which many thousands of direct and indirect jobs depend.
Now, as he said, in excess of 85 000 tons of Salmon is now produced in Scottish fish farms in an industry which generates more than EUR 800 million annually.
Regrettably, although ISA was first detected in Scotland only two years ago, it has now spread to 29 farms directly and around 240 other farms are affected in some way or another.
Wild salmon, trout and eels have been found to carry the virus which now seems to be endemic even in the wider marine environment.
But I must say that despite the scare-mongering of the Greens, it has to be emphasised that ISA cannot under any circumstances be transmitted to humans, and I must repeat what Mr Hudghton said, that the virus cannot survive above 25o - which is human body temperature - it is a virus of a cold-water species.
It can, nevertheless, in the affected fish, lead to severe weight loss and early death in its advanced stages and it therefore has had a serious economic impact on the whole Scottish aquaculture sector costing the industry around EUR 60 to 70 million in losses arising from the mandatory premature culling and other eradication measures.
So this report, Mr President, provides an encouraging range of proposals for improving the way in which the authorities in the UK and elsewhere should respond to the disease.
By recommending the introduction of a method of containment and gradual culling, similar to the system used successfully in Norway, the rapporteur seeks to introduce a more flexible approach to the disease which will provide confidence, not least to the insurance sector who have hitherto shied clear of providing any form of cover due to the insistence on a policy of compulsory slaughter.
By recommending the research, development and ultimate use of vaccination to control and eradicate ISA, the rapporteur also provides comfort to the pharmaceutical industry who have hitherto had no incentive to invest in the development of a vaccine.
So I thoroughly recommend and hope that the Parliament will support this excellent report.
I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Hudghton, also for this report.
Scottish salmon farming is the biggest in the European Union and accommodates 90% of the British aquacultural industry.
The industry is located in some of Europe' s most peripheral communities providing an economic lifeline to those communities.
In recent research it is estimated that the industry is worth EUR 800 million per annum and 6 500 jobs rely on its existence.
I believe that this report gives a clear method for dealing with Infectious Salmon Anaemia which is both practical, realistic and also achievable.
The example of Norway demonstrates the effectiveness of this approach.
As for the amendments, I oppose the amendments tabled by Mr Hudghton' s Green colleagues, that is numbers 7 to 13, not because I do not care about the risks to human health but because, according to scientific evidence, the virus does not survive beyond 25o Celsius and according to medical evidence, human beings at that temperature are dead.
There is a saying that the dead tell no tales and I am sure they do not eat fish but I do and I look forward to the implementation of this report.
I too would like to compliment Mr Hudghton on his report and to endorse his additions to the original proposal in relation both to the matter of compensation and encouragement of vaccine development.
I too agree that Amendments 7 to 13 are unfortunate, indeed Amendment 13 would not merely negate the intended effects of the proposal but actually would make the situation even more difficult than under current rules.
This is not though to deny the importance of environmental considerations in relation to fish farming.
Mr Hudghton has already referred to the final report of the UK joint government industry working group on ISA and the measures there are of relevance for fish farming wherever it happens, not just in farms affected by ISA.
Secondly, looking forward to the motion for a resolution on the Katiforis report later this evening, paragraph 28 is of particular importance.
This calls on the Commission and Member States to step up the adoption of measures to combat the possible negative effects of aquaculture on the marine environment.
Thirdly, referring to the earlier discussion on the collection of fisheries data, I very much hope that the Commission will engage in projects and studies looking at aquaculture in the environmental context but I believe that is the way forward in relation to the environment, not the way that is suggested in Amendments 7 to 13, and I hope honourable Members will reject them.
Mr President, I do not agree with this chorus of satisfaction expressed by my colleagues, who are delighted about the relaxing of a directive that respects the principle of precaution and which takes measures to protect consumers' health.
This infectious salmon disease is caused by an orthomixomicrovirus which breaks down the blood of salmon, causing death.
It spreads very easily through mucus in saline water, etc.
Under the 1993 directive, not only the diseased fish can be culled but also the farmed fish where individuals are affected, exactly like the case when one cow is sick in a herd and the whole herd is culled according to the principle of precaution.
What we currently propose is to relax this directive, so that we do not cull all the fish, but only the fish that are found to be diseased.
For the others, well, we would have time to see what would happen, according to local circumstances.
I think it is a very serious matter that we act in this way.
I would particularly draw my colleagues' attention to this fact as we cannot make do with saying that a temperature of 27º has every advantage for the human race and that, consequently, there is no risk to men.
What about women?
Nobody has undertaken any studies on human tissue in that regard.
There is also a risk to the environment, because we know that there is an incubation period in salmon and that, consequently, if they are eaten, they can be carriers of this virus and present a risk.
There is another risk to the environment as well, because this disease is transmitted to wild fish, as we have seen.
For this reason, together with my colleague, Patricia McKenna, we have tabled amendments against the proposals made by the Commission.
Mr Fischler, firstly a few comments on some of your answers.
We should come back to the Attwooll report again in the Committee on Fisheries.
I believe there have been some misunderstandings here, for example, where the database is concerned.
Mr President, in discussing the Hudghton report, we have now come to an issue that is very sensitive to my mind, for it relates to health.
At the same time, it is of vital significance in the true sense of the word, for as we have heard, diseases can endanger the stocks of many aquaculture enterprises overnight.
We are a long way off having this under control.
This report is about a disease termed infectious salmon anaemia.
Although, as we have heard, there is no direct threat to human health, we all know that consumers react quickly, and often extremely badly in such situations, particularly in my country.
The ultimate consequence of this is job losses.
It is not just the Scottish delegates that have a sad tale to tell there.
When a fish disease of this kind breaks out, the consequences are enormous.
There was a premature fish harvest on account of the disease, which led to the collapse of the Community market, with corresponding repercussions throughout the Union.
It is therefore in the interests of the Community to combat diseases of this kind.
This proposal is heading in the right direction in this respect.
I particularly welcome the flexible arrangements, i.e. the fact that a cautious approach is to be taken and enterprises are only to be shut down when this is truly justified.
We must not throw the baby out with the bath water!
At the same time, I must stress that this is only a step in the right direction.
There is still much to do and to this end, I urge the Council and the Commission to take up further measures; in particular, to create incentives for research into a vaccine, and what is more, for research into the origins and causes of fish diseases of this kind.
Mr Pietrasanta explained why we support some aspects of the Commission' s proposal, in particular support for development of a vaccine and compensation for farmers who are forced to slaughter their fish, but were not at all happy with the idea of changes to the slaughter policy.
Now people have said here that Norway has done a better job of controlling the epidemic of ISA and that the proposed change will bring us more in line with the Norwegian approach, but it must be said that there is more than just one difference between the Norwegian policy and that of the Community.
This is a Community policy which will effect Ireland as well - where I am from - should similar unfortunate events occur.
There are other differences that exist in the policy for inspections of disease, fallowing periods, restriction on movement of contaminated fish and materials and others.
Before we jump to copy the slaughter policy of the Norwegians, we should try these other things first to see if we can mitigate the disaster.
And people have spoken in the past about BSE.
For many years the Greens were calling for the BSE issue to be addressed.
Had it been at that time, you could have actually saved an awful lot of farmers and the EU a huge amount of money.
So it also has to do with environmental protection.
The protection of the farmers themselves and the protection of public health.
I would like to thank Mr Hudghton for his excellent report on ISA and for broadly supporting the measures proposed by the Commission and also for the contributions from each of the speakers this evening.
The Commission proposal aims to ensure a more pragmatic approach towards controlling a disease that has the potential to cause important losses in salmon farms.
However, this cannot be allowed to compromise our objective of reducing and possibility eliminating ISA.
Nor can it be done, if the proposal involves a threat to public health.
The environmental implications must also be taken very seriously.
I am advised that ISA is considered non-pathogenic for humans and mammals.
The disease exists since 1984 and there is no report of it affecting human health or mammals.
The virus harms cold-blooded animals.
It does not replicate at temperatures above 25º centigrade and would, if present in fish for human consumption, be inactivated when ingested.
In no way, however, can diseased fish be used for human consumption.
As an extra precaution, I am validating this advice to our scientific committee.
During the debate, a number of important issues linked to our disease-control strategy have been raised including compensation.
I deeply regret the losses suffered by the Scottish salmon industry.
You may know that with effect from 15 January 2000, under the new financial instrument for fisheries guidance, Member States may encourage eradication of diseases in aquaculture.
The Commission' s services are drawing up implementing rules in order to ensure the practical application of this instrument.
Council Decision 90/424 constitutes another instrument for Community financial support in case of disease outbreaks.
I must emphasise, however, that there are serious constraints.
Budgetary resources are very limited and priorities with other diseases have to be set.
So further thought is necessary.
I regret therefore that I am not at present in a position to accept amendments that refer to compensation through Decision 90/424.
This is in particular the case for Amendments Nos 3 and 5.
I agree, however, with the statement in Amendment No 2 saying that no compensation has been made payable to salmon farmers.
I am not able to comment on the availability of commercial insurance.
The Commission included in its proposal a possibility for vaccination of salmon.
The intention of this proposal is to introduce a tool for combating the disease in emergency situations.
I believe a vaccine should not be used for preventative purposes as suggested in Amendment No 4.
Experience in other areas has shown that preventative vaccination has the adverse affect of creating healthy virus carriers.
Those could perpetuate an infection.
I therefore am not able to accept Amendment No 4.
You also referred to the need for further scientific research on the nature of the disease.
I agree that such research is needed and I understand this is at present being organised in the United Kingdom.
I will follow very closely the results of this research and take it fully into account in future legislative proposals.
It must be further examined whether and how scientific research in other parts of the Community must be organised.
In this context I am happy to partly accept Amendment No 1, taking into account, however, that scientific investigations are not done by the Commission but that the Commission relies on results of investigations carried out in the Member States.
I also can partly accept the part of Amendment No 6 saying that Directive 93/53 should be amended as a result of scientific and technical evidence.
As I pointed out earlier, the available scientific evidence is that ISA is not a threat to health.
I can therefore agree to Amendment No 10 with the proviso that the words, and I quote, "of the highest possible standard" are replaced by "are safe" .
With regard to the environmental impact, it is a well-known phenomenon that while stocks have fallen during the last decades several reasons have been advanced to explain these reductions: pollution, over-fishing, changes in climate, etc.
It cannot at present be excluded that ISA has an impact on wild stock.
Fish escapes from aquaculture premises have been reported in the past and the virus has been found in wild stocks.
In this context, a number of scientific questions that can only be resolved through further research remain open.
It is for that reason that a careful approach towards the control of ISA is needed.
Diseased fish should not remain in the farms and I am prepared to look into the matter so as to avoid unnecessary shedding of a virus into the environment.
For that purpose, I propose to amend our initial proposal to provide that rural programmes established by the competent authority must be approved by the Commission.
This is to avoid excessive withdrawal periods.
I also propose to provide that the withdrawal of fish displaying clinical signs of disease should be immediate.
The procedures for setting additional control measures that already exist in Community legislation will be used to establish withdrawal schemes based on the state of health of the fish in order to minimise a possible environmental impact.
Bearing this in mind, I can agree to accept Amendment Nos 7 and 8 with a minor change to the latter.
I am also very sympathetic towards Amendment No 9, but I believe that it can be better formulated so as to join, at the same time, environmental concerns and disease control and eradication strategies.
I do not feel in a position to accept Amendments Nos 12 and 13.
It is my feeling that these amendments aim to achieve a zero risk.
I believe this objective is very difficult to achieve without closing down the fish farming sector concerned.
I look forward to Parliament' s own views on these amendments and will take careful note if you believe that such an approach is the best way forward.
I can partly accept Amendment No 11.
Finally, I would like to emphasise that we continue to strive to maintain a high level of health protection in accordance with our obligations under the Treaty.
I believe that measures that are proportionate to that objective is the way forward.
We remain committed to eradicating the disease, an objective that will be beneficial for both the environment and the salmon-farming sector.
I hope that in accepting our proposal the European Parliament acknowledges our commitment and I would be very grateful for that.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Byrne.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Protection of juvenile marine organisms
The next item is the report A5-0035/2000 by Mr Gallagher, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending for the fourth time Regulation (EC) No 1626/94 laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources in the Mediterranean and for the fourth time Regulation (EC) No 850/98 for the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures for the protection of juveniles of marine organisms (COM(1999) 552 - C5-0040/2000 - 1999/0222(CNS)).
The proposal before us as outlined in the introduction is a very important one.
By now, my colleagues in the Fisheries Committee and indeed in the Parliament will be well aware of our commitment to technical conservation measures which are based on sound technical advice.
The body charged with giving this advice based on sound scientific data is the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tuna.
This intergovernmental fishery organisation of which the European Union is a member is responsible for the conservation of tuna and tuna-like species in the Atlantic and the adjacent seas including the Mediterranean.
This body was established back in March 1969 and is formally obliged to meet biannually, however the norm is that it meets annually and takes its decisions on the basis of scientific advice.
The body then makes recommendations with a view to maintaining stocks.
This body has four standing committees comprised of national experts dealing with research and statistics, finances and administration, compliance and conservation and management measures.
They have also four panels dealing with tropical tuna, with temperate tuna, the north and temperate tuna south and other species.
These panels are powered to initiate regulatory measures on species covered by the convention.
Proposals made by the panels are then presented to the Commission and the Commission in turn makes recommendations to the contracting parties.
These conditions are binding, however contracting parties may lodge objections within a six-month period.
The European Union is a contracting party and is obliged to embody such recommendations in Community law.
At a ICCAT meeting in November 1998 in Santiago de Compostela, changes were recommended to the rules relating to the landing of the minimum size of bluefin tuna.
ICCAT also made recommendations in 1974, 1994 and 1996.
As of now, it is illegal to land or sell bluefin of zero age and that of course is - in weight terms - less than 1.8 kilos.
At its recent meeting in November 1998, the ICCAT standing committee on research and statistics was asked to perform a new assessment of the western Atlantic and eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean bluefin tuna populations.
The information provided would then assist the organisation in considering developing and improving stock rebuilding plans.
It was agreed that the SCRS should present a study at the 1998 meeting.
It was intended that this meeting be presented with various possible recovery options with a view to maximising sustainable yields by taking into account alternatives or possible levels of recruitment and mixing of stocks.
It was intended that the study should indicate monthly closures to purse seine, in order that the closures would be effective for the conservation of bluefin stock.
Following all of the research, the meeting agreed to a selective closure rather than a general prohibition of fishing for tuna in the Mediterranean with purse seine during the period 1 August to 31 August.
It is important to protect the tuna fishery for future generations.
Bluefin tuna is the world' s most expensive fish fetching up to EUR 90 000 per ton at the auctions in Tokyo and, of course, the indication of the importance of the Mediterranean tuna is that it accounts for 70 percent of global landings in the region of 30 000 tons.
80 percent of it was landed by purse seine.
The Mediterranean is an important spawning area for bluefin tuna so therefore it is important that the necessary measures be taken to enhance the protection of juveniles.
The minimum size must be respected and technical measures must be implemented if we are to eliminate the zero age.
The measures agreed in November 1998 are binding since 21 June, I repeat 21 June 1999, months before the communication was forwarded to the Parliament' s Fisheries Committee and 9 months almost to the date.
Now I believe, Commissioner, this is not good enough and that in the future we must learn and that reports must be submitted to the Parliament' s Fisheries Committee before decisions are taken, otherwise then we are nothing further than a rubber stamp and I know that is not the intention of the Commission or the Commissioner but let us learn from mistakes of the past.
Mr President, this proposal aims to incorporate into Community law an ICCAT recommendation from 1998 which should have been binding from June 1999, but which only reached this House at the end of last year.
The Commission' s legislative delay on certain issues should not surprise us, but for the fact that this is a recommendation from one of the most important international fisheries organisations on the protection of such a threatened resource as tuna.
The Mediterranean, particularly in some zones, is an extremely important spawning area for the bluefin tuna which is of enormous commercial value.
This is why ICCAT recommended this closed zone in the Adriatic and toughened the conditions for catching zero-age fish.
As rightly said by the rapporteur, both measures are totally and fully justified which is why we have no alternative but to ask for their approval.
However, I also agree with Mr Gallagher who felt bound to indicate his frustration at the tardiness of the Commission in getting into gear and transforming the recommendations into Community law.
We are, for example, still waiting for the proposal for a regulation on banning the import of bluefin tuna from Honduras and Belize.
The recommendation for this dates from 1996.
Apparently, according to my information, the Fisheries Directorate-General sent a note last January to the Trade Directorate-General which is still on the preparatory work.
Four years to apply this ban on imports from countries known to favour flags of convenience is absolutely unacceptable.
We have listened to the Commission' s explanations about the long internal process involved in transposing legislation.
This has simply left us with an image of an exasperating bureaucracy.
Yet I have my doubts about the only proposal currently on the table to improve this process which would involve doing away with the Council and Parliament procedure.
It is clear that we must find a solution to this problem, either at the time of the Commission report on regional fisheries organisations or, if possible, before then.
I do not suppose that anybody in this House would object to the principle of protecting juveniles of marine organisms.
Indeed, it is often stated that one of the general objectives of the common fisheries policy shall be to protect and conserve living marine aquatic resources.
All laudable stuff.
There can also be no doubt that bluefin tuna is of enormous environmental and financial significance.
As a king sport fisherman myself, I would love to see the days of the 1930s come back when anglers from the port of Scarborough in Yorkshire caught bluefin tuna weighing up to 830 pounds.
I do not know what the metric equivalent is.
So I support the findings of ICCAT and I support the principle of intergovernmental cooperation on environmental issues.
My concern though with this debate is that we are fiddling whilst Rome burns.
The common fisheries policy is not working.
For all of the high-minded talk about conservation, the reality is that the quota system is directly leading to an environmental disaster.
In mixed fisheries, you cannot discriminate.
The sheer volume of fish that are thrown back dead also means that any improvement in fisheries data is meaningless.
From a UK perspective there is also a deep-seated political objection to the CFP.
Many people now feel if this is federalism you can keep it.
Let me illustrate this with a topical example.
In February, Commission Regulation 394/2000 designed to protect Irish Sea cod stocks was issued.
It means that in Fleetwood, 30 inshore boats are tied up until the end of April.
The scientists and the fishermen both agree that something has to be done.
However, more than a dozen large Belgian beam trawlers have been granted a derogation from this regulation so the vessels that caused the very problem in the first place are carrying on fishing whilst it is a criminal offence for the UK fleet to do so.
The CFP does not assist in conservation and is angering the British public to the point where we demand to re-establish control over our own territorial waters.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Gallagher' s report on the fourth amendment of the Regulation on technical measures was not amended in our committee.
It was actually approved unanimously for which I congratulate the rapporteur.
This also shows that our committee is in total agreement when it comes to supporting measures which aim to protect species, such as tuna in this case.
These decisions must be defended by the Commission in ICCAT.
This is why our committee asked to be consulted in advance and to be represented at the meetings as an observer in order to ensure greater and better control and to reinforce the European Parliament' s role.
Mr Fischler, I am delighted that the Commission responded favourably to our request in the last and constructive debate which we had on this issue and has asked to attend our next meeting this month to inform us about the future preparatory ICCAT meeting.
Our rapporteur' s criticisms on this point have also therefore been heeded.
I must highlight the part of the report which states that, in 1975, with regard to the size of bluefin tuna, a minimum limit of 6.4 kg with a 15% tolerance in the number of fish was recommended for the entire Atlantic.
However, according to the SCRS study, the regulation establishing the 6.4 kg minimum has been poorly enforced in the East Atlantic and Mediterranean fisheries.
The WWF reports that, according to Italian, French and Spanish customs authorities, illegal bluefin fishing and landings of small fish are on the increase.
I cannot and do not want to go any further as we are pushed for time.
However, I must again congratulate our rapporteur, Mr Gallagher.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank the Committee on Fisheries, and above all you, Mr Gallagher, for your report, and also for the deliberations that have taken place in committee.
I am able to reassure you that there are in fact no problems as far as the proposal is concerned, and I hope that the Community will soon be in a position, following Parliament' s adoption of the proposal, to fulfil its international obligations pertaining to bluefin tuna.
Regarding the criticism that has been voiced here in relation to the proposals that are still to come, I would like to remind you that the Commission is, after all, relatively new to the ICCAT, and has in fact only been a full member since 1998.
However, we will make every available effort to discuss any proposals the Commission still has to make, to communicate them to Parliament and, in addition, to speed up the decision-making process and the discussion with the Member States.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Fischler.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Fishing and the environment (Bergen 13-14 March 1997): 2nd report
The next item is the report (A5-0016/2000) by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the second report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation of the "statement of conclusions from the intermediate ministerial meeting on the integration of fisheries and environmental issues, 13-14 March in Bergen" (COM(1999) 270 - C5-0156/1999 - 1999/2150 (COS)).
Mr President, Mr Fischler, my report concerns the vital integration of environmental and fisheries issues, as discussed at the ministerial meeting in Bergen.
This integration has always been a priority for me as we would be doing the fisheries and fishermen of the future a disservice if we did not emphasise the need for conservation of resources and responsible fisheries in general.
To fail in this respect would mean food for today but hunger for tomorrow, not just for our fishermen and the people of Europe but, more seriously, for humanity as a whole.
The common fisheries policy is theoretically very demanding and very strict in this respect, perhaps more so than most people, both Europeans and non-Europeans, would believe.
I have therefore asked the European Commission to produce a publication which lists all the measures of the common fisheries policy aimed at conserving and protecting resources.
This will serve to publicise our protectionist actions.
We have also asked Parliament' s own DG IV to prepare a systematic study of these measures for the Committee on Fisheries.
The revision of the common fisheries policy in 2002 is the biggest time-limited challenge facing us.
We must completely overhaul, modernise or, if you prefer, update this policy in its entirety.
I would stress that the whole of the CFP must be revised, particularly the part on the protection of fish stocks.
This is the basis of my request to the European Commission and the services of this House.
I do not believe that the state of stocks and the current scandalous system of discards are a good example of the policy' s effectiveness which must therefore, in my opinion, be significantly improved.
I do not want to and cannot go into too much detail, Mr President, given the time constraints and also the interpreters' fees.
However, I will just remind you that the meeting in Bergen showed very significantly that a proper policy on the sea must be created.
The President-in-Office informed our committee that the current Portuguese presidency intended the CFP to be regarded as a policy for ensuring the sustainability of our resources.
This must be our objective in Europe and throughout the world.
In this respect, important Community initiatives arose from Bergen which have always been supported by our committee.
These are aimed at re-establishing the breeding biomass, reducing and adapting fishing effort to resources, protecting juveniles, species and their habitats and adopting technical measures aimed at selective and responsible fisheries.
These initiatives, together with effective systems of control, are the key aspects for the future of fisheries.
However, we do not have to resort to extreme solutions, as Mr Katiforis initially suggested in his draft report.
I am referring to this now because I will not have time to speak later on.
I must point out in this respect that it was the numerous amendments tabled and approved in our committee and the flexibility shown by Mr Katiforis which enabled his report to be approved by our committee.
Coincidence or fate has worked to bring together in this part-session both my report and Mr Katiforis' s report on fisheries and the environment.
The oral question from our committee on the extremely serious consequences for fisheries of the accident involving the tanker Erika will also be considered tomorrow.
Maritime transport, industrial and urban pollution and waste also have negative effects on fisheries whose problems do not just come from overfishing.
Mr President, Mr Fischler, concerning the Attwooll report, I have just this minute had an impromptu discussion with your assistant about the database, and I welcome this kind of cooperation with open arms.
I grew up by the North Sea.
Therefore, as a child of the coast, I have always followed North Sea happenings with fervent interest.
I think I can safely say that our maritime environment is unique.
We still have a considerable diversity of species in the water and on land.
However, biological diversity is under threat.
Exploitation by over-fishing, untreated industrial effluent, tanker accidents, extensive shipping traffic and rampant tourism are a massive threat to the balance of maritime flora and fauna.
But that is nothing new.
The Bergen conference made a good start.
What was exciting about this was the fact that for the first time, Environment and Fisheries Ministers worked together on "Coast" , a future marine programme.
All measures are underpinned by the transposition of existing regulations at European and international level, observance of scientific findings and the precautionary principle.
This also includes setting up a Community network of protected areas, known as "Natura 2000" for the recovery of the ecosystems of the North sea, as well as - I would recommend this - integrated management of coastal areas.
This all sounds good, but you can say what you like on paper, and everything would be fine if we were divine beings.
But we still do not have the fisheries data we need the most - as we have just heard - and there is also still a lack of willingness on the part of some Member States to make the necessary and agreed reductions in capacity.
Therefore, the end result must be seamless cooperation between the institutions from the time the fish are caught until they reach the consumer.
The only way to achieve this is by efficient monitoring, strict observance of regulations, applying the "polluter pays" principle (eventually), and using sanctions that hurt.
Our aim must be to fully integrate fisheries and environmental policy into EU policy, and let us not wait until the next millennium to do so!
Mr President, I too welcome your report Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna, for as far as I can see, we share the same opinion where progress in the protection of fish stocks and ecosystems in the North Sea is concerned.
I also believe that the Commission' s achievements in terms of the monitoring measures speak for themselves.
I can assure you that I will continue, in the future, to pursue the course of action we have embarked on.
I would especially like to draw to your attention the fact that following the bilateral negotiations with Norway at the end of last year, medium-term management measures for cod, shellfish, plaice, sea salmon and mackerel were agreed and laid down.
I would also like to remind you that similar measures had already been introduced for North Sea herring prior to this, in cooperation with Norway.
These medium-term measures are completely in line with the precautionary approach to fish stocks management recently recommended at the International Council for Marine Research.
The Commission aims to extend the medium-term measures to stocks beyond the North Sea as well.
This has already happened in the case of certain important stocks in the Baltic, such as herring and sprats.
I am taking as read the fact that the implementation of the new regulation for the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures for the protection of juvenile marine organisms as of 1 January this year will bring about a drastic improvement in the protection of juveniles, not just in the North Sea but also in all the other Community waters of the north-east Atlantic.
We have made provision for new minimum catch sizes for mussels and crustacea in this regulation, alongside existing minimum catch sizes.
We have imposed a fishing ban in respect of sand eels off the north-east coast of England and the East coast of Scotland, and we have stipulated that trawlers may only catch shrimps using funnel nets or nets that have a sorting grid.
In addition, the provisions from the old technical measures regulation will, of course, be adopted and simplified as well.
I will quote a few examples: we have streamlined mesh sizes in such a way that species are grouped according to whether they are small, medium-sized or large, and one particular mesh size applies to each grouping.
For example, a uniform mesh size of 100mm applies to all larger species in northern waters.
In southern waters, a mesh size of 77mm applies to hake and other species.
So as to enable juveniles to get away, when catching Norway lobster and crabs in northern waters nets with square-meshed panels must be used which are arranged in such a way that the mesh cannot close.
As you know, when Norway lobster are caught, large quantities of juveniles of other species are often caught along with them.
These were just a few examples.
As you can see, these measures ought to provide greater selectivity.
We will, of course, continue to take a close interest in how the situation develops once these new measures have been introduced.
I hope the developments will be of a positive nature.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Fischler.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Fisheries management and nature conservation in the marine environment
The next item is the report A5-0017/2000 by Mr Katiforis, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the communication from the Commission to the Council and European Parliament: Fisheries management and nature conservation in the marine environment (COM(1999) 363 - C5-0176/1999 - 1999/2155 (COS)).
The problems for resource management and environmental protection in the fishery sector have been considered by this House many times in the past.
This particular communication from the Commission forms part of the Commission' s overall strategy of improving the integration of environmental considerations into other Community policies.
The overall strategy of the Commission is to direct fisheries activities towards both economically and environmentally sustainable levels through management of the scarce resource in such a manner as to prevent its exhaustion through over-exploitation and/or environmental degradation.
The alternative to successful management is the economic decline of the fisheries industry as stocks dwindle and demand for fish products is increasingly met by imports.
I understand I have been described in a Spanish newspaper as an enemy of the fishing industry because I have said such things.
Of course, I am only an enemy of the fishing industry as much as anybody who recommends to some people not to saw off the branch on which they are sitting.
This is an unwise policy.
In particular, the communication calls for control of fisheries pressure to benefit commercial stocks and marine aqua systems, improved measures for nature conservation in the marine environment, in the graded management of coastal areas, improved training, information transparency and a greater contribution from scientific research to fisheries management.
All of the above priorities will be pursued equally at both the Community level and in the various international fora in which the Community participates.
They should also be pursued in the context of the bilateral and multilateral agreements which the Community negotiates.
Whilst the communication reveals the Commission' s worthy intentions in this field, it is also revealing as to what activity is lacking and where management and control improvements can be made.
One can quote from the communication.
Over-exploitation is so severe in Community fisheries that the scientific authorities have recommended rapid reductions of the exploitation levels of up to 40 percent.
That appeared in the communication published last July.
Since then, the Fisheries Council meeting of 16 December decided on drastic reductions in the total allowable catches for certain species such as cod and anchovy which were in the region of 25 percent for cod and 43 percent for anchovy for the year 2000.
Furthermore, the Commission adopted an emergency regulation for a recovery plan for Irish Sea cod, effectively calling a halt to cod fishing in the Irish Sea between 14 February and 13 April due to the crisis in the species.
These are examples of the fishery sector facing severe problems due to over-exploitation.
What can be done to alleviate the damage done to fishing communities?
The first consideration must be to recognise that Community legislation must be reinforced and control mechanism procedures enhanced.
Secondly, the principles of such Community legislation should also be extended to international agreements to which the Community is a party.
Thirdly, the European Union should undertake to enhance its monitoring and prevention of extensive pollution prevalent in Community waters and which is harmful to marine life including fishery resources.
More controls would be placed to prevent oil spillages such as that of the Erika in the Bay of Biscay and also deliberate dumping of waste oils.
Recognition should also be given to the pressures which the delicate marine aqua system faces from urbanisation of coastal areas.
Such pressures are greatest in Europe.
In this context one can also mention the problems of discards of unwanted catches, fishing gear which destroys the seabed and the destruction of natural habitats by over intensive aquacultures.
A quota management system such as that existing in New Zealand since 1986 is one possible alternative.
Under this system, and given the total allowable catch for a species, a market is created for individual quotas for fishing rights within a certain area which the rightholders can trade amongst themselves, fish themselves or lease the rights to other fishermen for a certain time.
The property right that has been created in such a system is the right to fish - not the fish themselves.
Such a market organisation can reap better long-term prospects for the fishing industry.
At present dear colleagues, we can never be fully informed about the vast ecosystem that is the sea, nor about the multitude of factors which affect the stock of resources in this aqua system.
However, we should never blind ourselves to scientific research, we should never cease to gather information, we should never cease to explore improvements in existing systems and, if necessary, we should at least consider policy changes.
The fishery sectors in Europe face serious problems and I am a great supporter of the fishery sector.
I therefore call upon the Commission and the Council to find the information, the political will to provide genuine long-term solutions for fishing communities and not depend upon short-termism.
I recommend the report to the House.
The Environment Committee is generally pleased with the Commission' s communication and we are also pleased that the Fisheries Committee adopted all our amendments.
It is now widely accepted that fishing has effects on marine environment which are much more wide-ranging and pervasive than simple capture of target species with a little bit of by-catch.
We welcome the intention of the Commission to integrate environmental protection into other policies of the EU including the common fisheries policy.
After all, the treaties have stipulated since 1992 that the precautionary principle and environmental protection should be integrated into Community policies.
But as has been pointed out, the adoption of a rigorous definition of the precautionary principle is crucial.
This is because it is all very easy to pay lip service to the idea and then to continue with business as usual.
The UN Fish Stocks Agreement of 1995 would serve as a very good model in this regard.
One aspect that was missing from the communication though is the aspect of surveillance and control.
All the good policies and regulations in the world will not lead to conservation without an effective system to ensure that the rules are respected.
Control is a Member State competence and the Council has recently adopted a list of serious infringements aimed at coordinating to some extent the severity with which similar violations are viewed in different countries.
This is a good step forward, but as the Commission and the Fisheries Committee continually point out, much improvement is needed in the control programmes of all Member States.
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report.
Mr President, fishing is an extremely important economic activity which involves major investment.
Most of its jobs are provided under fairly tough conditions throughout entire Community regions.
However, some people' s view of the fisheries sector can be extremely simplistic, ranging from mere folklore to the insult of regarding fishermen as insensitive pirates and predators.
I regret to say that this report, due to its link with the environment, seems to have provided an occasion for those with this type of view to introduce their own particular misconceptions.
If Mr Katiforis' s report had been approved in its initial wording, none of the members of the Committee on Fisheries could have gone into any fishing region again without fear of being lynched.
The relationship between fisheries and marine ecosystems is obvious.
Yet it is very wide-ranging and involves many other factors including pollution and maritime transport.
To blame fishermen alone for environmental damage is both unfair and wrong.
Our committee avoided embarrassing itself by making a series of amendments of which I tabled 14, many of which were accepted by the rapporteur for which I thank him sincerely.
Just when we thought the discussions had ended, a number of diverse amendments have been tabled in plenary which I ask you to vote against unreservedly.
According to these, for example, the meagre fisheries budget should have to finance artistic heritage or encourage tourism at sea.
Others, like Amendment No 4, which request financing for biological closures, also demonstrate a lack of understanding of fisheries regulations by requesting measures which are already in force, although admittedly there is room for improvement in these.
I therefore ask you to reject the four amendments tabled so that we can close this chapter on fisheries and the environment with the thought which came up in the committee' s debate.
These two areas are closely related and they suffer the effects of the same environmental attacks.
As I have said many times before, the fisheries sector is more a victim than the cause of damage to the marine ecosystem and tomorrow we will be able to confirm this in the debate on the Erika.
Mr President, Mr Katiforis' s report has the virtue of having brought life, debate and controversy to a communication in which the European Commission limits itself to listing a series of good intentions, although recognising its inability to put these into practice.
Mr Katiforis has certainly not lacked the courage to set out the measures which, in his opinion, could help to improve and conserve the natural resources of the sea.
Yet I must say that I disagree with many of his proposals because I am with those who believe that it is not just resources which are important in the fisheries sector but also the human beings who have been carrying out this activity for centuries.
I agree with the rapporteur that the European fisheries and environmental policies should be better coordinated.
However, what we are basically missing is the political courage and determination of the Commission and the Member States to take decisions and apply the current regulations.
Maritime transport, employment and energy should be integrated together with fisheries and the environment.
As for the Structural Funds, certain examples could be mentioned but I will leave this for another day.
The European Parliament is aware of the limited resources and the need for responsible fisheries.
The Commission and Member States should be meticulous in respecting the TACs and the quotas fixed in accordance with objective scientific criteria.
The same yardstick should be used for everyone.
As Mr Katiforis says, discards are a waste of resources which we cannot accept.
Twenty million tonnes of unwanted catches are being thrown back.
The fleet must therefore use increasingly selective fishing gear.
This House has already indicated its opposition to driftnets and yet it is evident that certain countries are not only not respecting the undertaking to eliminate these nets but are increasing the number of vessels using these or simply not providing data given the passiveness of the national and Community authorities.
We socialists consider that to defend the common fisheries policy is to defend a regulated and controlled fisheries sector.
It is therefore essential that the Commission launches an information campaign on the CFP with this message.
Without a common fisheries policy there can only be lack of control, damage to the environment and an unsustainable economic activity.
Mr President, I very much appreciate this report by Mr Katiforis on fisheries management and nature conservation in the marine environment.
Let us not forget that fish are at the very basis of our food chain and that the first 'environmental' disaster, Minamata disease, occurred in 1958 in Japan owing to the fact that fish were polluted by mercury.
We should therefore very carefully monitor pollution from industrial activity, but also from domestic activity.
I do not believe that ejecting emissions at sea, and particularly in a closed environment like the Mediterranean, when we want to clean up purification plants, is a good way to clean up water.
We should pay particular attention to telluric pollution, to development, to the urbanisation of coastal areas, etc.
But we should also think about restoring the environment and, for example, solving the problems associated with caulerpa taxifolia, and the areas of posidonia that are disappearing and which must therefore be protected.
They say that if you want something done, it is best to do it yourself and so the users of the sea, the fishermen, must be very attentive.
It will certainly be necessary to reduce the amount of fish caught and the elimination of the surplus capacity between 30 and 40%, as proposed by the Commission, has been very greatly watered down by the Council, to between 5 and 10%.
It will also be necessary to undertake selective fishing and, together with my colleague, Nol Mamre, who is also a former Member of the European Parliament, we would request a moratorium on the use of deep-sea trawlers in Community waters in the Bay of Biscay, to the south of the 47th parallel north, because we have had enough of seeing dolphins being washed up and dying on our beaches, particularly at the moment.
So we must practise selective fishing.
Aquaculture should also be monitored.
Read Mr Katiforis' s report again, in which he says that in Scotland, for example, 17 000 salmon are infected by the disease that I just mentioned, and impact upon the environment.
Let us therefore take great care with work in a closed environment.
The Council of Europe is coming before the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy on 22 March to speak about the research work that must be undertaken, particularly in the marine environment and, more precisely, the scientific and economic challenges of exploiting the oceans.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would ask you to come and take part in this discussion.
Mr President, the Katiforis report has been amended according to the proposals, notably, of the Europe for a Union of Nations Group, which were adopted in the Committee on Fisheries and, in my opinion, this version is an improvement on the original.
I would like to touch briefly on these amendments.
With regard to the installation of satellite fishing vessel monitoring systems, we feel that it is important for them to be installed on as many vessels as possible, although small vessels should not be compelled to carry them, of course, as investment and running costs would be disproportionately high compared to the value of the catches they make, and also in view of the fact that, in any case, satellite fishing vessel monitoring systems are not suitable or efficient for coastal fishing vessels.
We welcome the report' s rejection of the idea originally put forward by the rapporteur of creating a taxation system, as this would be impossible to implement and enforce for all the Member States.
Moreover, with regard to the protection of coastal areas, which are the main breeding and spawning grounds for many species of fish, we hope for tighter controls, which, in our opinion, should be accompanied by penal sanctions for throwing unwanted catches back into the sea.
In effect, this practice is responsible for a high death rate and is therefore incompatible with good fisheries management.
More specifically, with regard to fisheries management in the Mediterranean, we are all aware that fishing in the Mediterranean is not governed by provisions on TACs.
And just as well, in my view.
As you may be aware, in contrast with the cold Northern seas, the Mediterranean is a small, warm sea where there are very few, if any, schools of only one species of fish.
In our opinion, the possibility put forward in the explanatory statement of this report of setting TACs in the Mediterranean is therefore inappropriate.
Lastly, we would vote for the amendments tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left.
We do believe that it is extremely important to give financial support to conventional fishing and craft trades and to boost the income of fishermen during periods when moratoria on fishing are in force: in short, we must make it possible to carry on a major, responsible economic activity while still ensuring proper respect for the environment.
Mr President, Commissioner, the Committee on Fisheries has worked very hard indeed to produce a balanced report.
Some people say in all seriousness that the decline in fishery stocks is caused solely by fishing.
That is wrong of course and it also diverts attention from objective statements.
I therefore call upon all parties involved to take account of the other factors causing reduced stocks as well, be they pollution, climate change, industrial activities, sea traffic etc.
Once again there has been an environmental tragedy off the coast of Europe, namely the sinking of the Erika off Brittany.
A combination of the aforementioned factors and inadequate supervisory measures at European level are the primary causes of a debilitated marine environment.
Fishing is an economic activity.
If we want a strong fisheries sector then we need to have stocks to catch and a perfect environment for fish to reproduce in.
The EU must develop conditions that will create a balance between environmental considerations and all other interests.
That is why we completely oppose one-sided measures that attack and weaken the fisheries sector.
It is wrong to ignore the technical and environmental realities.
Does it really make sense to equip boats less than twelve metres in length with a satellite control device?
Does it make sense to bias our efforts in favour of promoting coastal fishing although it is neither particularly environmentally-friendly nor capable of being monitored to an adequate degree?
These are just a few of the many questions raised by the Committee on Fisheries.
These examples show that it is simple enough to talk about fishing and the environment from a theoretical standpoint.
However, it is far less easy to come up with constructive measures based on the principle of sustainable stocks management.
We need even more wind in our sails here!
Mr President, first of all, I am pleased that the Katiforis report takes into consideration the multitude of factors responsible for the deterioration of the marine environment: pollution, unsupervised fishing, drilling platforms and pressure from the increasing use of coastal areas for urban development are potential sources of widescale damage to the environment in both coastal areas and offshore, and fishing is also a victim of this situation.
There is therefore a need for an in-depth analysis of the relationship between fishing and the environment.
The use of selective fishing gear which reduces incidental unwanted catches and limits the throwing of unwanted fish back into the sea is certainly essential, as is a reduction of the pressure from the fishing industry offshore, as well as in coastal waters.
A reduction in the fishing capacity and in pressure from the fishing industry on fish stocks is not necessarily compatible with maintaining an outdated fleet and would limit modernisation.
In addition to providing more appropriate conditions of safety and hygiene, the use of more modern vessels could also contribute to reducing certain major factors.
Moreover, it is important to uphold the concept that it is not possible to make a surface categorisation of entire fishing sections as more environmentally friendly: in reality, in some cases, small-scale fishing has less of an impact on the environment and natural resources.
I am also pleased that the report takes into consideration the possibility of starting a campaign for informing fishermen and consumers of the risks of exploiting fishing resources, and I also welcome the Commission' s request to propose the institution of a European award to be given to different categories of the industry and to all those who provide services and advice regarding responsible behaviour, in order to further the sustainable management of fish stocks and the conservation of marine life.
Mr President, as a member of the Verts/ALE Group, but also as a Member of this Parliament for Galicia, I propose to use this intervention to enlarge upon two issues.
I shall, of course, be brief.
Firstly, fishery production and the conservation of marine life and resources are two sides of the same coin.
Shipowners and fishermen from the countries most active in fishing are more concerned than anyone about respecting their means of living, for without it, the future of this sector cannot be guaranteed.
Secondly, it is true that a policy of preserving the marine environment must be practised both in Community seas and in international waters or those belonging to third countries.
This particularly applies, however, to our own coastal waters.
Given this context, I would like to tell you about something that happened a few days ago.
I discovered that the EU is using ERDF resources to finance the construction of a wharf in Vilagarcia, in Galicia, for storing chemical and hydrocarbon products, on a site which will only employ three workers.
This contravenes the EC environmental impact directive in relation to an estuary such as Arousa, where 26 000 people earn a living from the seafood industry.
Can I first of all congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report.
Conservation is something that I hear on many occasions and a lot of people pay lip service to it.
A lot of people are all in favour of it until it arrives on their own doorstep.
It is all very well to talk about conservation and I agree with it totally.
But at the end of the day one has got to strike the balance between those who are dependent on their life and their livelihood from the sea and those who are making the laws which govern who may or may not fish and where, when and how they may fish in any particular waters within the European Union.
Commissioner Fischler, of course, knows me from a long time back and I have written to him on BSE and many other issues in agriculture but now that he is responsible for fisheries I am going to have to berate him on fisheries, along with his lusty colleagues, because one of the areas that has been most affected has been my region and the fishermen of Northern Ireland.
In actual fact they have had a moratorium imposed upon them without any recompense, without any real negotiation or discussion.
It has been imposed upon them that they cannot fish for about an 11 to 12 week period.
Now we all accept that there is a problem in conservation and a problem of stocks, but what I am really saying to you Commissioner, and I have said this to you in the Fisheries Committee and I will say it to you again: There is a wide divide between Brussels and the working fishermen.
It does not matter whether you come from Galicia, it does not matter whether you are from Northern Ireland or whether you are from Scotland.
That chasm exists and we in Brussels have not been able to cross that divide.
And we have got to take on board the views of the fishermen.
We have got to take on board the concerns of the fishermen and we have got to work closely with them and I hope that you, as the Commissioner responsible for fisheries, will recognise that divide and will try and work as closely as you possibly can to ensure that all sides are brought together and their views are taken on board.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, one thing must be made clear, to my mind: it is the task of our common fisheries policy to guarantee sustainable fisheries management.
Conservation of the marine ecosystem is both in the interests of fisheries management and of environmental protection.
It is simply the case, Mr Nicholson, that we must succeed in crossing this divide between the measures that are deemed necessary and adopted here in Brussels, and the views and also justifiable interests of the fishermen in various parts of the Community.
However, in my opinion, sustainability is a principle that ought not solely to take account of environmental considerations, rather it is equally important to make economic and social considerations part of the concept.
If we want to secure the sustainability of the European fisheries sector in economic and ecological terms, then we certainly have a lot of work to do there, although there have already been some developments along the right lines.
I would remind you of the measures for improving the selectivity of fishing gear which came into force this year.
I would remind you of our decisions on setting catch quotas, so as to reduce fishing for threatened stocks by 40%.
I would remind you of the introduction of protected areas, which also benefit sea birds, for example, and, lastly, I would just like to mention the long-term management strategies, which are based on applying the precautionary principle to ten of the most important fisheries stocks used for commercial purposes in Community waters.
As I said though, we still have a lot of work to do.
In particular, we should, after thinking one or two things through, head in the direction of multiannual quota setting.
This would help to secure long-term, sustainable fishing activities, and would afford fishermen a longer-term perspective and help them to plan with greater certainty.
Short-term measures alone benefit neither the stocks nor the fishermen.
However, if we are to take a fresh approach to this issue, then this requires a certain amount of political courage, and this goes for all parties involved, whether they are working at national or Community level.
One of the things the Commission is called upon to do in the amendments - which are also the subject of our debate - is to devote more funding to the fisheries policy.
I must remind you at this point that the rules we work to have changed.
The Berlin decisions have meant that there is no scope for fresh, new budgets or money.
We have to operate under the terms of the financial framework that was placed at our disposal there.
You also recommend extending coastal waters from a 12 to a 24 mile zone.
I believe we will need to discuss this issue in great depth though, for we must not forget that this could bring major problems as well as benefits, particularly in the light of the fact that in so doing, we would actually be heading in the direction of a partial renationalisation of fisheries policy.
All in all, though, this report demonstrates our commitment to the aforementioned aims, and we therefore welcome the support this report has received from the rapporteur, Mr Katiforis.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Fischler.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Bankruptcy procedures
The next item is the report A5-0039/2000 by Mr Lechner, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the initiative of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Republic of Finland, with a view to the adoption of a Council regulation on insolvency proceedings (9178/1999 - C5-0069/1999 - 1999/0806(CNS)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen - and still so many of you here shortly before midnight!
In the European internal market, not only do enterprises undertake cross-border economic activities; increasingly they also have assets and branches in several different countries.
However, there are losers, as well as winners in the internal market.
This is regrettable, but no doubt inevitable.
So far there has been little or no regulation of the problems that arise in the event of bankruptcy.
For example, what effect does the opening of insolvency proceedings in one Member State have on assets located in another Member State?
How do matters stand with regard to the debtor' s power of disposal?
Is he able to successfully transfer assets, even after the opening of insolvency proceedings; forum shopping as it were?
There are neither international law agreements worth mentioning nor European solutions.
An agreement was drawn up in 1995, but it did not enter into force.
This regulation will mean that these problems will now be regulated by a European legal norm in a comprehensive and conclusive manner, and what is more, it will be directly binding.
In my view, the regulation can be described as a big hit and an important step towards unitary and uniform European conflict of laws in matters of insolvency.
With this regulation, the competent court of law and applicable law are determined in accordance with the State in which the debtor has the centre of his main interests.
Fundamentally, it is this lex concursus that determines the opening of the insolvency proceedings, the liquidation of the total assets, including those abroad, as well as the participation of foreign creditors, the handling of the procedure and the winding up thereof.
The opening of procedures has a direct Europe-wide effect, but the decisions taken at a later stage also have a direct effect, with no need for special acknowledgement procedures in other Member States.
The regulation is based on the principle of universality and uniformity underlying the procedure.
In principle, the debtor' s total assets should be liquidated in one insolvency procedure, which all creditors - domestic as well as foreign - participate in and receive an equal measure of satisfaction from, i.e. it operates on a cross-border basis.
In view of the differing national systems of law, for example with regard to security rights or contracts of employment, this principle of universality cannot, however, be upheld throughout.
This would infringe the rights of third parties in an inadmissible manner.
Accordingly, there are a number of significant legal aspects in respect of which special provisions allow for observance of the national law in force in the respective locality.
In particular, this applies to rights in rem, immoveable property, rights recorded in public registers, legal institutions such as the reservation of title, set-offs, rights of challenge, and last but not least, contracts of employment.
Although these special provisions are irrefutable, the regulation also allows for one or more further insolvency procedures to be conducted in respect of a subsidiary located in another country.
Such procedures are then conducted as concurrent or secondary proceedings - termed territorial insolvency procedures - the effect of which, however, is confined to the territory of the country concerned.
In my view, and that expressed in the report, as well as in that of the Committee on Legal Affairs, there are question marks over this.
The principle of universality, which, ideally, is inherent in the logic of the internal market and the creation of a uniform legal framework, is thereby interrupted in a way that is not factually irrefutable, unlike in the case of the above-mentioned special provisions.
In any event, the same applies to the kind of concurrent proceedings - and this is very important - which are to be instituted following the opening of the main proceedings.
In such cases, insolvency proceedings will already have been initiated in respect of the subsidiary at the time of the opening of proceedings in respect of the centre of main interests.
For this reason, it is proposed in my report that in cases of this kind, when main proceedings are already under way, further proceedings in the form of concurrent proceedings should only be permitted with the consent of the administrator of the main proceedings.
This qualification would constitute another important step in the direction of a closed, uniform, European legal system.
As a matter of fact, the opinions of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs also took this line, and other opinions are against having more than one set of proceedings.
They would create additional complications and delimitation problems.
It is not so much the facts of the matter that have given rise to this proposal, as the pressures attending the search for a unanimous compromise.
I believe Parliament should shift its emphasis here and would therefore urge those who have tabled amendments on this point to give it further thought.
Further proposals concern clarifications, for example with regard to safeguarding the independence of legal persons and other matters.
On a final note, I would like to say a word of thanks to Finland and Germany, who are to be commended for initiating the proposal.
This regulation lays down all conflict of law provisions in insolvency law in a compact, conclusive and binding manner, as a European legal norm, whilst upholding national systems of law in the matter.
This represents a breakthrough and could be held up as an example in my view.
Hence I would urge the Council to adopt the regulation as quickly as possible, taking Parliament' s proposals into account.
Mr President, I think we all agree that a European legal area must be created.
We also all agree that there should be harmonisation in a field that is marked by the great disparity of our legal systems and, what is more, concepts.
The very word bankruptcy, the legal concept of bankruptcy, does not cover the same accounting concept in each of the Member States of the Union.
We therefore all agree on the established facts, and the draft regulation and the report are going in the right direction.
If I may, however, just make a few comments on the method.
When you observe - and you cannot fail to do so - the disparity in the legal systems and concepts, and the fact that we wish to improve coordination, I believe that there are three ways in which we can proceed.
The first is to establish equivalence, saying: in the final analysis, bankruptcy in France is the same thing as bankruptcy in England or in Germany.
The second way is to recreate a law ex nihilo, that is to say, to harmonise the systems and completely overhaul all the concepts and legal systems in each of the Member States.
That is not the route that has been taken.
The third route that has been taken is in the end to superimpose above the existing systems, which are not touched, a real embryo of Community law of collective procedures and procedures for companies in difficulty.
This is a good thing, moreover, and the result has probably exceeded what the authors had hoped for.
But at this stage I should like to make an observation, which is not technical, but more philosophical and taken from practice.
It is that bankruptcy is experienced within the European Union, in the majority of States, as an absolutely definitive event for the person it affects.
And I believe that it is our responsibility, in an ever more rapidly moving economy, where everyone must have a real opportunity, to give people the chance of running a commercial enterprise, and a second and a third chance, if necessary.
Today, in many Member States, that is not possible.
One of the reasons that explains the difference in competitiveness between the European area, for example and the United States, is precisely this ability of bouncing back that exists on the other side of the Atlantic and that we just do not have here.
I believe that since we have gone that far and we are continuing along that path, which is the route of creating a collective procedure for regulating this type of legal standard in the European Union, we should bear in mind that it should not become the allegorical figure of the guillotine.
Mr President, Commissioner, I believe, in fact, that it is more by luck than skill that there have not so far been any disasters due to the absence of the rules mentioned by the previous speakers.
When we deal with the positive side of the single market and create a common internal market, we must also deal with the darker side, namely bankruptcies.
I consider that we are experiencing an historic moment in this regard.
I congratulate the rapporteur for having so quickly progressed further with his report.
I am, moreover, proud that my own country has been involved in tabling this regulation which we now hope will swiftly be adopted by the Council.
I think it is an important step we are taking, even if each of the national systems is not especially influenced by it.
To the rapporteur' s regret, I must unfortunately point out that our Group cannot support Amendment No 3 because we consider that it restricts creditors' legal position and impairs their legal protection.
With regard to Amendment No 6, we tabled a similar amendment in the negotiations in committee.
I am a little surprised that you in the Group of the Party of European Socialists did not support it then.
We shall now support your Amendment No 6, but I wonder why you did not support our own amendment in committee.
I also hope that we produce some insight in this context and that we shall be able to compare which procedures are quickest and best in the various countries.
.
(PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, the Commission wishes to emphasise above all that the draft regulation being debated this evening is merely an amendment of the 1995 Convention on insolvency proceedings.
As you all know, this convention was the result of many years of discussion, which was often difficult and often laborious, and that for this very reason, it represents a compromise between unitary and territorial principles, that is to say, the structural principles of the different legal insolvency proceedings in each of our Member States.
Because we are aware that the developing global economic situation, and particularly the single market, can force businesses to resort more frequently to insolvency proceedings, which often take the form of cross-border proceedings, the Union itself is fully justified in equipping itself with the binding legal instruments it needs to ensure that insolvency proceedings are carried out according to a set of common structural principles, thus ensuring that they are carried out swiftly.
For better or for worse, the fact that businesses become insolvent will become an increasingly common occurrence in our daily economic life.
It will furthermore be a factor in renewing the very fabric of business, which must not be hindered by the existence of slow bureaucratic procedures or by obstacles that prolong the agony of businesses that are no longer viable.
This is why it is important to try to find a legal frame of reference which can adapt to the new requirements of a global economy.
It was not the Commission that presented the present proposal for a regulation but two Member States, Germany and Finland, by means of a joint initiative under the right of initiative which Member States share with the Commission on such issues.
The Commission considers that this regulation makes no substantive amendment to the text of the Convention.
As far back as 1981, the Commission had already stated its position in favour of clearly adopting the principle of unitary insolvency proceedings.
Furthermore, this view was accepted in the Commission' s proposals on a parallel procedure concerning the liquidation of businesses.
The 1995 Convention, on the other hand, authorises the filing of secondary proceedings, thereby creating situations which are exceptions to the general rule that the Commission would like to see accepted.
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, the Commission would therefore have preferred that a new text be adopted, one which would specifically enshrine the principle of unitary proceedings.
Nevertheless, I do not think that this is the time to call into question the agreement obtained in the 1995 Convention which was, moreover, based on a timescale for negotiations of approximately thirty years.
Consequently, the Commission has refrained from presenting an amendment.
Instead, it has limited itself to focusing its opinions on institutional issues.
The Commission feels, for this reason too, that it should not present a modified proposal for amendments to the regulation, but I would nevertheless like to convey to you the Commission' s opinions on the amendments under discussion.
The Commission therefore accepts Amendments Nos 1, 2, 3 and 5 proposed by the rapporteur, Mr Lechner.
On the other hand, it does not accept Amendment No 4.
Indeed, the Commission feels that Parliament should instead support Amendment No 4 by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, which would allow the annexes to the regulation to be modified by the Commission, assisted by a regulatory committee, in accordance with the on-going procedure of Article 5 of Decision 1999/468/EC.
Therefore, with regard to the amendments proposed by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 3 and 4.
On the other hand, it does not accept Amendments Nos 1 and 2, on the idea of "centre of the debtor' s main interests" .
With regard to the centre of main interests of a company or of a legal person, this idea is clearly defined in Article 3.
In all other cases that have not been specifically addressed, we feel that the reference made in Recital 13 should be sufficient.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Vitorino.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
(The sitting was suspended at 12.05 a.m.)