# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
That is very important work, it is already scheduled and we must work as quickly as possible so that the maximum number of questions can be answered.
The rest will be replied to in writing.
We will begin Question Time.
Question No 1 by (H-0350/00):
Subject: Undesirable persons in Turkey The Turkish newspaper 'Sabah' has published a list of 56 persons considered undesirable in Turkey.
The list includes numerous political representatives from several European Union countries (Denmark, Italy, Greece, Sweden and Spain) and also from non-Member States, together with a large number of journalists, clergymen, members of humanitarian organisations etc.
Despite the uproar caused by this list, the Turkish Government has not denied its existence.
As maintaining a list of undesirable persons constitutes an unacceptable and undemocratic act on the part of the Turkish Government, does the Council intend to look into the issue and to intervene with the Turkish Government at once to ask for the list to be scrapped?
Mr President, I shall try to answer the questions as briefly as possible, although the brevity of my answers does not reflect the Council' s genuine desire to give answers to this House that are as comprehensive as possible.
It is indeed true that information has appeared in a Turkish newspaper about a list of people considered to be undesirable in Turkey.
This issue was specifically raised by the Presidency at the Association Council meeting between the European Union and Turkey on 11 April 2000.
I would like to say that the Turkish Foreign Minister, Mr Schem, has stated officially that no such list exists, which is why, in the light of an official statement like this, we feel that we should not continue to insist on this point.
If, by any chance, the Turkish authorities were to take any action that might suggest a contradiction of what the Turkish Foreign Minister has told us, the Council would, of course, act accordingly.
- (EL) I should like to thank the President-in-Office, both because the question was raised and for his reply.
I hope that this is in fact the case.
I should like to use the opportunity which I have to ask a second supplementary question and the occasion of the presence here of the husband and son of Leila Zana, who was awarded the European Parliament' s Sakharov prize, to ask the minister the following question: does he not think that before assuming the Portuguese Presidency, he should have raised the matter of the release of a lady member of parliament honoured by our very own House with the Sakharov prize for her fight for human rights now that Turkey wishes to draw closer to, and integrate into, the European Union?
Should the Council and the presidency not have made a move to help Leila Zana?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the decisions of the Helsinki European Council led to Turkey being considered as a candidate for accession to the European Union.
It was agreed that, following this decision, an accession strategy would be established, which naturally includes strict monitoring of what the European Union regards as essential reforms.
This relates in particular to the area of human rights, which, in the light of the Copenhagen criteria, are essential for the accession of any country to the European Union.
The Council will monitor all of these issues and will not fail, whenever necessary, to convey any information to this House which is relevant to progress with this accession strategy and, in particular, its views on Turkey' s compliance with requirements for the future opening of accession negotiations by the European Union.
Mr President, on a point of order.
I attend Question Time nearly every time and every time the first question or two are from our colleagues in the Greek Communists and, in particular, Mr Alavanos.
You will notice that the date on this question is 30 March 2000, which was two weeks before the last part-session.
Therefore, in my view, it should not have been number one on the list but should have been on the last part-session' s list of questions.
There seems to be some system whereby Mr Alavanos and his colleagues always get the first and second questions, and they always attack Turkey.
I should like you to investigate why this should be.
Mr Purvis, I believe that we should not enter into any judgement of intentions.
I would like to point out - although you already know - that the President, together with her office, decides on the order of questions.
I do not know whether Mr Alavanos has so much influence with the Presidency of Parliament.
What I can tell you is that it is not the Greek Communist Party but Synaspismos.
That I do know about.
However, we shall continue with our agenda.
I will take good note of your question.
Question No 2 by (H-0361/00):
Subject: Dispute between Armenia and Turkey On 11 December 1999 the Council accepted Turkey' s application for accession to the European Union.
Paragraph 3 of Parliament' s resolution of 18 June 1987 'Calls on the Council to obtain from the present Turkish Government an acknowledgement of the genocide perpetrated against the Armenians in 1915-1917 and to promote the establishment of a dialogue between Turkey and the representatives of the Armenians' .
Turkey has not acknowledged the genocide in question and is still imposing its economic blockade on Armenia.
What action has the Council taken to encourage the development of political relations between Armenia and Turkey?
Is the Council considering lifting the embargo as one of the indispensable conditions for Turkey' s accession to the European Union?
The objective of European Union policy in this area has obviously been to promote stability in the Caucasus, both between countries in the region, specifically in relation to Nagorno-Karabakh, and between the countries themselves and their neighbours.
I have to say that we are now at a new stage in our relations with Turkey which means that we cannot automatically accommodate Turkey' s interests, and are also making greater demands on Turkey as regards the way it responds to requests made of it by the European Union.
This has therefore created a new kind of dialogue.
This will, of course, oblige Turkey to adopt a set of attitudes regarding traditional aspects of EU external policy towards countries in that area.
In view of this, it is worth pointing out that cooperation between the European Union and Armenia is part of the acquis communautaire which Turkey will have to adopt if the negotiating process begins.
Turkey' s compliance with these requirements will, of course, also bring about an obvious lessening of tensions between Turkey and Armenia.
Mr President, I should also like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his answer.
I must, however, regretfully inform him that his answer was still particularly vague, as my question referred to a European Parliament resolution adopted in 1987, in which, effectively, we officially recognised events such as the genocide of the Armenians between 1915 and 1917.
We do not, however, know today what measures have been taken by successive Councils in order to attempt to establish relations between both these countries, given that today Turkey is still imposing an economic blockade on Armenia.
My question is therefore as follows: in the context of negotiations with a view to Turkey' s accession to the European Union, has the issue of this blockade been raised, and could lifting this blockade be counted a precondition to Turkey' s accession?
The honourable Member has asked two questions.
The first concerns the 1987 resolution on acknowledging the genocide in 1915-1917 and the second question basically concerns political relations between Armenia and Turkey.
With regard to the first question, these issues are obviously open to political interpretation, although they are based on a historical assumption which we all acknowledge and which is extremely important, but which is not a precondition for reopening dialogue with Turkey.
With regard to relations between Armenia and Turkey, which we hope will be positive in future, all that the European Union has done is to try to ensure that Turkey complies with the European Union' s normal framework of external relations.
This framework includes good relations with Armenia, especially on trade matters.
These good relations and the whole framework for cooperation on which they are based are part of the acquis communautaire that Turkey must accept.
Nevertheless, at international level, we cannot force countries to maintain good relations with one another, as these cannot be imposed by decree.
They must result from a political decision.
Turkey must practically demonstrate that no matter how it views the situation in Armenia, if it wishes to open negotiations with the European Union and if it wishes to join the European Union, it will, of course, have to respect the whole framework of good relations that the European Union enjoys with Armenia.
This has, until now, been a purely bilateral issue and the European Union cannot, therefore, intervene in it.
Question No 3 by (H-0365/00):
Subject: EU-Jordan Association Agreement Would the Council please list those Member States which have still to ratify the EU-Jordan Association Agreement and advise what level of priority it is giving to encouraging them to speed up the process?
Mr President, in reply to this question, I think that in terms of day-to-day relations between the Council and the European Parliament, it would be useful if we could make full use of the facilities that the transparency process for Council information provides for all citizens, including Members of the European Parliament.
That is why I would like to suggest that those honourable Members who are interested in issues such as this should use the Council web page, which is updated daily, to ascertain the dates of signing and the position on ratification, adoption and entry into force of all agreements, and specifically the Mediterranean agreements such as the agreement with Jordan to which the honourable Member' s question refers.
On this point, the latest information I have is that eight countries have still not ratified the EU-Jordan Association Agreement.
As you will be aware, this is a matter for national parliaments, and they have the final say, as these are mixed agreements, in which there is a Community dimension and a national dimension.
It is obvious that we cannot interfere in the decisions of national parliaments.
Nevertheless, we can and we must make representations to the governments of these countries, and I must say that the Portuguese Presidency intends, at the next informal meeting of Foreign Ministers on the Euro-Mediterranean process, to highlight the importance of making the parliaments of these countries aware of the need to ratify this agreement in particular, as well as other agreements which still remain to be ratified.
I would, however, like to mention an issue that is often overlooked.
This is that given that there is a Community dimension to these agreements, and that this dimension concerns trade, the entry into force of these agreements would normally be preceded by a Commission decision.
And the Commission has, in fact, as it has done with regard to other Euro-Mediterranean agreements, already brought into force unilateral measures for dismantling customs tariffs, which will provide products from Jordan with easy and swift access to the Community market.
Mr President, I wish to begin by saying how delighted I am that the presidency is prepared to put some pressure on the governments which, in turn, I hope will put pressure on their parliaments to proceed with ratification.
It is quite shaming that after well over six months there are eight Member States still to ratify.
The Jordanians are particularly sensitive to the slow pace of progress.
Commissioner Patten is determined to reinvigorate the whole Barcelona process and the European-Mediterranean relationship.
I hope that the Council will follow that lead and ensure that this is transmitted down through the governments to the Member State parliaments.
Could he give me some assurance that the Council gives Mr Patten its full support in what he is trying to do in the Mediterranean area?
Mr President, with regard to the latter part of Mr Purvis' s question, actions in the Mediterranean area have been one of the Portuguese Presidency' s priorities.
The Portuguese Presidency also intends to continue the very thorough work that has been done to establish the joint strategy for the Mediterranean, and it has developed various initiatives in this area.
Specifically, with regard to the agreement with Jordan, even though we acknowledge and regret the fact that the agreement is not yet in force, previous experience has shown that these agreements take around three years to be ratified.
The most rapidly ratified agreement was the agreement with Tunisia, which was signed in July 1995, and which came into force in March 1998; it therefore took just under three years.
Our experience with all the other agreements is that they took around three years and I think that the pace of the agreement with Jordan is more or less standard.
This depends to a large extent on national parliaments.
Nevertheless, the Portuguese Presidency will certainly make the various governments aware of this issue.
As the author is not present, Question No 4 lapses.
Question No 5 by (H-0370/00):
Subject: Culture and the WTO The Portuguese Presidency has emphasised the role of culture in the European project and has linked it, in particular, to the need to clarify the European strategy for the future WTO Round.
Will the Council now make a statement on the issue?
Mr President, I gather that this question refers to the issue of culture within the WTO.
As you will be aware, when the Council' s mandate for the Seattle Summit was being prepared, many Member States were particularly careful to stress cultural aspects and, above all, the European Union' s need to adopt a very firm position in these negotiations on protecting the specific nature of culture.
I would therefore remind you that in the conclusions of the Council meeting on 26 October on the preparation of the Seattle Ministerial Conference, the idea was expressed that during the forthcoming WTO negotiations, the Union would try to ensure, as it did in the Uruguay Round, that the Member States which comprise the Community would be able to preserve their cultural diversity by maintaining their own cultural and audiovisual policies.
Honourable Members will be as aware as I am of the fate that befell the launch of the new round of WTO negotiations in Seattle, which has, of course, led to delays in addressing issues of this kind.
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that within the specific framework of the GATT agreement, that is, of the General Agreement on Trade in Services, it was specified that negotiations on the so-called built-in agenda would have to begin on 1 January 2000.
These negotiations have begun, but there has been no substantial change of position so far - which is something of an understatement - with regard to progress on these issues, given that this whole process is obviously linked to the start of the overall negotiating process.
I can also tell you that the Council believes that there is no way that a satisfactory start can be made to the process this year.
I wish to thank the President-in-Office for his response.
The reason for asking the question is that we have in our own ideologies many different models at a European Union level which are unique to the European Union as a whole: many times we speak of the European model of agriculture or the European social model, and so on.
In particular, with regard to things like audiovisual, we had a discussion today in Parliament on the Randzio-Plath report on transparency and financial dealings between undertakings and state aid.
There is a huge threat now to cultural diversity within the European Union because of the import of programmes from America and globalisation even of food chains like McDonalds.
That is constantly undermining what is unique not only about Europe as a continent but also about the individual Member States.
I hope that you and your colleagues will be vigilant in ensuring that we have the opportunity to maintain that diversity, as it adds to what essentially the core of Europe is all about.
I would like to offer Mr Crowley certain assurances.
We will continue to address the issue of preserving national identity and the need to maintain a set of instruments which, without in any way distorting the competition rules, can, in some way, ensure that the core values of European identity will be preserved.
This applies both to the overall position adopted by the Council, which will, of course, remain the focal point of the negotiations conducted by the Commission on behalf of the Union during the next round, and also at national level.
The position I have described reflects Portugal' s view of this matter, and I believe that my country is not alone in its approach to this issue.
Mr President, the WTO deals primarily with issues pertaining to the opening up of markets.
For example, there is a discussion on-going at the moment about China, and whether our European manufacturers are to have access to the textile market as well.
It is a market worth billions and could create many new jobs here in Europe, particularly when one considers that the only possession many Chinese have to their name is a pair of trousers.
The cultural question I would most like to hear answered though, is this: how are we proposing to handle the language issue in future?
France pursues a very independent policy where the French language is concerned.
Do you see any evidence of similar tendencies on the part of the Germans, Spanish or Portuguese?
Are we going to take an even-handed approach in this respect or will we form an assessment on a country-by-country basis, taking into account the respective size of population?
I would be very happy to answer the honourable Member if I had any idea at the moment of how the debate on this issue will proceed.
I nevertheless believe that the Council intends to highlight these different national approaches, which reflect the very diverse nature of the European Union.
And as regards my own country at least, there is considerable concern that these cultural issues, and specifically the language dimension, should be the very top priority in the discussions that the European Union will be holding with its WTO partners.
As the authors are not present, Question Nos 6 and 7 lapse.
Question No 8 by (H-0376/00):
Subject: EU agriculture budget paying for the UN mission in Kosovo Will the EU use appropriations from the agriculture budget to pay for the UN mission to Kosovo?
Mr President, with regard to the previous questions, I think that when it comes to agriculture, the actions of the Portuguese Presidency are sufficiently eloquent to have answered the honourable Member' s question - even in his absence.
Turning to the question about financing our policy in Kosovo through the agricultural budget, I must make it absolutely clear that the United Nations mission in Kosovo cannot possibly be financed from agricultural budget headings, since there is no appropriate legal basis for this.
The current financial regulations do not allow for appropriations to be transferred between two headings in the financial perspectives.
This does not necessarily mean that there is no intention, as specifically announced by the Commission, to propose an amendment to the 2000-2006 financial perspectives which, in the Commission' s view, would not fundamentally affect CAP appropriations.
The Council is currently studying this issue, which is highly controversial.
We know that in this House, too, a majority is against a review of the financial perspectives which would lead to a reduction in the amount available for the common agricultural policy.
Nevertheless, I repeat that the Commission has stated that there is absolutely no danger of direct aid to farmers being reduced and that this is simply a question of taking advantage of savings essentially flowing from changes in the euro/dollar exchange rate.
These savings will be extrapolated over the next two years.
Furthermore, the Commission considers that the post-2002 review of the CAP, which was, as you know, agreed in the Berlin European Council conclusions, will provide a basis for further savings.
But as I have said, the Council' s position on this issue is, in political terms, to oppose a review of the financial perspectives.
The Council considers that a very thorough assessment must be carried out of the requirements of the Balkans and of the real ability of the people there to absorb these funds, particularly bearing in mind and focusing very closely on the role of the European Union as one of the international funding agencies in this area.
This request has already been made to the Commission and to the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy.
We have therefore asked the Commission to provide a schedule showing the indicative distribution of all the contributions that have been pledged, divided into those components which are donations and those which are loans.
The Council feels that it is only on the basis of this kind of information that an accurate assessment of the Commission' s proposals can be made.
It is precisely for this reason that the idea of a review of the financial perspectives is not being considered at present.
What the President-in-Office of the Council has just said completely contradicts what the Commissioner said yesterday, the day before yesterday and on previous occasions in this House.
The Council' s view is correct: payments to farmers are at stake.
It is truly outrageous that aid is not paid for nuts - which means they cannot continue to be grown - or that farmers are not being given what they are asking for: a reduction in diesel oil prices.
Nevertheless, what the Commission does is take funds intended for agriculture, and which have already been approved under Agenda 2000, at the Berlin Summit, as if there were a surplus, and divert them to foreign policy.
Although I am in favour of aid to Kosovo, I am not in favour - in fact I consider it an outrage - of taking money intended for agriculture, approved under Agenda 2000 - since if we do this it shows that it has been nothing but a smokescreen - and dedicating it to foreign policy.
My question is as follows: what do we do when the Council says something diametrically opposed to what the Commission says?
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, what do we do in this event?
If Parliament feels that there is a contradiction, it can address this contradiction by comparing it with reality, and the reality is that, contrary to what the honourable Member has just said, nowhere in my speech did I say that direct aid would suffer as a result of this redeployment of appropriations.
I must make it clear that the Commission has simply said that it would use available funds and that savings would be made in the common agricultural policy.
That is all.
This does not mean that the Commission may not present proposals for the redeployment of appropriations, but rather that - as the Commission itself has continued to say - this will not affect direct aid to farmers either.
- (EL) Mr President, frankly the President-in-Office leaves me speechless.
First he assures us that no part of the CAP budget will be used for Kosovo or for exercising the European Union' s foreign policy and then he says that, in any case, the Commission has said - and rightly so - that any sums not taken up will be shared out.
In other words, part of the CAP budget will be redistributed.
We insist on knowing if the Council really believes that part of the agricultural budget, which has undergone swathing cutbacks for 2000, can be used for purposes which have absolutely nothing to do with the purposes for which the budget was approved.
Apart from our opposition to the entire policy being exercised by the European Union in Kosovo, the issue at stake is this: we want a commitment from the Council that not one single euro from the agricultural budget will be channelled elsewhere.
Our farmers are already being squeezed dry, their needs are tremendous, as we see on a daily basis, and it would be unacceptable to take money away from their already reduced budget.
Mr Korakas, I should like to begin by explaining that most of the appropriations allocated under the ACP framework have been granted through the European Development Fund and are extra-Community budget contributions.
They come from the specific EDF budget, which is why I say that it would be rather difficult to transfer EDF appropriations to aid for Kosovo, because they are not part of the Community budget.
Furthermore, I would like to make one point quite clear: I explained that, at the moment, appropriations allocated to aid for Kosovo are unused CAP appropriations.
I repeat: they are unused CAP appropriations.
I would also like to say that, with regard to the Commission' s proposal, I stated quite clearly that currently there is not a universally positive attitude to changing the 2000-2006 financial perspectives in the Council.
The Council has taken the view that the internal balance of the financial perspectives should not be changed during this phase.
It is, however, also obvious that the Berlin European Council conclusions are relevant here, as they show that the financial perspectives for the period 2000-2006 provide for a mid-term review, specifically with regard to the common agricultural policy.
Perhaps it would be worthwhile for honourable Members to consider whether the common agricultural policy will ultimately be compatible with the outcome of the next WTO round.
The 2000-2006 financial perspectives also provide for a review, which will, for the first time in fact, be dealt with by a qualified majority, and I would also ask the House to bear this point in mind.
As the author is not present, Question No 9 lapses.
Question No 10 by (H-0381/00):
Subject: Financial assistance to European-level parties Replying to my oral question H-0268/00 in Parliament on 12 April 2000, the Commission took the view that:
'The present Article 191 of the Treaty establishing the EC does not constitute a legal basis for funding European political parties.
The article refers to the importance of political parties at European level.
It does not, however, empower any of the institutions to enter into expenditure commitments to support European political parties, nor does it provide for a procedure for approving any measure to facilitate the giving of such an expenditure commitment.
The Commission therefore considers that in the interests of legal certainty it would be best to incorporate an appropriate legal basis for such expenditure in the Treaty establishing the EC.
This matter should be considered at the Intergovernmental Conference.'
Does the Council take the same view with regard to the legal basis for this?
Will the matter be placed on the agenda for the IGC?
Mr President, as the honourable Member' s question states, it is true that Article 191 of the Treaty does not constitute a legal basis for the funding of European political parties.
This issue was studied at the Intergovernmental Conference that established the Treaty of Amsterdam, and it was considered at the time - and I say this as someone who was there representing the Portuguese Government - that there was not a majority, let alone unanimity, among the Member States in favour of creating a specific legal basis in this area.
As regards the Intergovernmental Conference, and particularly bearing in mind the speech made by the President of the European Parliament, Mrs Fontaine, at the IGC ministerial meeting on 10 April, this is an issue that the IGC will consider again.
I myself, as Chair of the preparatory group, intend to have this issue put on the IGC agenda once again by the end of the Portuguese Presidency.
In any event, I think that, at the moment, as there is no legal basis, all we can do is try to discover, through the various Member States participating in the IGC, whether or not there is a will to work towards funding for European political parties.
Mr President, I agree with Mr Seppänen on the legal basis being a primary concern, i.e. it must be in place before expenditure for this kind of support is entered into.
After this, the amount, type and form of support will surely be for Parliament and the Council to decide.
In this context, I would like to ask what kind of plans, if any, the Council has regarding these practical arrangements.
The report on Parliament' s financial administration, in which all political groups were criticised for having channelled parliamentary appropriations into European political parties also, did not take into account the fact, for example, that the office of the Party of European Socialists is situated within the European Parliament buildings, whereas my own group, the PPE, received a great deal of criticism despite the fact that our Party office is situated away from the European Parliament' s services.
I would therefore like to know whether any plans are afoot as to what might be incorporated in this support, which was jointly decided upon by Parliament and the Council, and what issues will be taken into consideration.
I would like to tell the President-in-Office of the Council and the honourable Members that we are discussing these issues within Parliament.
The question concerns the legal basis and the Intergovernmental Conference.
It is one of Parliament' s duties.
As the author is not present, Question No 11 lapses.
As the author is unwell, Question No 12 by Mr Bowis will be replied to in writing.
Question No 13 by (H-0389/00):
Subject: Turkish incursion into Iraq What view does the Council take of the new large-scale incursion into Iraq by a heavily armed section of the Turkish army?
, Council.
(PT) We all know that the current situation in northern Iraq and, in particular, the fact that Baghdad is not sufficiently in control of the northern part of the country, are causing a political and even a military vacuum, which have led to Turkey taking direct action.
This results, de facto, from the fundamentally ambiguous situation in that area.
It is obvious that the European Union must oppose any actions that could involve the violation of other states' borders.
But I cannot comment on this issue, except to say that we will remain concerned about the territorial integrity of Iraq and that we believe that anything that could cause this territorial integrity to be violated is undesirable.
- (EL) Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, thank you for your reply.
It was most interesting.
You say that the situation is unclear and that there is a political and military vacuum.
In other words, that Iraq does not control its northern area.
Now, forgive me Mr President-in-Office, but Iraq does not control its northern area because we do not let it and perhaps we are right not to.
But even if we do not let Iraq control its northern area, that does not mean that we have to put up with its being controlled by someone else.
What I am hearing is quite absurd.
I imagine that you are unable to defend whoever it is who takes the decisions there.
Except that, of course, they include members of the European Union.
Perhaps they could inform you of what is happening in the area and tell you, for example, why they are allowing other people to go into and take control of the northern area of Iraq, which they do not allow Iraq to control, i.e. let us not beat about the bush - why are they allowing military invasion?
I think that this situation is scandalous in every sense of the word from an international and political point of view and I wonder how you tolerate it.
I would just like to say that nothing I have said implies that the European Union is at all complacent about actions that Turkish troops may be involved in beyond Turkey' s borders.
Question No 14 by (H-0390/00):
Subject: European Charter for small companies In the context of creating a business environment conducive to entrepreneurship and innovation, the European Council has called for the drawing up of a European Charter for small companies.
Can the Council say that, in such a charter, it would support due recognition being given to the very specific nature of the fisheries sector, where such factors as seasonality need to be considered?
Mr President, I wish to thank Mr Gallagher for his question, particularly as it gives me a further opportunity to provide the House with information about the work resulting from the adoption by the Special European Council in Lisbon of a set of measures to improve the fight against unemployment and to encourage economic reform and innovation.
We feel that the European Charter on small- and medium-sized enterprises due to be approved this June is an extremely important instrument for guaranteeing improvements in the fight against unemployment, in increasing social cohesion and also in improving the foundations on which the new knowledge society is based, by making instruments for innovation more democratic.
I would point out that the conclusions of the Lisbon European Council highlighted the role of small- and medium-sized enterprises as the driving force of Europe' s economy and that they in fact generate around 80% of employment in the European Union.
Small- and medium-sized enterprises cannot be excluded from the strategic objective outlined in Lisbon, that is the creation of a more competitive, more dynamic, knowledge-based economy.
Small- and medium-sized enterprises are essential and they must be given more support.
The Council and the Commission are therefore drawing up a Charter for small- and medium-sized enterprises which, as I said, we hope will be approved in June at the Feira European Council.
The aim of this Charter is to commit Member States to focus on these instruments and to provide a specific response to the specific needs of small- and medium-sized enterprises.
I wish to emphasise that although the issue of a Charter for small- and medium-sized enterprises is not new, the European Council has never quite so clearly demonstrated the importance it attaches to making it a reality.
We think that a fairly detailed study must be carried out on this issue, which will not only enable Community instruments to be adjusted to facilitate the work of small- and medium-sized enterprises, but which will also highlight the need for Member States to have a set of procedures enabling them to take action in this area, procedures that should be as uniform as possible.
Mr President, I want to thank the President-in-Office for his reply and I am pleased that work is under way and in fact, near finalisation.
Hopefully, it will not be too long before we have details of the proposals.
I am also pleased that the President-in-Office has recognised that the engine of growth in the economy are the SMEs providing 70% of the jobs.
Therefore, it is blindingly obvious that SMEs will play an important role if we are to resolve the very high unemployment problems that we have generally in the Union and specifically in various regions of the Union.
I did ask a specific question about fisheries.
Of course, fisheries by their very nature create much-needed jobs in coastal regions of the Union.
Fisheries, unlike any other industry, depend so much on seasonality and weather factors.
Could the President confirm that the study which has been carried out would, even at this late stage, look at fisheries in isolation rather than look at fisheries in the global sense?
Mr Gallagher, I am sorry that I did not specifically mention your point about fisheries in my answer.
Nevertheless, in line with the understanding that there has been about addressing this issue on the part of both the Commission and the Council - and this issue will, for example, be considered by the Industry Council tomorrow - we acknowledge the very specific nature of the fisheries sector and we share your concern about the importance of small- and medium-sized enterprises operating in this sector.
This Charter is, however, a broad policy document and is generically aimed at all small- and medium-sized enterprises.
It is not a document that lists measures to be adopted in each sector and assigns priorities to them.
The Charter is designed to create a universal regulatory framework for small- and medium-sized enterprises as defined at European level, and also to establish stages for implementing these measures.
There is no provision for defining sectoral measures that could be implemented at EU level once the Charter is approved, and this could only be done in a more technical document relating to the actual implementation of the Charter.
When I speak to small- and medium-sized enterprises, they are certainly pleased about the mood music that is coming out of the Council, but frankly they are a little sceptical as to whether the Charter will do anything constructive for them.
They think it is just another piece of paper saying how wonderful they are.
Can the President-in-Office tell us if this Charter will envisage new Community instruments being created to help small- and medium-sized enterprises.
For example, funds to help them with training, education, adaptation of premises or the use of new technology.
If so, can he also indicate that they will be as free as possible from bureaucracy because the other complaint one gets from small- and medium-sized enterprises is that the funds which already exist at European level are almost unobtainable because of the hoops that they have to jump through in order to obtain them.
I recognise that small- and medium-sized enterprises probably lost patience a long time ago with the lack of concrete measures aimed specifically at them.
Nevertheless, although we are aware of the situation, we would ask them to be patient for another three weeks, until they actually see the draft Charter which will be presented at the European Council.
In fact, the draft version of this Charter will be considered by the Industry Council tomorrow and the Charter will be published in three weeks.
Furthermore, I think that, like the Lisbon Special Summit conclusions, which Mr Gallagher will surely acknowledge go somewhat beyond traditional, merely speculative rhetoric, the Charter must provide concrete and timetabled measures, with firm objectives.
With regard to the Charter' s real potential, let us wait for it to be published and then we will, of course, be willing to listen to criticism from small- and medium-sized enterprises and in particular from the European organisations that coordinate and represent them.
We will be willing to consider all the opinions of small- and medium-sized enterprises.
As they deal with the same subject, Question Nos 15 and 16 will be taken together.
Question No 15 by (H-0391/00):
Subject: Specific directive to combat discrimination against the disabled Pursuant to Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which provides for action to combat discrimination, the Commission has recently presented a package of measures which include three directives.
However, although disability is included as one of the forms of discrimination which Article 13 is intended to combat, the package of measures does not include a specific directive designed to counter discrimination based on disability.
What view does the Council take regarding the possibility of drawing up a specific directive to combat discrimination on the grounds of disability?
Should it take a favourable view, when would it expect to present an appropriate initiative?
Question No 16 by (H-0396/00):
Subject: Combating discrimination At the start of the twenty-first century, which signals a new departure by European society in the direction of greater democracy, cohesion and recognition of the contributions of all citizens, the unacceptable phenomena of racism and social exclusion can be observed.
In Greece, the exclusion of physically disabled and paraplegic citizens from two competitions is causing a social and political problem.
One competition is for the employment of officials in state banks and the other is for the employment of school teachers (primary and secondary) in state education, and the exclusion is because the new Code for Public Employees includes the term 'able-bodied' .
The Greek Parliament adopted the Code for Public Employees in 1999, almost at the same time as the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which protects citizens of the Member States from all types of discrimination against them (Article 13).
In these circumstances, how is the Council intervening to restore the credibility of the European Union' s policies and the dignity of its citizens?
Mr President, under Article 13 of the Treaty establishing the European Community, the Commission has duly presented three proposals which are currently being discussed in the Working Group on Social Issues.
These are a proposal for a directive establishing a general framework for equal treatment at work and in professional activities, a proposal for a directive implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons, irrespective of racial or ethnic origin, and also a proposal for a Council decision establishing a programme of Community action for fighting discrimination between 2000 and 2006.
The Commission' s three proposals enshrine different approaches to combating discrimination.
The first proposal prohibits discrimination in the field of employment based on racial or ethnic origin, religion or beliefs, disability, age or sexual orientation.
The second proposal for a directive prohibits discrimination on the grounds of racial or ethnic origin in the areas of employment, education, access to goods and services and in the area of social protection.
The proposal for a decision establishing a programme of action for fighting discrimination, which is designed to support and complement the implementation of the directives through exchanges of information and experience, will be implemented by promoting good practice in legislative and other fields.
Furthermore, the fight against discrimination on the grounds of disability is covered by the first proposal for a directive, which seeks to implement the principle of equal treatment in the field of employment and in carrying out professional activities.
This proposal covers an area which is crucial to our citizens' ability to exercise their rights, given that this is an area in which discrimination is more obvious and has a more negative effect on integrating people into society.
As Parliament is aware, it is the Commission that has the power of legislative initiative, not the Council, and therefore the proposals that the Council adopts will be based on what the Commission proposes to us.
Firstly, I would like to express my satisfaction, both at the existence of Article 13 which has been mentioned, and for the action plan which the President-in-Office of the Council has referred to and which has been developed for the issue that we are considering today.
However, since not everything in the garden can be rosy, I am not completely satisfied at the moment.
It is true that Article 13 covers practically all possible - at the moment at least - forms of discrimination.
However, subsequent regulatory development and the initiatives being proposed are incomplete and unbalanced.
The President-in-Office of the Council has mentioned three examples and I would like to refer to them specifically.
There are certain cases in Article 13 which are susceptible to discrimination, such as the one we are dealing with today, the case of disabled people, which I believe have been implemented in an irregular way.
It is true that there are others which are still much less developed, such as discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
However, returning to disability, I believe that the European Union requires more complete legislation which covers every possible type, including cases of double disability.
I would like to know the Council' s opinion - as well as that of the Commission - and I would like to know whether it is considering any initiative for cases such as, for example, women and disability, discrimination on the basis of gender and for the kind of disability involved in the case I have referred to.
Mr President, Mrs Cerdeira Morterero, as I said, these proposals for legislation have been presented by means of Commission initiatives.
The Commission, by using the information provided by its various committees, can, of course, take into account the opinions expressed by various interest groups, and in particular those which legitimately oppose discrimination.
Regardless of your real reason for asking a question of this nature, we must recognise that, in recent years, and particularly since the Treaty of Amsterdam, very specific measures have been adopted in the European Union to ensure that these issues are addressed in a far more appropriate way, taking into consideration the interests of the various parts of society that are affected.
In the last few years and over the last decade, the European Union has dedicated a whole approach to this issue and a raft of policies which, although far from ideal, represent a huge qualitative leap forwards.
At world level, we can be truly proud of the steps that we have taken in this area.
But I do acknowledge, of course, that we still have a great deal to do and that probably this accumulation of legislative proposals on discrimination may even lead to and require a different legal procedure.
It is important that we continue to make the Commission aware of this issue and the Council will follow this matter closely and actively.
- (EL) Mr President and Mr President-in-Office, thank you for the replies which you have given us.
I should like to remind the House that the European Council in Lisbon highlighted the promotion of social inclusion and called on the Commission, and the Council, to take priority actions for specific target groups.
One of these groups is the disabled.
Member States choose amongst these actions according to their particular situations and subsequently report on their implementation.
What is happening in Greece, as described in my question, is causing me a great deal of concern because the procedure described by the Lisbon Council gives national legislation and practices the opportunity to practice indirect discrimination.
Perhaps a European observatory should be created so that the specific practices of the Member States and the application of European policy can be better monitored?
Also, does the Council intend to work with candidate countries on the recognition of the rights of minority groups, given that we know they are not properly respected in many of these countries?
Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, I cannot add much more to what I have already said.
You are concerned at the shortcomings in the way these principles are being implemented and I would say that such shortcomings will have to be rectified.
I feel that it is extremely important today for all forms of discrimination to be addressed and monitored at political level, either by establishing a specific monitoring centre or by using existing mechanisms, which are more appropriate for monitoring and managing the experience of individual countries.
In any event, I must say that the Council follows this type of issue with great interest and I believe that the attention paid by Parliament to such issues is crucial to keeping them on the Community agenda, and in ensuring that the various Member States do not feel tempted to make any exceptions - within their own borders - to what the Union decides as a whole.
As the author is not present, Question No 17 lapses.
Question No 18 by (H-0392/00):
Subject: Burma What further measures will the Council consider taking if existing measures appear to be inadequate and if the second EU Troika mission meets with no greater success than the first, when the common position on Burma comes up for another renewal in October?
Mr President, the European Union has been closely following the situation in Myanmar for several years.
More recently, at its meeting in April, the Council adopted three additional sanctions against the Burmese regime.
At that Council meeting - and against the background of the concern that has been felt for many years - the Union' s concern at the situation in Burma-Myanmar was expressed, specifically with regard to the repeated and active repression of civil and political rights, and the harsh conditions that prevent the people from exercising their economic, social and cultural rights.
Once again, the Council urged the government of Burma-Myanmar to respect human rights, to restore democracy and to establish dialogue with the opposition, which would lead to national reconciliation in a unified and democratic State.
For this reason, the Council decided to renew the common position adopted in relation to Burma-Myanmar for a further six months and, at the same time, to ban exports of equipment that may be used for internal repression or intimidation, and to improve the current visa system, by identifying those people who are covered by this system and those who support it.
Furthermore, the Council wishes, with the agreement of all Member States, to refuse to grant an entry visa for the Minister for Foreign Affairs, a decision which could be reversed if it is in the interest of the European Union, to freeze assets held abroad by the persons I have just mentioned, who are associated with these acts of repression, and to make greater efforts to explain and promote the objectives of European Union policy on Burma-Myanmar by establishing meaningful political dialogue.
To this end, the European Union plans to send a second EU Troika mission to Rangoon.
The Council has furthermore decided to ask the Commission to study the possibilities of increasing humanitarian aid for Burma-Myanmar, with the aim of directly helping the people, and in particular of distinguishing development aid from direct aid to the people, in particular through non-governmental organisations.
I think that the European Union' s concern about the situation in Burma-Myanmar has been made sufficiently clear and I believe that it matches the concerns that have been expressed by Parliament.
President-in-Office, thank you for the answer.
I am, of course, very happy that the new common position has been established by the Council and that it has strengthened the position as compared with the past.
I prefer to use the name Burma rather than Myanmar since the people of Burma and now Aung San Suu Kyi, the legitimate leader in Burma, do not refer to it as Myanmar.
I should prefer it if Parliament avoided the term Myanmar also.
I have to say to the President-in-Office that the net impact of the various measures the European Union has imposed since 1996 has been very limited: the Burmese have not entered into dialogue with Aung San Suu Kyi and the democratic forces in Burma remain as outside the whole process as ever.
Whilst I express my support, one thing still puzzles me.
Whilst we take these measures, there is no progress on the pressure that some of us in Parliament have been trying to exert on the Council in relation to the need for sanctions - sanctions, of course, which Aung San Suu Kyi has consistently called for.
Related to that, we continue to oppose the Massachusetts Federal laws which impose very effective sanctions on Burma.
We are waiting for the US to decide against these Federal laws.
Will that remain the case?
If the US decides in favour of Massachusetts, will the European Union then reintroduce our opposition in the World Trade Organisation to these measures taken in Massachusetts?
Mrs Kinnock, I am pleased that we agree on the importance of renewing the common position.
I admit that the action the European Union has taken in this area may not have changed the situation in any concrete way.
I would remind you that in this area, my country spent years, sometimes in relative isolation from the rest of the Community, trying to draw attention to the situation in Indonesia, and the success of that pressure was only measurable against the internal reaction and above all against action by the people of East Timor.
It is obvious, however, that EU action in such a far-off place cannot always have an immediate impact on changing the political conditions that mark the current regime, specifically human rights violations and the lack of respect for these countries' most basic democratic rights.
I would nevertheless like to refer to something that I did not mention just now.
The resolution on the human rights situation in Burma adopted by the United Nations Human Rights Commission in April of this year is also important.
I would also like to say - and this is an important point that also concerns the overall framework of relations between the European Union and countries in South-East Asia, and acts as an element of cumulative pressure - that relations between the European Union and ASEAN have, since 1998, been through a rather strained period, precisely because of the problems resulting from Burma' s membership of that organisation.
Because of the common position on Burma, it was impossible to invite the Burmese delegation to the EU-ASEAN ministerial meeting in Berlin, which led to that meeting being cancelled.
I cannot predict what the European Union' s attitude to this situation may be in the future.
As the author is not present, Question No 19 lapses.
Question No 20 by (H-0395/00):
Subject: Decision-making powers of the Euro 11 The media quite frequently make reference to the 'Euro 11' as if it were a formal decision-making body within the EU's institutional structure.
Infeuro No 13, however, defines the Euro 11 as follows: 'This is not a Council in any legal sense but an informal gathering of the Economic Affairs and Finance Ministers of the 11 Member States participating in the euro area ...
However, Ecofin remains the decision-making body.
In the light of this statement, will the Council say what exactly takes place at Euro 11 meetings and what implications it may have for the EU's regulated decision-making procedure?
Can the Council confirm that no decisions whatever are taken at Euro 11 meetings?
Can the Council refute media reports that references have been made at Ecofin meetings to decisions already having been taken by the Euro 11?
Once again, I am sorry that the honourable Member who asked a question, this time question number 19, is not present, as this would have given me the opportunity to provide an answer with regard to my own country.
In any event, I am more than happy to answer question number 20.
As stated in the European Council Resolution of 13 December 1997, the meetings of the 'Euro 11' group are informal and their aim is to enable Member States to coordinate, through discussion, issues which relate to the responsibilities that they share with regard to the single currency.
Formal decisions cannot be taken at these meetings and are, in all cases, as is in fact stated in the Resolution, taken by the Ecofin Council in accordance with the procedures laid down in the Treaty.
I think that this is quite clear and that this dual framework works in accordance with its own rationale.
By that I mean that Euro 11 is an informal setting, and Ecofin is the formal setting.
The function of the first category of meetings is purely to coordinate the countries that have joined Economic and Monetary Union and which are part of the single currency.
Thank you for your answer, which I think was important and valuable.
In the debate in those countries which are not participating in the third phase of EMU and which are not therefore becoming a part of the euro zone, the point has been made that ministers from these countries are losing influence, not only on issues directly affecting the euro, but also on other issues dealt with by Ecofin.
A real shift in power seems, in fact, to be taking place, from the meetings of Ecofin to those of the Euro 11, despite the fact that the latter are of an informal nature.
I should therefore like the Council' s representative to confirm that there is no real shift in power whatsoever from the formal, regular Ecofin meetings to those of the Euro 11.
I should like the Council' s representative genuinely to confirm that it is not the case that ministers from, for example, Denmark or Great Britain, are losing the power to influence other issues dealt with by Ecofin because these countries are not members of the Euro 11.
Mr Gahrton, the cause of your concern will vanish on the day that these countries attend this Council, which will then no longer be Euro 11, but Euro 15.
In any event, I must tell you that until then, nothing within the European Union prevents countries meeting in smaller groups than in the normal Community context.
We are all aware, from newspapers or from conversations in corridors, that various countries in Europe, particularly the Nordic countries, regularly coordinate their positions in a framework that predates the Community decision-making process.
This coordination does not, of course, mean that there is any transfer of power to the specific framework in which these discussions are held.
This is purely and simply a coordination of joint positions, and it is perfectly natural that countries that joined the third phase of Economic and Monetary Union and which are members of the single currency should need to find specific measures to express their action and that they should collectively bring these issues to Ecofin.
I do not think, however, that the position of the other countries is any more restricted in Ecofin than it was at the beginning.
But, let us be frank here: minorities are minorities.
This means that the democratic process is at work in Ecofin and there is nothing we can do about that.
That is how the EU works.
Mr President, I too should like to thank the Portuguese President for his answer, and I would also ask him to confirm that there is no question of an issue being taken off the agenda for any meeting of Ecofin because it has already been discussed in a Euro 11 meeting.
If that were to happen, would it not be possible for any minister at all to be able to insist that it be put back on the agenda for the Ecofin meeting?
Mrs Sandbæk, let us be quite clear about this.
The Euro 11 arrangement forms part of the framework for coordinating relations between certain countries that have a different level of integration or, to use more modern parlance, closer cooperation as predetermined in the Treaty, and this involves certain coordination mechanisms.
The Euro 11 Council can obviously discuss whatever it likes, and may even agree that a certain issue is not discussed in Ecofin.
This does not mean that the countries that are not members of Euro 11, but which are, of course, members of Ecofin, cannot raise that issue under the Ecofin Council agenda.
What must not happen is that a country that is not part of Euro 11 is asked to set the agenda for those that are.
I must say one more very simple thing, Mrs Sandbæk.
The other countries are not in Euro 11 or Euro 15 only because they do not want to be, not because anyone has banned them from joining.
Thank you very much, Mr Seixas da Costa.
We hope that you have success with your contact with the Parliamentary group on the important issue of the Statute of Members.
Since the time allocated to Questions to the Council has elapsed, Questions Nos 21 to 31 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes Questions to the Council.
(The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)
Telecommunications/radio spectrum policy
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
A5-0094/2000 by Mr Paasilinna, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Fifth Report on the implementation of the Telecommunications Regulatory package (COM(1999) 537 - C5-0112/2000 - 2000/2072(COS));
A5-0122/2000 by Mr Alyssandrakis, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Next Steps in Radio Spectrum Policy - Results of the Public Consultation on the Green Paper (COM(1999) 538 - C5-0113/2000 - 2000/2073(COS)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, deregulation in the telecommunications sector has continued for a decade and it has been a great success.
The traditional telephone as we knew it is now a fading memory.
In the past, people acquired a telephone in order to keep in touch with each other, but now they have become shareholders in a company, which could, for example, be acting as an intermediary in sexual services.
I am sure this has come as a surprise to many.
The instrument itself is so tiny that it could, for instance, be inadvertently placed in the mouth, being mistaken for false teeth; in this respect, too, things have changed a lot.
Deregulation created fears of a fall in standards of public services and an increase in telephone charges.
This has not happened, however, and instead services have become diversified and prices have fallen.
Money to finance all this has, of course, been generated by new data terminal equipment, networks and services.
The 1988 regulatory package was well timed and - due to its efficient implementation - worked well in several Member States.
In some countries, however, implementation has been slow and even formal.
We would support action by the Commission to improve cross-border services and honest competition.
We are concerned at the fact that the limited supply of user access has prevented many user groups - in particular those with lower resources - from taking full advantage of, for instance, reasonably affordable Internet access.
Therefore, we need new alternative loop systems, we must facilitate the development of wireless local loop systems and also, for instance, the use of a cable TV network, without having to resort to specific legislation on this issue, however.
Parliament notes that due to the variations in its implementations, the current regime has led to legal uncertainty in different Member States.
Sufficient transparency on the specific conditions for operating licences is required, so that undue delays in the approval process can be prevented.
The most important reform strategy of the European Union is a reform initiative called eEurope, the framework of which was recently approved in Lisbon.
The Commission must be congratulated on the fact that the structure and strategy of the European information society differ in a positive way from others in that it has not only taken account of competitiveness, but also of elements such as cohesion, social equality and employment.
The objective is to prevent social discrimination and to increase consumer confidence and social cohesion.
This initiative is impressively entitled: "An Information Society For All" .
The radio spectrum is a scarce natural resource which has now started to come up for auction.
We take a negative view of this with the exception of certain special instances.
We were aware, as early as two years ago, that the GSM auction in the USA had resulted in a state of chaos, i.e. bankruptcies.
Experiences from India are equally bad.
Those in favour of auctioning believe it to be a good means of controlling resources.
We think it will lead to increases in user tariffs and delays in the spreading and development of communications services.
Prices at auction have now become incredibly high, and these will be passed on to the consumers, resulting in a new telecommunications tax.
This would be an unfair tax, in that it would be the same for both rich and poor.
Now that the eEurope initiative - with all its worthy objectives - has just been approved, it is being obstructed by the imposition of a new 'digital divide' , a greedy fee-charging principle.
In practice, this means that our priority project, the development of an information society, is now being obstructed through taxation.
This is cause for concern, which, in my opinion, should be looked into in greater detail.
I therefore request that the Commission investigate, without delay, the impact of this, the auctioning principle, in different countries, in order that we should have more information on which to base our opinion.
Furthermore, this principle will privilege big operators, who will start dividing up the market.
In the end, there will be the fear that as we reduce regulations, i.e. deregulate, these big operators will make mutual agreements and 'reregulate' , creating new regulations.
This cannot be right.
.
(EL) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the idea of using the radio spectrum to transmit signals revolutionised telecommunications and new applications for the radio spectrum have been developed continuously ever since.
Thus, we have progressed from the simple wireless telegraph to the digital transmission of sound and image, satellite navigation and the third generation of mobile telephones.
I should like at this point to stress that the radio spectrum is not used solely for telecommunications.
Apart from applications based on the transmission and reception of radio signals, there are also 'passive' applications which just receive signals emitted by natural phenomena.
The main applications here are radio-astronomy, which studies natural phenomena beyond our planet on the basis of the radio waves which they emit, and Earth observation, both of which use the radio spectrum.
The constant increase in the demand for radio frequencies for new applications is such that we need to review the principles on which they are distributed and the policy which the European Union needs to apply in this sector.
The European Commission responded to this need by publishing a Green Paper on Radio Spectrum Policy for public consultation at the end of 1998.
It subsequently issued the communication which we are examining today on the basis of the aforementioned public consultation.
The Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, having expressed its satisfaction with the work of the European Commission, has come to a number of conclusions and has formulated a number of principles.
Starting from the premise that the spectrum is a valuable but scarce natural resource and that the demand for it is rising constantly, it stresses that it must be used efficiently in order to best serve the public interest and help develop new high-quality services.
In this respect, the Committee on Industry considers that spectrum policy cannot be solely market-driven, that the economic and social value of the radio spectrum should not be assessed on the basis of profit opportunity and that we need a balanced combination of commercial and social interests.
The Committee on Industry also stresses that specific measures need to be taken in order to guarantee a satisfactory number of frequencies for public and private radio and television broadcasts, for amateur radio operators, for navigation systems and for passive applications, such as radio-astronomy and Earth observation.
The Committee on Industry accepts the proposal of the European Commission to create a Spectrum Policy Expert Group having a purely advisory role and transparent internal structure and modus operandi.
However, although it acknowledges that it would be advisable to further harmonise Community radio spectrum policy to an extent, as far as pan-European services and applications are concerned, it does not accept the European Commission' s proposal for a new regulatory framework at pan-European level, considering this to be both premature and hurried.
I should like to draw your attention to one issue which seriously worried the Committee on Industry and which Mr Paasilinna mentioned just now.
I refer to the degree to which the principle of spectrum pricing, auctioning and the introduction of a secondary market should be adopted.
Your rapporteur takes the view that radio frequencies per se should not be bought and sold, because this would result in frequencies' being diverted from their intended purpose.
Other practices, such as auctions and a secondary market, would result, with mathematical accuracy, in the prevalence of stronger economic interests, which would then monopolise the market.
Your rapporteur is in favour of an overall payment for each commercial service which uses the spectrum.
The Committee on Industry did not adopt my view and, although not in favour of auctions in all cases, considers that they could be applied for commercial uses.
I should like to point out to members that the results of the recent auction of radio frequencies for third generation mobile telephones in the United Kingdom have given rise to second thoughts on the subject.
The huge sums paid will not come out of the companies' profits; they will be paid for by users.
I have heard that in the United Kingdom, in order to find the money paid at auction, every man, woman and child will need to spend 400 pounds a year on telephone calls.
We must not lose sight of the consequences which such practices will have on the final user.
I therefore call upon the House to vote in favour of Amendments Nos 4, 12, 5 and 6, so that our final resolution includes a clear position against auctions.
Mr President, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, I wish to congratulate Mr Paasilinna on his report, which we very much welcome.
He has drawn up not only a very concise but also a very hard-hitting report.
It is entirely appropriate as a response to the telecommunications communication from the Commission and exactly what we needed to give us a basis on which to move into our further consideration of the whole electronic communications package, which we shall be debating again in a month's time.
I want to focus on some of the key points highlighted in the report.
I am going to leave issues on radio spectrum policy to my colleague, Mrs Niebler, who will be responding on behalf of our Group to Mr Alyssandrakis' report.
Just to move forward on some of the issues related to opening up the market.
The first and most encouraging thing from our point of view is that we now see the wisdom of opening the telecommunications market.
To have an open competitive regime has now become the accepted wisdom.
It is something that is fully accepted and we now need to translate that and move that forward as quickly as possible, towards further deregulation and even quicker opening of those markets that still work imperfectly.
There is a tremendous amount of detailed analysis in this report and it clearly shows the consumer benefits in price reductions, choice and increased services that have flowed from deregulation.
However, it also clearly shows that there are far too many barriers, and the Commission has our full support in tackling them.
For consumers to benefit from this choice, they have to be encouraged to shop around, to compare in many cases what can be quite complex offers of prices and contract terms and service packages.
We would like to encourage independent regulators to work together to provide simple, impartial price comparisons for consumers and use the sort of new tools they have available, like the Internet, to give consumers the ability to calculate the real cost of their calls.
We encourage the regulators to share best practice with each other to provide a unified price and contract comparison system.
We will not have a developed market unless we have investment.
The other issue we have to address is the ability of investors to make satisfactory returns on their investment.
Therefore, in looking at the market-opening regulations, we have to look at methods of competition and encourage competition between the different parts and elements of the platforms.
That is something we shall address in the next communication.
We welcome this report, which is really going to encourage market-opening to the benefit of consumers and the European economy.
Commissioner Liikanen, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of my Group, I would like to comment on the Alyssandrakis report on the Commission communication concerning radio spectrum policy.
This communication and the report on the communication are amongst Parliament' s reports on the telecommunications sector, and they are all very closely linked.
I could mention the report by Mrs Thors, which we are to vote on in the near future, and the reports by Mr van Velzen and Mr Paasilinna, who has just spoken, as well as that of Mr Alyssandrakis.
I would like to take this opportunity to again express my sincere thanks to the rapporteurs, shadow rapporteurs and those responsible within the groups, for the inter-group cooperation in this matter.
Unlike grid-bound infrastructure, frequencies cannot be multiplied ad infinitum.
As such, they should be treated as a special case.
Radio spectrum policy is gaining in importance within the European Union, but also worldwide, in connection with new technologies - UMTS has been mentioned - but also in connection with the famous 'making it through the last mile' , so as to create some movement in charges for local phone calls.
The granting of licences - whether by auction or by 'beauty contest' - is regulated, and as previous speakers have mentioned, the United Kingdom has had first experience of this and results are now available.
Mr Paasilinna and Mr Alyssandrakis made reference to this.
Auctions can lead to high prices.
It is also suspected in Germany that high prices are achieved at auction.
Several of my colleagues in my Group are concerned because they suspect that the high figures achieved at auctions, plus the investment that has to be made in this sector, will inevitably lead to the overall cost being passed on to consumers.
This may well be the case.
However, one thing I would point out is that even when the average weighted rate of VAT was introduced, the first mobile phones were expensive, and the charges were very high.
However, increasing market penetration brought the prices down.
I believe we should appeal to the national governments to use the proceeds from the auctions held in these sectors for the implementation of the information society and for broadening the basis thereof in the Member States.
This is a cue for me to mention the 'Schools on-line' or 'Public administration and libraries on-line' programme that we have called for repeatedly.
I feel that the average EU citizen interested in using the Internet is bound to continue using PCs at home, in the library or in the office.
I do not think they will be clamouring to be the first to use the UMTS equipment.
In addition, the proceeds from the auctions will be able to ease the burden on Member States' budgets, which will - and I am digressing slightly from our specialist technical subject now - give politics renewed power to act.
As such, I believe the governments are quite justified in receiving the proceeds.
I hope that my fellow delegates will endorse Amendment No 8 tabled by my Group.
Unfortunately, we are unable to support any of the others.
Mr President, Commissioner, previous speakers have mentioned the broad consensus that exists concerning the profits arising from the liberalisation of the telecommunications sector.
There was no such consensus previously.
To my great delight, I note that it is liberals who have been in the vanguard of this change: Commissioner Bangemann, together with Finland' s former Minister for Transport, Mr Norrback, who was among the first ministers to liberalise this sector.
I would point out, for example, that, last year, we in Finland noted that GSM prices were, on average, seven per cent lower.
Even foreign calls were ten per cent lower than previously.
We are therefore still making quite large strides in this area.
I also hope that, in the future, we shall be able to conduct a similar open dialogue with the Commission regarding development within this sector.
The Commission is undertaking many investigations and inquiries.
We need impartial information to be able to keep track of developments and, as public decision makers, to be able to take the necessary decisions.
These two reports deal with issues both large and small.
In common with previous speakers, I would express my appreciation of the constructive cooperation that has taken place with the rapporteurs.
The major issues are about the ways in which broadband services can be made available to everyone and about the auctions we have touched upon.
Clearly, it is up to each Member State to decide upon its strategy for obtaining networks with high transmission speeds for everyone.
However, we wish today to offer vigorous support to the Commission' s recommendation that dominant network operators should be responsible for permitting combined services all the way to the subscribers.
In certain Member States, that is already the case, for example in my own country, Finland.
Even there, consideration might be given to going further by introducing a situation in which dominant operators become responsible for hiring out the telecommunications companies' premises for the purpose of housing equipment.
I think we need to see to it that we utilise existing capacity as far as possible and obtain better service and, in that way, lower prices.
The auctions issue has provoked discussion and does so every day.
One might well wonder if it is a question here of being penny wise and pound foolish.
Apart from the risk of the auction prices for third generation mobile telephones putting the brakes on development, there are two other matters I should like to emphasise.
There is a risk of roaming for third generation mobile telephony being put in jeopardy.
There may also be a risk of barriers arising between the Member States.
I would therefore hope that the Commission is alert to this question and that we can engage in a creative discussion on the subject.
Mr President, Commissioner, twenty years have passed since the philosopher and essayist, Alvin Toffler, identified the new information technologies as the third of humanity' s great revolutions.
Nevertheless, in Europe, we once again failed to take much notice of our thinkers and, in the meantime, over the last decade, the United States has increased its GDP and income per capita to above European Union levels, where, in the last year, these indicators represented barely 75% of US levels.
While half of the world' s internet users are American and 44% of US homes have direct access to the networks, in Europe that proportion is barely 15%.
We are now rapidly turning to the information society, information technology, the Internet, the Galileo network for monitoring and intercommunication by satellite, the liberalisation and convergence of telecommunications and technological advances in general.
For all these reasons I would like to call for the prompt transposition in all Member States of all the directives relating to radio-broadcasting and voice telephony, the interconnection and maintenance of digitisation, general authorisations and licences, leased lines, open networks, mobile telephones and data protection.
In this regard, we should condemn the fact that the national regulatory authorities of certain countries - such as Spain, Germany, Sweden and the United Kingdom - are not playing their part to the full, which has led to complaints from new companies, who have found that the telecommunications monopolies that already exist are placing obstacles in their way and delaying the consolidation of free competition to the detriment of users.
Furthermore, we ask that, as soon as possible, flat rates be established for access to the Internet, to the network of networks, and we even argue that they should be free, since they should be offered, like health and education, as an essential public service to the citizens.
Mr President, there has been a change over to electronic capitalism, both in Europe and worldwide.
On the stock markets, there is a 'gold rush' for the shares of IT companies - IT shares are a present-day Klondyke.
The reports by Mr Paasilinna and Mr Alyssandrakis emphasise the necessity of rules even for gold prospecting: if the common and public interest is not secured, the richest, largest and fastest players will take all, and they will reap all the fruits of the new technological developments.
A rapid concentration of the information industry is in progress - at the consumers' expense.
The battle over market shares for next generation mobile phone frequencies, for example, will raise consumer prices sky high.
As we know, the profit from these shares will ultimately always be generated through the prices of telephone calls.
We must now ensure that public interest is secured - as proposed by Mr Alyssandrakis - and ensure the availability of sufficient frequency bands for use by public broadcasting.
This will not be possible if such a restricted natural resource as the radio spectrum is auctioned off for the monopolised use of the highest bidding major companies.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I too would first like to extend my sincere thanks to Mr Alyssandrakis, the rapporteur, for his report on radio spectrum policy.
The results of the auctions in third generation mobile phone frequencies, the 'UMTS' frequencies, that are currently taking place in several Member States, demonstrate just how important frequencies are, particularly as far as the economy is concerned.
Mr Paasilinna and other speakers have already touched on this matter.
In Great Britain, mobile phone operators were forced to pay a total of EUR 38.5 billion for frequencies.
In Germany, proceeds from auctions are expected to total EUR 50 to 60 billion.
This development has come as a complete surprise to everyone.
The auctions were supposed to yield a tenth of the aforementioned figure.
The market could have borne this quite satisfactorily.
Current developments on the auction front give cause for serious concern to my mind.
The companies are being deprived of the financial basis they need to make investments in infrastructure and new innovations.
In addition, the operators are unable to offer their customers inexpensive mobile access to the Internet.
Yet it is precisely this that was recently thought could offer us the possibility to make up ground in the competition with the USA.
What is more, some practices in the Member States - either auctions or 'beauty contests' that is - in respect of these billions, lead to distortion of competition in the internal market.
Certain governments are evidently prepared to jeopardise the development of the mobile phone sector, which is one of Europe' s industries of the future, for the sake of overhauling national budgets.
Commissioner Liikanen, may I ask you quite openly, how the European Commission views this development?
Do you think there is a need for action at European level?
In principle, I believe auctions for commercial purposes to be an excellent alternative, let there be no mistake about that.
But I sill feel that the way auctions for UMTS licences are shaping up gives us good cause to rethink the 'pure doctrine' .
I have the following brief comments to make on the report itself: in my view, three priorities for revising radio spectrum policy have crystallised from the debate, which we also had in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.
Mr Alyssandrakis also highlights them in the report.
Firstly, the European institutions must be better represented at world radio conferences.
Secondly, the Community must be allowed to express itself during negotiations within the CEPT, the European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations that is, in such a way that better account is taken of Community interests where radio spectrum policy is concerned.
Thirdly, the Commission must be able to demand that the Member States release the frequencies needed for the pan-European services and applications decided by the Council and Parliament, at an early stage and without hitches.
Appropriate instructions should be drafted to this end.
Rapporteur, ladies and gentlemen, in 1993 the European Union undertook to open up the telecommunications market.
Since then, this decision has led to the adoption of a series of directives, and we have constantly been reminded that there is a political objective underlying these regulations, namely growth, employment, competitiveness and the provision of access to the information society for all citizens, with the necessary legal protection.
In this context, the Commission has performed its monitoring role and produced a raft of reports, and the communication we are discussing today is part of this undertaking.
I must say that the assessment presented to us is, at least, detailed.
Although, during the two years since the market was completely opened up, the telecommunications market has been characterised by growth, newcomers to the market and some price reductions, nonetheless, gaps have also appeared which are serious to say the very least, including what is known as the digital divide between regions and between citizens caused by the cost of accessing these new services and, along with this divide, the exclusion of some citizens or regions from the new technology society.
It is therefore imperative that we do not lose sight of the objective of providing a high-quality service for all citizens if we want to avoid creating a fresh division within our society.
Moreover, today we are debating reducing the cost of Internet access within the framework of local loop competition.
The objective is admirable, but we must avoid certain errors and must, therefore, discuss the matter very thoroughly with the national authorities.
Once again, I would stress the need to simplify the rules, as well as consumer protection, the role of the national regulatory authorities and the licensing system which has been discussed at great length.
Finally, opening up the market is not an end in itself: it is a means of ensuring that the transition to an information society is made by and for all citizens through the creation of permanent jobs, and this is certainly not always the case in this field.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Reino Paasilinna for his thorough and excellent work in preparing this report, but I would also like to thank the Commission, which has done so much in support of this eEurope initiative and the expansion of the Internet.
As the Commission has stated, there has been a lot of progress in the past few years in the EU telecommunications sector, but there is still a lot to be learnt where the mobile phone market is concerned.
For instance, the availability of carrier pre-selection should be considered, and this facility made available to consumers, if studies confirm that they are going to benefit from this pre-selection.
In future, it is incumbent on the Commission to ensure more vigorously than ever that the 'roaming' fees charged to users by operators are brought down in all EU countries to a sensible level based on actual costs.
At the same time, the Commission must ensure that the fees collected from the operators remain under control.
The EU' s operating logic thus falls into two stages.
The operators are not allowed to collect fees from the users, but neither must the public authority collect from the operators.
The costs to the operator might become unreasonably high, should the new generation mobile spectrum be auctioned.
Auctioning may also distort competition, if operators start making 'tactical' bids for the spectrum in order to harm the position of their competitors at auction.
Therefore 'beauty contests' between the various operators are clearly more consumer-friendly alternatives.
The latest UMTS auction in Great Britain, where prices soared sky high, will, in any case, set the alarm bells ringing.
After the hammer has gone down, it is always the consumer who foots the bill - and that is exactly what we do not want, all of us being consumers ourselves.
If we also want to introduce the Internet into schools and libraries and make it available for everybody on a very large scale in future, and if we also want to utilise its future potential in competition with the USA, the Internet will have to be affordable to all.
President, Commissioner, colleagues, can I add my congratulations to the Commission and to my two colleagues, the rapporteurs, on the speed and thoroughness of their reports.
I want to comment on both reports in a very few, but I hope, significant respects.
On Mr Paasilinna' s report, I want to comment, and perhaps ask the Commission to comment on the whole question of the balance between regulation and liberalisation.
Mr Caudron touched on this in his remarks to the effect that the benefits of liberalisation have been felt disproportionately in the business community and those who make long distance and national calls while domestic consumers have benefited much less, particularly those who make very few calls, or people who live on their own.
I want to ask the Commissioner about the speed of regulation and the purpose of regulation.
It was good to see the Commission taking very urgent action, for example, in respect of leased line and the charges for leased lines where the existing legislation had not been properly implemented.
The differences in attitude, ethos, resources and the degree of independence among the national regulators are still a cause for concern.
On the report on spectrum, others have mentioned the question of to what extent it matters that different systems for deciding on third generation mobile licences have been sorted out.
It significant and I would like the Commission to comment on this in respect of third generation mobiles, and digital television, which are the two areas where the European Union has a lead.
I also want to ask the Commissioner whether he thinks the application of the subsidiarity principle in respect of the allocation of licences might do something to narrow that lead.
If he thinks so, if he thinks the differences in methods are going to distort competition, is he able to tell this House what steps he will take to monitor and address that question?
Mr President, Commissioner Liikanen, chèr ami Paasilinna, I am delighted to be discussing the important issue of the pleasure of auctions versus the frustration of taxation.
It is a pleasure to achieve high returns but frustrating when one knows that the sale proceeds in fact represent a voluntary form of early taxation.
I believe we should learn from the auctions in Great Britain in this respect.
The people who applied for these licences actually missed a nought off in their calculations.
They had to pay over ten times the anticipated amount for the licences.
I believe that will have a distorting effect on competition in the long run, because other companies that only have to face a 'beauty contest' can now pursue a considerably more aggressive price policy of course, and will ultimately be able to take over illiquid telecommunications firms.
We therefore need to examine the opportunities and risks associated with the various forms of allocation without delay.
I believe it is for the Commission to perform the important task of analysing the auction results and the effects thereof, and make a real point of asking those who buy licences at auction whether they are aware of the risks that the legislature still has on the table.
It is not known how the legislature will support the universal service in the future.
Our Group is in fact against this for the mobile phone sector.
All the same, it is not known what is in the pipeline, for example, in connection with number portability or data protection.
I could list a whole host of things that the legislature could still come up with and that would present a considerable risk to auctions.
I feel that one should, of course, consider stock market prices as well.
If a company in Spain takes part in a 'beauty contest' without serious intent, and pays very little for a licence, then of course this company' s shares will rise accordingly on the stock exchange.
This means increased liquidity and market imbalances.
Companies that pay dearly for licences, on the other hand, and do not have this opportunity, may very quickly go into a tailspin on the stock exchange.
Therefore, if auctions are here to stay, we must call for a regulatory framework to be put in place.
One idea would be to earmark the revenue from these auctions for boosting investment in education and training.
One could promote research and development investment, concentrating on start-up companies, or small and family businesses, particularly those involved in the development of telecommunications, Internet and multimedia programmes.
Finally, we could, of course, promote the infrastructure needed to bring on competitive cabling, networks and hardware development too.
Just transferring the proceeds to the national budgets, however, does not seem to me to be enough!
Mr President, I wish to congratulate Mr Paasilinna and Mr Alyssandrakis on their very timely and invaluable work.
As part of an on-going exercise of monitoring by the Commission, the Fifth Report sets the scene for many of the conclusions and recommendations made in the communication' s review, which was issued at the same time, and on which we, and the European Parliament, are working right now.
Mr Paasilinna' s report inevitably touches on some of the issues to be addressed by the final proposals, which we will discuss here again next month.
The Commission shares many of the concerns expressed in Mr Paasilinna' s report on the current regulatory situation.
They are vitally important for the uptake of the information society, for the development of the Internet, e-commerce and m-commerce - mobile commerce.
They offer unbundled access to the local loop, facilitating developments in licensing, co-location, carrier pre-selection and the independence and the powers of national regulatory authorities.
The Commission is addressing many of these problems which you identify at the moment.
It has the very recent recommendation on the local loop and on bundling.
The Commission will also use its powers in regard to competition to monitor carefully dominant positions.
We have also made a revised recommendation on interconnection pricing and now we have on-going enforcement measures and infringement proceedings, for example, against a number of Member States on carrier pre-selection and local tariff structures.
Pending the adoption of the new framework, which will be presented in June, the Commission will continue to press for effective implementation of the current rules.
This is called for by market players, national regulators and national administrations and has now also been unanimously mandated by the Lisbon Summit.
At the moment, the Commission is preparing the sixth framework report to be adopted during 2000.
Parliament' s report will provide important input.
I am sure that the report will be an important benchmark as we follow the development of the information society.
Cable systems will be examined more closely by the Commission.
We already have a policy of pushing for divestment of cable TV networks to ensure greater local competition and to stimulate investments and services, as Parliament is calling for in these reports.
As to the radio spectrum issue and the report of Mr Alyssandrakis, I agree that radio spectrum is an increasingly scarce and valuable resource.
It is used in many policy areas of concern for the EU, such as telecoms, broadcasting, transport, research and development, which are all very important for the European economy.
For that reason, the Commission proposes a harmonised approach.
Mobile and wireless communications develop at a rapid pace and the unexpectedly high results of spectrum licence auctioning in the UK show the growing importance of the sector.
Furthermore, the messages of the spectrum Green Paper demonstrate the need to address certain radio spectrum issues at Community level and to reach a balance between various user sectors.
Second, Community action on the radio spectrum is beneficial if taken within a clear regulatory framework.
In addition, political support is required to facilitate the achievement of Community objectives at international level.
We have the on-going radio conference in Istanbul where issues like Galileo or third generation spectrum will be discussed.
The Commission therefore welcomes the report from Mr Alyssandrakis.
As this report calls for a radio spectrum policy, which fulfils Community policies, further harmonisation of radio spectrum is necessary.
We have to see development of information and communications technologies and a balance between all spectrum needs including private and public interest.
The competitiveness of European industry at global level must be developed in the interest of the European citizen.
At the same time, the Commission would like to stress that it is urgent and not premature to have an appropriate framework at the Community level to implement the spectrum policy options agreed in the Spectrum policy group and to ensure that results of harmonisation mandates are implemented in the Union.
We should be able to promote without delay harmonisation measures which respond to technological and market developments.
The Commission will report annually to the Council and the European Parliament on the measures adopted.
As far as further actions are concerned, the Commission will present by the end of June - after Parliament' s discussions and the votes on the radio reports - the appropriate framework for radio spectrum policy in the EC.
This will also take into account the results of the overall discussion which is now taking place in the 1999 review.
We well understand the debate on auction prices which have received a lot of attention here.
According to the present new rules, the Commission must recognise the authority of Member States to choose their preferred spectrum licensing method, whether it is the administrative or auction method, but the Commission will closely monitor developments to avoid distortion of competition and ensure the implementation of the licensing directive and also technological and service developments in the interest of EU citizens.
Mrs Read put a question about the balance between competition and regulation.
I would say that we need regulation to push for competition because otherwise bottlenecks can actually prevent competition which can help citizens because it will be the incentive for lower prices and higher quality services.
But there are areas where we also have a major public policy interest, especially in regard to universal service and data privacy.
In those areas the Commission will make proposals in the context of the new legislation on electronic communications which will be presented at the end of June.
At the same time, the Commission also intends defining this balance between the markets and public policy in the context of the Europe Action Plan, which should be presented next week.
Finally, as far as the coherence of the licensing arrangements is concerned, we must ensure there will be no distortion of competition and guarantee the implementation of the licensing directive.
This whole discussion is very important for defining the content of the new electronic communications legislation, and I am sure these issues will not be the concern of only a few passionate expert parliamentarians as is the case today - electronic communications will be a major political issue in the years to come.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Liikanen.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Coherent European approach for space
The next item is the report (A5-0119/2000) by Mr Alyssandrakis, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Commission working document: Towards a coherent European Approach for space (SEC(1999) 789 - C5-0336/1999 - 1999/2213(COS)).
.
(EL) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the launch of the first artificial satellite by the Soviet Union in 1957 marked the start of space exploration and the beginning of a new era for mankind.
Man' s ability to launch space vehicles has extended our frontiers well beyond the Earth' s atmosphere and has afforded us a wealth of new knowledge on the solar system and the universe as a whole.
At the same time, it has brought practical applications which have changed our lives.
The use of artificial satellites in telecommunications, weather forecasting, Earth observation and navigation is so widespread that it is hard to imagine these activities continuing without the use of space.
Moreover, the high technical standards required of space equipment have led to enormous technological breakthroughs, which have gradually filtered into our everyday lives.
Finally, space has always had a strategic importance, since whoever controls space also controls the Earth.
Space is the one sector in which international cooperation is particularly important.
In Europe, the European Space Agency (ESA), an independent body comprising 14 European countries, 12 of which are members of the European Union, has played a critical role in fostering cooperation in space exploration, space applications and the development of research in space.
The Council, the Commission and Parliament have all addressed the issue of space policy on a number of occasions in the past.
The main political issue in the entire discussion concerned the development of a coherent approach to space and the promotion of collaboration between the European Union and the ESA on the basis of specific targets and within a clear framework.
The Commission' s working document being examined today comes as a response to the Council' s resolution of 22 June 1998 calling on the Commission to take practical measures to promote cooperation between the European Union and the ESA.
The text discusses aspects of the European Union' s space policy concerning practical applications, mainly in the fields of telecommunications, navigation and Earth observation, but makes no mention of space exploration or the use of space for scientific research.
From this point of view, the document is somewhat limited in scope, since an overall policy for space cannot restrict itself merely to practical applications.
The Commission has made it clear that a coherent approach is indispensable for the European Union.
It has therefore set up a consultative structure for space and related matters with the active participation of the ESA.
This structure comprises the Space Advisory Group and other high-level groups.
The Commission' s document concludes that the European Union must find new means of implementing a space policy and proposes specific lines of approach.
The resolution by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy expresses a strong desire to see space used for peaceful purposes for the benefit of mankind as a whole.
At the same time, it takes the view that space policy must not be wholly dominated by the market and that account must be taken of long-term assessments of the benefits and risks of exploiting space, not only from the point of view of the interests of industry, but also in terms of the welfare of mankind as a whole.
It stresses the importance of international cooperation, the need for all Member States to participate in space activities and the importance of collaboration with third countries, and points out that the ESA has functioned efficiently and has played a leading role in space research and space applications in both Europe and worldwide.
The Committee on Industry welcomes the European Commission' s intention of establishing a policy framework for future programmes and stresses that this framework must be developed after extensive and in-depth consultations between all the parties involved.
It is in favour of the further development of launching systems, the development of new telecommunications systems and further European participation in the Alpha station programme and reiterates the European Parliament' s support for the development of the global satellite navigation system known as Galileo.
It calls on the Commission, in collaboration with the Member States, to take all measures needed for effective use of space-based systems for monitoring the environment and for security, in order to protect citizens' lives and natural resources, identify at an early stage, or even avert natural or man-made disasters and help combat fraud.
I am convinced, fellow members, that today' s debate will help to develop space policy further.
Mr President, first of all, I would like to say thank you very much to the Commission and to the rapporteur for the work they have done and for their excellent cooperation.
Space exploration is, of course, a high technology field, which operates years ahead of its time in many areas and which is developing applications now that will only be available to the bulk of the population in ten or fifteen years' time.
Europe is in competition in this field with countries such as the USA, which is number one of course, but also with Asian countries and Russia.
We must see that Europe strengthens its position in this strategic field and also takes a leading role.
One positive example in this respect is of course the Airbus, with which we are all familiar, and which is responsible, on account of years of cooperation between the States and industries, for the fact that we now play a leading role in the construction of civilian aircraft and already have a market share of 50% in many segments.
Therefore, this is not just about space exploration itself but about how competitive Europe is going to be in the future.
A number of examples have, in fact, been mentioned: earth observation, telecommunications, environmental protection, security.
It is not just about practical applications but also, as you have already mentioned, about research.
I would like to highlight three points that I consider to be important.
One is the future cooperation between the ESA, the European Union and also the Member States.
We should, of course, give the Member States the latitude they need, in keeping with the terms of subsidiarity.
However, there is also a case for improving coordination between the Member States, the ESA and the EU, precisely because the work undertaken in this sector is so capital-intensive.
We also need to establish an opposite number for industry.
Industry is undergoing a consolidation process.
There are an ever-increasing number of public private partnerships in this sector.
That is why there is an urgent need for industry to have a point of contact, someone with whom it can enter into dialogue, rather than running itself into the ground.
My second point relates to future commercialisation.
We must ensure that the products, the applications from space exploration, are also used in practical applications for consumers in the future.
We must create new opportunities in this respect, so as to enable small- and medium-sized companies, and start-up companies, in particular, to practise innovation.
GALILEO is a key word here.
Of course, we are having to compete with the American GPS system, but I believe that if we do more to help commercialisation on its way, then we will see more innovation across the board.
The third important point relates to the WEU, external security.
The Kosovo conflict brought home to us only too clearly the implications of not having our own information system.
Hence we should keep this option open if the WEU is incorporated into the EU.
Having our own foreign and security policy means having our own information facilities too.
We should not foreclose this option but always keep it in mind.
Mr Alyssandrakis, ladies and gentlemen, everyone is in favour of mankind' s direct or indirect access to space for, in the first place, it is a dream, a fantastic adventure and a way of expanding our knowledge.
But, in addition to this, it has, above all, generated incredible change in our everyday lives.
Satellites and telecommunications have been mentioned, and we could add the weather forecast.
However, we must also acknowledge that space is a strategic issue: we have mentioned the terrible war between the United States and the USSR.
Today, although the United States and Russia still dominate this sector, the countries of Europe play a major and increasingly significant role.
It is of paramount importance that we establish a European strategy if we want to lend more weight to the Union and this strategy must maintain a balance between the various uses made of space.
The European Space Agency has played a role which has been crucial for the cooperation between European countries in the field of the exploitation of space and research development.
However, as the rapporteur suggests, it would appear necessary to extend its activities to projects launched within the Community framework.
We must also make up for the absence of a genuine European policy and a European strategy ensuring the effective use of space systems to monitor the environment and to provide security, protect natural resources, detect or forecast natural and man-made disasters and combat fraud.
A large chunk of the practical applications involving space is already controlled by the market, and I feel that this is dangerous.
The Commission must put forward measures to control what are genuine abuses.
Lastly, together with many of my fellow Members, I am extremely pleased that the Galileo project met with such approval.
It will ensure that Europe makes a substantial contribution to the establishment of a worldwide satellite navigation system.
To sum up, the new approach to space policy must be based on a close partnership between the Member States, the European Union and the European Space Agency.
This is the only way to achieve the consensus such a policy requires.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioners, the European market for space applications is fragmented.
There are many smaller companies active which do not work together very well.
In order to be able to compete on the global market, it is necessary to restructure the space industry, that is to say integrate various companies into one company or group of companies.
There is, as such, plenty of work for the space advice group.
Cooperation at Community and international level in space activities is imperative.
My second point concerns the position of the European satellite industry.
Since the end of the cold war, the strategic importance of having our own satellite industry has been of commercial importance.
The sector is growing by 10% annually and thus helping create employment.
If the European Union does not want to miss the boat, the Commission and Member States need to promote the development of the industry.
Satellite systems are the means to further develop information and communications technology.
Unfortunately, the European satellite industry is very much dominated by governments.
This is why it works too much in isolation, without a great deal of interaction with the computer, network, software and peripheral equipment industry.
As a result, the industry is increasingly losing its market share to the US.
More cooperation and company mergers are needed, as well as more support in technology development, through the framework programme, among other things.
My Group is waiting with bated breath for the document the Commission has promised on a European space satellite in which, needless to say, the input of the European Space Agency is vital.
All this noise is making things very difficult: the sound quality is dreadful.
I would appreciate it if the technicians could do something about it.
Thank you, Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel.
The Bureau has also noted that there is a problem with the sound, but this problem can, of course, only be fixed when we are not working.
Let us hope that the sound quality will be better tomorrow.
Mr President, although I do want to congratulate Mr Konstantinos Alyssandrakis on his extremely comprehensive report, I have to say that, on this occasion, the Commission, in particular, and this final report have not been bold enough as regards the European space research initiative.
As has already been said, there is no longer any competition between America and the Soviet bloc, and yet, for all its scientists and technical expertise, Europe is unable to launch itself into space and space research.
We need to increase funding and create a specific budget heading for space research.
The European Union should manage national space research budgets, for space research is, by nature, one of the main activities of the European Union and would clearly not yield satisfactory results if carried out merely at individual State level.
We need to create a European Union space body which is separate from the ESA: the ESA is something different.
We need to organise the launching of low cost European Union satellites to serve European industries.
Finally, I would like to point out that pensioners should somehow be included in this space research.
How can this be?
Well, in the United States, a famous pensioner, the astronaut John Glenn, went into space at the age of 69.
I am 55 years old and in 15 years' time I will be 69.
I am already a politician: I could become an astronaut, the first pensioner astronaut of the European Union.
I am booking my seat today!
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Alyssandrakis, and all the Members who contributed to the preparation of this resolution.
On behalf of the Commission, I can assure you that we welcome this parliamentary resolution, in that it stresses the importance of politically consolidating the Commission' s analysis regarding, amongst other things, the strategic and economic role of space and the need to reinforce European investments and the status of the European space industry and to develop new approaches to space policy.
As you are aware, on 2 December, the Council of Ministers for Research adopted a resolution calling upon the Commission to draw up a European space strategy together with the European Space Agency.
This strategy will have to be submitted to the Council for evaluation before the end of the year.
Yesterday, I sent a note to the Commission reviewing the progress of the work.
You will remember that this work is carried out by a group made up of representatives of the Space Agency, representatives of the various Commission directorates concerned and also representatives of industry and the WEU.
This group has already met several times and will meet again in July.
The information memo which will be sent to you will inform you as to the state of progress of the work.
The drawing up of a European space strategy is of universal relevance and it must serve as a basis for the decisions scheduled for the end of 2000 on the Galileo programme, more explicitly, and for the debate already underway on security and the environment, which should lead to initiatives whose importance is noted in the motion for a parliamentary resolution.
I feel that the dialogue which we have embarked upon with the European Space Agency is fully in line with a wider-ranging communication which we are shortly to discuss in connection with another report, the dynamic of a European research area.
In my opinion, the thrust of the two measures is very similar, for we are trying to achieve synergy between all of Europe' s potential so that it can take as full and extensive a place as possible in tomorrow' s world.
I therefore welcome the debate which has just taken place, which, as I said before, lends political support to the Commission' s analysis.
In the next few months, with the support of Parliament, the European Council and the ESA Council, for we want to work in tandem, we should have a benchmark for future space activities.
As the report stressed, these are essential.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Busquin.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.
European research area
The next item is the report (A5-0131/2000) by Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Towards a European research area (COM(2000) 6 - C5-0115/2000 - 2000/2075(COS)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, I would first of all like to thank Commissioner Busquin for launching a broad debate on a European research area.
It comes at exactly the right time, between two framework programmes.
At present, there is no European research area as such.
The research policy of the Member States and that of the Union are running parallel without forming a coherent unit.
In addition, we invest far less in research than the United States and Japan.
These two factors have caused the chasm between us and the United States to widen even more over the past few years.
If the European Union wants to invest in more competitiveness, and thus more employment, we will need an approach which is broader and more innovative than the one we have pursued so far.
The forthcoming enlargement of the Union makes this all the more pressing.
The European Member States need to leave behind their technological nationalism and strive more towards a European Union for research and technology too.
This means that European researchers need access to each other' s national programmes.
The European framework programme for research and technological development is a useful instrument for stimulating international cooperation, but this programme on its own is not enough to boost the joint European research efforts.
Although it only makes up 6% of total European research expenditure, the framework programme fulfils an important multiplier function, a kind of flywheel function.
Industry pays 60% of total investments in research in Europe, 90% of which is spent on research to improve existing production processes and, in this way, to retain the competitive edge.
Only 10% is spent on new innovative research.
As such, the framework programme certainly makes a considerable contribution to this 10%.
Europe has no problem converting euros into research, but has far greater difficulty converting research into euros.
It appears that commercialisation, i.e. injecting expertise into a product, seems to be much more successful in the United States than it is in Europe.
A better link is required between the development of new technology and application in the market.
In this respect, increasing expertise is not a goal in itself, but translating expertise into innovation and industrial success, however, is.
It creates employment and prosperity.
Universities and companies therefore need to work more closely together.
As is the case in the United States, the work of scientists should alternate between academia and industry.
Commissioner Busquin has now indicated how a European research area could be brought about.
However, he mainly focuses on optimising the infrastructure by, among other things, incorporating centres of excellence into a network and by setting up Virtual Centres.
But I believe that in order to bring about a European research area, we will need more than measures in the sphere of infrastructure.
Infrastructures do not innovate, neither do electronic networks, although they are a prerequisite.
But a European research area can only be created if, in addition to an advanced infrastructure, we also have a European identity and European creativity.
In my view, the potential of women has been neglected for too long in this respect.
My final point concerns the lack of a Community patent.
The existing European patent system causes fragmentation and leads to considerable extra costs.
A patent application in Europe is ten times more expensive than it is in the US and far more involved.
Not only do we not have a Community patent; the mechanisms to help small companies protect their patents are also lacking.
Will the Commissioner consult Mr Bolkestein to do something about this?
After all, small- and medium-sized companies do not have the means to pay for expensive legal procedures.
Finally, I would like to state that Europe needs a joint research policy which accommodates both applied and fundamental research in various technical specialist fields and which takes into account the fact that innovations often emerge at the interface of different scientific disciplines.
In future, new employment could mainly be created within the specialist areas of bio-technology and ICT, but also research into human and social sciences will remain necessary in the European Union, with its large diversity of cultures.
I would like to thank my colleagues for their kind cooperation.
Mr President, I have to say with great regret that I disagree with my colleague, Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, on one point, namely this: if there is any end worth pursuing in human life it is knowledge for knowledge' s own sake.
If there is any impulse which contributes to good research it is the impulse of pure curiosity.
It has been work done out of pure curiosity for the sake of knowledge as an end in itself which has, in the end, produced the big spin-offs that make a real difference.
I agree with her, however, that it is not enough to justify spending public money on the ground that somebody suffers from acute curiosity.
Therefore, it is the promise of long-term applicability and long-term economic contribution that justifies the expenditure of public funds.
But we must remember that public funds will not be well spent unless they are spent on people who have the drive of curiosity and the commitment to knowledge for its own sake.
That is something which we in Europe forget at our peril.
It is mentioned in clauses 'n' and 'o' of the preamble.
I am very grateful for that.
Indeed I am very grateful to Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for the way in which she has worked into the report of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy practically all the points that were contained in the draft opinion from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market for which I was responsible and which is the reason for my addressing you tonight.
The whole is better than the sum of its two parts.
It was very good of her to work it in so effectively.
The amendments by Mr Pietrasanta and Mrs Maes, which add the points about sustainability, environmental goods and health, to the other economic points that we have been making, are important and should be adopted.
There is indeed a European crisis in research funding.
We must increase it.
It must go up to 3% from the current pathetic 1.8% - about half of what our Japanese and American friends and competitors put in.
Legal devices are important.
We should improve the European patent.
Subsidiarity is all-important; subsidiarity, as the Commissioner has said, in its broadest sense - regions contributing to research as well as Member States and the Commission, right down to the research team.
They are the people at the sharp end.
We must make sure that we never have systems of research support that are so over-burdened with bureaucracy, with application mechanisms so difficult to penetrate that we use resources in applying for research funds that should be spent doing the research itself.
Simplicity is all and subsidiarity means, in this context, simplicity and an appropriate period of research review.
We also need other things.
We need due and proper attention to mobility and all that goes with it, proper research careers throughout Europe, the chance for people to gain employment in research and to move freely.
The omens are not entirely good.
We have seen, in the case of the foreign language lecturers in Italy, that 12 years have passed with immobility enshrined in European law because the right to free movement without regard to nationality has been denied and has not yet been effectively enforced by the Commission.
We really must insist that improvement is achieved here and is carried through from the teaching community into the closely allied research community.
In short, we must do at Community and Union level the things that can only be done at those levels and push the rest down.
All that is stated in paragraph 40 of the report.
We must also be better at developing and applying the knowledge we achieve.
My colleague in Edinburgh, Professor Salter, has developed a device for destroying mines safely.
It has never been taken up industrially.
Many good ideas that are developed do not get taken up.
That is also vital.
Mr President, I have great pleasure in responding on behalf of the EPP and ED Group, and on behalf of my colleague, Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl, who was the shadow rapporteur in the Industry Committee but who unfortunately cannot be here tonight.
I have the pleasure of shadowing Mr MacCormick in the Legal Affairs Committee.
You have already heard that this is indeed a formidable combination and an extremely comprehensive and thorough report from Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, but Mr MacCormick added his own distinctive touches to the report, the flavour of which you have just heard.
Clearly, the thrust of the Commission' s thinking that has gone into this report and indeed our response has focused on two aspects: competitiveness and coordination, because research capability combined with the ability to translate that research into products and services of real commercial value is going to be the key to the competitiveness of the European Union and the enlarged Union into this new century.
We really need to make better use of all the intellectual capabilities that we have across the European Union by improving ways of working together, particularly by better focusing our efforts, by not duplicating that work, by bringing together the original thinkers that Mr MacCormick was talking about.
Anyone who has worked in research will know that if you get people together you spark new and creative ideas all the time.
That activity cannot really be achieved by a lot of centralisation.
The Commission has a job to do as a catalyst for the process.
As Mr MacCormick says, we have to get people across the Union together talking region to region, university to university.
We have to have better information networks, we have to have this exchange of information horizontally, not coming into the centre and going out again.
We have now fantastic new tools to be able to do that.
After all, the Internet was a tool intended to facilitate research networking.
That is what it was originally designed to do and we now have the ability to use it and to think about how we are going to develop the telecommunications capability, the ways of using it, the structure that we talked about in our early debate on telecommunications, the idea of virtual centres of excellence.
That, I think, is a factor of very great importance in trying to achieve this focus and this synthesis of ideas.
If anything should be brought forward very quickly in a pilot stage by Mr Busquin and his team, it is the idea of moving into the virtual centres of excellence and achieving progress in certain key areas.
The second point I want to make links in with our competitiveness.
I echo very much the closing phrases of Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel to us just now: we have to encourage research and development of skills on taking products to market.
We have to improve the ways that we do that.
The processes of original design are prototyping, testing and making.
We have to reduce the time to market, to take these ideas and move them out to consumers as soon as possible, to make products simply, quickly, more effectively, more flexibly.
Those are very important skills that we need to develop and research has a very important part to play in that.
In welcoming Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel' s report, we are anticipating the next stage, Mr Busquin, in meeting these challenges that we have thrown down.
We look to you to turn these proposals into tangible ideas to achieve the objectives that we all share.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to start by congratulating the Commission and the Commissioner responsible for research, for, with this thorough document, they have done something to fill the gap which always occurs in our activities between one framework programme and the next.
We occasionally have two-year periods which are sometimes called rest periods or reflection periods, whereas, in actual fact, you are not allowing us to relax, and rightly so, presenting us with a very timely communication on the European research and development area.
I would say that this contribution is all the more welcome in that it fertilises fallow land, namely the field of cooperation between the European Community and the Member States in the area of research.
This cooperation, which we could already describe as consolidated and which is laid down by Articles 165, 168 and 169 of the Treaty has, up until now, only existed in theory.
Your communication has brought the provisions to life.
We hope that, having come into being, this cooperation will then grow, but I will come back to this point.
In this regard, I would, of course, also like to congratulate Mrs Plooij­Van Gorsel on her report - and not just as a friend or colleague.
Even though she was pressed for time and had to work under conditions which were not always favourable, the result is completely satisfactory.
We will therefore support the report, especially since it has been improved upon by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.
However, I would not like it to be inferred from the reading of Mrs Plooij­Van Gorsel' s report during this sitting that the alpha and omega of research and development consists of nothing more than finding a solution to what has been dubbed the European research paradox: high level research which lacks the innovation necessary for it to reach United States quality.
Consequently, there is a great temptation, and you have succumbed, ladies and gentlemen, to the temptation to say that the most important element is clearly the transition from laboratory research to the reality of the market.
You have stressed, extremely vigorously I would say, all the elements which facilitate this transition: benchmarking, aid to private investment, tax exemption and a certain amount of support for enterprise and SMEs with high technological added value, all of which is important and necessary.
In effect, we must convert research into growth and growth into jobs.
But how could we think that a European Community, which devotes only half the amount of resources to research and development that the United States or Japan do, would be able to maintain a sufficient knowledge and skills base?
If, tomorrow, we want innovation, our knowledge base has to be up to the task.
The best means for achieving this end put forward by this major communication, in my opinion, are precisely the establishment of centres of excellence and networks to link these centres, infrastructures, the sharing of large facilities and better structured mobility.
In short, everything which will contribute to consolidating our knowledge base.
Moreover, as my predecessor, Mr Harbour, used to say, henceforth, Commissioner, you can count on the wide support of the European Parliament.
I know that you already have the support of the European scientific community and that is extremely important.
Now we must convert the test into proposals, but also into more radical changes.
A meeting will be held midway through the fifth framework programme and, without waiting for the sixth framework programme, this may well be the right time to formalise the announcements you have made today, which seem to offer great potential, as laws and new priorities.
Mr President, Commissioner, the communication under discussion forms an important introduction to closer cooperation in the field of research.
As things are now, resources are wasted due to overlapping and lack of coordination.
On behalf of the ELDR Group, I wish to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, for a good report and for her extremely enthusiastic work for this cause: your views have the full support of my Group.
The statistics indicated in the communication regarding the poor level of investment by EU countries in research are cause for concern.
Even worse is the fact that the gap with respect to the USA is widening.
However, some Member States have made considerable investments in research, and this appears to have paid dividends, particularly in the area of information technology.
While I have the floor, I would like to bring up a few additional points.
I would prefer to talk about cooperation or strategy, rather than research policy.
The word policy has a connotation of activities being closely controlled by Brussels.
In research, however, objectives for activities should not be defined at too detailed a level.
Each research community is best aware of its own needs for investment and development - these should not be too tightly controlled by policy.
The participation of women in scientific research within the EU continues to be too fragmented.
More tangible action must be incorporated in the programmes in order to promote this participation.
Researcher exchange programmes and interaction between research teams are matters which deserve our full support.
They are a means of disseminating information and skills; these activities will create true European cooperation - networks which will also bear fruit later on.
The COST secretariat has already produced some commendable work.
Its position as research coordinator should be further strengthened.
Mr President, it is, of course, essential to develop a European research area, but this must not operate simply in areas neglected by the Member States.
It must be built openly, sharing competences and resources at as early a stage as possible, in order to ensure optimum synergy.
I wish to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for her very dynamic work on this report.
We must naturally consider the economic impact and job creation, as our fellow Member, Mr Desama, said.
In the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, we do not give priority to the pursuit of competition and competitiveness at any price, or to the commercialisation of research.
Both fundamental and applied research must, above all, retain public support and a public dimension.
We are opposed to the areas of biotechnology focused on genetic manipulation or patenting the living organism.
On the other hand, we are in favour of research focusing on sustainable technologies, particularly in the areas of the environment and health.
As the Committee of the Regions advocated in Mrs Blandin' s report, we wish to emphasise support for decentralised research, the formation of networks, collaboration with the regions.
For example, the cooperation which has developed through the ecosites, in the field of ecotechnologies, according to the criteria of sustainable development, is appropriate to local development and to supporting SMBs and SMIs.
Europe may be a significant driving force in this field.
I should also like to stress the aid which we wish to provide for new information and communications technologies by developing virtual laboratories for data collection, analysis and diagnosis, and prevention in the area of major risks.
There is here a potential which can only be realised fully at European level, in collaboration with universities, centres of excellence and the authorities.
Finally, I should like to flag the interest we have in the Joint Research Centre, a subject that is well worth thinking carefully about.
Its nuclear bias, which was topical when it was set up because of the involvement of Euratom, must now be reconsidered.
It is not a matter of duplicating the installations or the research carried out in some European Union Member States but instead of developing, as Mrs McNally suggests, a shared system of technical and scientific references for political applications.
In this respect, there is also a need for serious thinking about the STOA.
In conclusion, I wish to thank our Commissioner, Mr Philippe Busquin, for undertaking, as soon as he arrived, this investigation into a European research area which we support.
He did not neglect the areas of schemes on behalf of young people and the participation of women in research and, in continuing liaison with the Member States and with Parliament, he is working towards developing a knowledge-based Europe in the latest fields, without neglecting social and human aspects.
Mr President, Commissioner, considerable research is indeed essential to be able to make sense of the 27 recitals and 60 paragraphs of a report which has reached oversized proportions due to the studies of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy and which contains absolutely everything, albeit in occasionally vague and often inexact terms.
Let us begin, however, in a spirit of constructive criticism, by welcoming the fact that this contribution towards achieving better integration of the European scientific community seeks to safeguard the balance between fundamental and applied research in order to combat the brain drain, to prioritise the problem of unemployment among young researchers within a European policy which is aware of the reality of the situation, and to recognise the leading role played by businesses in research and development.
We might then, also, reiterate what the report said, by emphasising the risk that concentrating research infrastructures, with a view to establishing a cost-effective critical mass, would represent for the peripheral regions, which are, in general, increasingly being disregarded by European programmes.
Attention should also be drawn to the need to adhere strictly to the principle of subsidiarity, in order to leave the Member States and, through them, the regions with genuine local driving forces for research centres in direct contact with the worlds of business and academia, the ability to define their own priorities and methodologies under their own responsibility.
Finally, let us dare to hope that your laudable concern to develop communications and translation services in order to eliminate the language barrier to the desirable synergy between the work of our respective researchers is not a cover for a further attempt to promote one of the Union' s languages above all the others, a language whose imperialism would be no less neutral here than elsewhere.
Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group is going to vote in favour of your report, but I would ask you, in practical terms, will it be effective enough for us to achieve our shared goal, which is high-level scientific knowledge generating improved performance in every field?
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel' s excellent report, which we have before us, on the European Commission communication, "Towards a European research area" , has aroused genuine interest in the House judging by the fact that almost 150 amendments have been tabled.
Clearly, the development of research within the European Union is one of the keys to the future.
The twenty-first century will be the century of knowledge and grey matter.
Progress in communications effectively increases the rate of dissemination of knowledge, as the development of the Internet demonstrates, and is a powerful factor in promoting economic growth.
In the broadest sense, then, research will, more than ever, be a fundamental element of future development.
According to the figures made available by the Commission, Europe is definitely lagging behind the United States.
Here are some examples of this: the average investment in research for the European Union as a whole is no more than 1.8% of GDP, as opposed to 2.8% in the United States; the number of European graduate students studying in the United States is twice that of American students in Europe.
On this subject, the proposals of both the Commission and the Plooij-Van Gorsel report lead me to make a few observations.
The first is that European investment in research is at least as important as the European research area.
In the United States, there is rather less concern for semantics and more for practical action.
The second observation is that approximately two thirds of research is undertaken by private companies and that the European Union must take this situation into consideration when focusing its resources.
My third observation is that we must absolutely avoid anything which, from a distance or close up, looks like what has just been referred to as a master plan for European research.
Research is, first and foremost, a matter for freedom and not for planning.
This is all included in the Commission communication and the report by our fellow Member.
There is, however, no prioritisation in the proposals, and this is something I would like to suggest.
This prioritisation should focus primarily on researchers and businesses.
As far as researchers are concerned, their standard of living throughout Europe must be enhanced.
As far as businesses are concerned, research work must be encouraged.
My conclusion is as follows: that we should first back the people involved, then business and, finally, that we should ensure that the European Union does not hinder the activities or the development of either party.
This is what our approach must be.
So the area ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, I wish to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for her usual very good report.
I thank the Commissioner, whose timing is very good and so is his idea of launching this debate.
There is indeed a growing feeling of unease at the lack of coordination in European science and research.
The response has been positive, as the Commissioner knows from his contacts throughout Europe, including a recent visit to Cambridge.
We are looking forward to seeing his analysis of the results of the consultation.
There is a growing awareness in Europe of the dimensions of the threat from the very well-resourced, very well-targeted United States of America.
Frankly, the EU is not punching its weight in research, although some Member States are very good.
I would name Finland, Sweden and countries like the Republic of Ireland, which have made good progress.
Apart from industrial competitiveness, of course, as Mr Desama says, we have serious environmental and social problems which need research to put them right.
A target of 3% of GDP on research is realistic and essential, as is the recruitment of far more scientists, including women.
Please do not underestimate the potential of the Joint Research Centre, which is itself a scientific centre for policy - a reference centre for policy - and is ideally suited to the role of networking the centres of excellence.
It is itself a centre of excellence in many areas.
I strongly support paragraphs 16 and 17, which call for informing the European public about scientific achievements and looking at ethical questions.
We look forward to regular reports from the Commissioner about the implementation and realisation of this very exciting and essential project.
Mr President, it is impossible to say something meaningful in two minutes about such a challenging report as the one written by Mrs Plooij without getting very frustrated, because one could say so much more and, more to the point, would want to say so much more.
I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on his ambition, which is considerable.
Trying to create a European research area is an ambitious plan, because this research space is currently lacking and we only have ourselves to blame.
We make insufficient resources available, although we all - and Mrs McNally underlined this a moment ago - acknowledge the link between progress, development, and creating prosperity and jobs.
This is evident to all of us, yet our governments fail to set aside sufficient funds.
This is true for the Member States and regions, some of whose percentage levels are shamefully low.
We should, as it were, sound the praises of certain Member States and regions, but should not work on averages.
This is why it is good to emphasise cooperation.
Pyramids and hierarchies are not really of much use here, because we know that talent bubbles up from below and from all those regions and all those milieus where talent breeds, both male and female, although female talent - and this has been pointed out many times before here - can only ascend to the very pinnacle of academia very slowly.
Cooperation, however, requires organisation.
And really, the absence of this is something we only have ourselves to blame for.
If our organisation of the scientific environment lags behind, we will not achieve a European research area.
After all, it is exactly this area, where people can communicate a lot more freely with each other than before, which has to ensure that scientists feel at home in Europe.
Mr President, a competition-orientated research policy of the kind that we are pursuing today is the best type of social and employment policy of tomorrow.
That being the case, Mr Busquin is assuming one of the major responsibilities within the European Community.
As far as we are concerned, it is all about encouraging researchers to engage in one-to-one conversations.
Scientific studies have demonstrated that one-to-one conversations between researchers are the best way of making progress.
What we need to do is to bring researchers from all over the world to Europe, and particularly those from countries wishing to join the EU.
Researchers there are producing outstanding results that have yet to be acknowledged and marketed, and which can be intensively developed.
This leads us onto the subject of youth.
I believe we should make sure that we impart this entrepreneurial spirit, the pleasure derived from innovation and research, to young people.
It is good to see young people getting involved in research projects.
Perhaps it would also be a good idea to set up a LEONARDO for researchers, an exchange programme between universities, schools, companies and research institutes.
I believe that each individual has a great deal of knowledge to contribute, and that, ultimately, communication between specialists is the best method of conveying this knowledge.
It is also important for the small and family-run enterprises, but also the suppliers, to have access to the major research institutions, to the top research centres.
We in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy have proposed to the Committee on Budgets that an additional allocation be made.
We have said that at least 10% of research expenditure must be for the benefit of small- and medium-sized enterprises.
I would say that a larger slice, 20% or 30%, should be closely tied in with cooperation between small companies, suppliers, and major research institutes, so as to bring about a dramatic improvement in the networks and in communication in this sector, and create brand new opportunities.
An active and passive licensing and patenting policy - I wrote my dissertation on this at university - is the basis of successful research.
As we have already heard today, it is vital for the European Union to give attention to this matter.
What obstacles are there?
I believe we should distinguish between large and small assistance projects, particularly when it comes to expenditure.
It is particularly important to keep administrative expenditure to a minimum in the case of small companies and small-scale projects.
The Commission ought to concentrate on large projects, albeit with the proviso that the major projects undertaken are divided into small units; a proportion should be stipulated here as well.
On a final note, Commissioner, I would just like to say that I am already looking forward to, when the next benchmarking projects....
(The President cut the speaker off)
I really have to ask the Members to exercise some self-discipline.
I am sorry to interrupt you, but time goes on and, at this rate, we will be here until gone midnight, and surely that is not what we want.
We cannot do this to the Commissioner either.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to extend my most sincere thanks to the rapporteur, Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, for this report, and, incidentally, to the Commission, for the document they have presented us with.
In the short time available, I have just two comments to make: I would like to take up what Mr Rübig had to say about youth.
People the length and breadth of the country complain that we do not have enough engineers.
Young people are no longer going to university to study natural sciences.
Where I come from, a survey was carried out in order to ascertain why this should be.
This had surprising results.
We had always believed that young people are no longer choosing to study the natural sciences or engineering at university because the job prospects are so poor.
This is not the case.
They do not study physics and chemistry because they are no fun.
In a society that prizes having fun so highly, it is evidently extremely important for things to be fun.
We are evidently failing to make the material attractive to people and suited to the lifestyles they have these days.
They are from a different generation to mine.
Therefore, I advocate that we bear this in mind when we find ourselves talking in such scholarly terms about the next generation.
The second proposal I would just like to make is as follows: we are discussing the European research area.
We are going to enlarge the European Union, marvellous!
Indeed all these States are already taking part in the fifth research framework programme at the present time, and they will also participate in the sixth.
I would therefore recommend involving the Parliamentarians and Ministers for Research of these countries in the preparation for the sixth research framework programme as well.
I would envisage doing this here in the European Parliament - the French expression is assises de recherche - so that we can have a joint discussion about the guidelines for the sixth research framework programme.
Mr President, as a scientist on loan to politics, as I like to describe myself, who has worked in the most advanced laboratories in Italy and elsewhere and who has worked with highly advanced countries such as the United States and Japan, I would like to thank the rapporteur for her extreme sensitivity, her competence and her enthusiasm.
I would, of course, also like to thank all the members of the committee, irrespective of their political party, and, in particular, I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude on behalf of the academic world to Commissioner Philippe Busquin for the extreme sensitivity he has shown in creating, at last, a European common research area.
The creation of a common research area in Europe will, at last, make it possible to fully exploit networks of high quality centres and achieve that critical mass which is essential both for the progress of knowledge per se and to provide practical answers to the man in the street: answers which cover a range of issues, from the control of terrible illnesses such as AIDS or cancer to neurodegenerative diseases or injuries caused by environmental pollution and so forth.
This is why we support the Commissioner!
Dear Commissioner, what a challenge!
We will keep fighting in order to overcome that red tape which tends to delay the achievement of these goals.
The adoption of the amendments I tabled will greatly promote recognition of the common research area and boost its efficiency.
Thus, the first amendment, which calls for at least 3% of the gross domestic product of all the countries of the European Union to be allocated to research, represents a great victory and will allow us to compete with the United States and Japan.
The second amendment I tabled on behalf of the poor, vulnerable and abandoned regions, the Objective 1 regions of the South, i.e. to invest 5% of the unused regional funds - which would otherwise be taken back - to benefit those regions, will, at last, make it possible to exploit the excellent human resources available to us and close the gap in infrastructures and technology between these regions and the regions of Europe.
The third amendment, which was also approved by our friend Mr Novelli - whom I would like to thank - will apply tax exemption and, thereby, at last make it possible to further increase the level of research carried out in all sectors.
Commissioner, I would therefore like to finish by paying tribute to the new scientific research structure which you have introduced.
On 20 June, two Nobel prize-winners, Rita Levi Montalcini, holder of the Nobel Prize for neuroscience, and Renato Dulbecco, will pay tribute to this initiative, in recognition of the fact that, at long last, in establishing the research area, you have conferred great honour on all research scientists.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, cooperation in terms of research is difficult in Europe, far more difficult than it is in the United States and this is why Commissioner Busquin' s communication is so significant.
Investment in research and in cooperation must lead to more economic growth and more employment.
This effort deserves all our support, and this is why I can give my full backing to the report by Mrs Plooij, to whom, by the way, I would like to convey my sincerest compliments.
But I would prefer it if we were a little more precise in our debate.
We have to ascertain that not all research leads to more economic growth or more employment.
The demand for research is huge where supporting policy choices, risk analyses, environmental effect reports, monitors and comparative research is concerned.
It is all part of the preparation or assessment of political decisions in the environmental sector in the area of food or public health.
In these particular areas, European cooperation is meaningful.
The Joint Research Centres, the JRCs, have many examples of sound cooperation projects.
In many research areas, the JRC researchers find themselves in a situation much like a spider in a web.
Where research in support of policy is concerned, initiatives from the Commission are therefore vital in order to prevent work from being duplicated, to avoid fragmentation and to ensure that the best measuring methods and the best techniques become the benchmark.
But in this type of work, no major spin-offs in the employment sphere can be expected outside the research centres.
There is also great demand for applied research, which can be expected to have a far greater impact on employment.
But European policy could restrict itself to creating appropriate conditions, and practical obstacles should be cleared away.
I would like to finish off by saying a few words on basic research.
Research situated between applied and basic research now has a lower profile but remains significant.
Many fundamental questions in the fields of natural and life sciences remain unanswered.
It is precisely in these spheres that coordination of national research efforts is of major importance.
Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for her invaluable work.
On account of the amendments tabled in committee, this report ended up being more wide-ranging; when dealing with issues related to research areas, we must not focus solely on scientific communities.
The role of the SME sector as a locomotive force for innovation and research work must also be clearly borne in mind.
The Commission' s communication provides an unnecessarily one-sided view of the challenges of European research.
It is obvious that, in the preparation of this communication, there has been no horizontal utilisation of the expertise of the various directorates.
Since the discussion on the research area touches, for example, on the enlargement process of the Union and on the vitality of the SME sector, one would have wished that the Commission' s communication had presented more visions and concrete content.
It is not enough to talk in broad terms about the competitiveness of the Union.
Keywords in research policy are flexibility, global thinking, and the more effective use of resources than at present.
The self-directed nature of science and the Member States' own research policy priorities must be accorded sufficient space.
It is therefore necessary to give careful thought to what will be required in the future of the joint research centres highlighted in the Commission' s proposal.
On no account is it appropriate to enlarge the role of the Union' s research centres in such a way that the operations of national research centres are made more difficult in the context of resource reallocation.
Most of the added value of the internal market approach in research will be acquired specifically through the more even distribution of the research and know-how which is funded by non-public resources.
Practical experience has shown that by working within framework programmes it is not possible to react sufficiently flexibly to problems which demand rapid action, such as the BSE crisis.
Increasing, for instance, the mobility of researchers according to need and enhancing the cooperation between the scientific communities of the EU and Eastern Europe will create a reliable and credible basis for research projects.
In this discussion, particular attention must also be paid to the position of women in European research policy; the body of technical experts in particular - which actually suffers from a labour shortage - is alarmingly male-dominated.
The EU must accept that one of the most important challenges for its training and research policy is to awaken women' s interest in this sector.
Mr President, Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, ladies and gentlemen, I am personally delighted to have this opportunity to express an opinion on the Commissioner' s communication and to be able to tell him that it is a document of extremely high quality which, as we have seen again this evening, has provided the basis for a relevant debate on revitalising research in Europe.
We have effectively entered the knowledge society, which has led us to put research back at the heart of our society.
In Europe, however, as many people have said, the position of research looks worrying if one looks at the figures.
It is therefore necessary, as a matter of urgency, to adopt an overall strategy at European level in order to make up for lost time.
It is not a matter of casting doubt on the efficiency of the FRDPs.
Their results are plain to see.
It must be noted, however, that new initiatives need to be adopted in order to decompartmentalise Member States' national systems which today represent nothing more than a duplication of efforts.
Among the many measures which must be implemented, this evening I shall mention, in particular, the training and the mobility of researchers, to go back to a previous debate which involved the Commissioner and researchers from my own region.
I am speaking, therefore, to voice their concerns, for we are not training enough scientific researchers and even fewer European researchers.
The training of researchers should therefore include a European dimension, which would offer them greater mobility.
Schemes do exist, but, in the real world, before and during implementation, there are administrative obstacles to mobility, such as welfare cover, which discourage many researchers.
I shall end by saying that we must also devote ourselves to informing the citizens, in whom scientific progress raises as much hope as concern.
I therefore hope that, in June, our ministers will be able to approve the rapid establishment of a whole series of building sites in Europe, on the basis of the Commissioner' s proposals.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate Commissioner Busquin for deciding and having the courage to create a European research area, bearing in mind that, in the field of knowledge, we have always fought hard for the principle of solidarity.
I am a member of the Committee on Culture and in fact Parliament has not taken up the opinion of this committee.
I am the only person from that committee who is speaking in this debate.
I very much regret the fact that the contribution of the Committee on Culture has not been allowed to enrich the debate.
In this respect I would like to offer some constructive criticism.
Firstly, I would like to say that this is a laudable and courageous piece of work, because subsidiarity is a straitjacket which is holding Europeans back despite the brilliance of their desires and their minds.
Nevertheless, it lacks a parallel project, which is concerned with human resources.
Much is said about money and companies, but we never take into account - or at least we only do so in the small print and indirectly - the fact that it is a question of human resources and that therefore research requires training, training and more training.
In Europe there are no training programmes for researchers.
FEDER and the FEDER projects do not cover grant holders.
Furthermore, the fifth research plan only includes one person per project, although it is impossible to carry out a far-reaching project with grant holders alone.
The personnel available to us include very few post-doctoral teachers and we do not have sufficient staff.
How can we talk about mobility if we do not have researchers?
This is the great challenge we have to face and, in this case, I would support Mr Rübig and others who have proposed specific training programmes.
We must support the universities and researchers because, in Europe, working in research means sacrifices and a career full of risks and very few rewards and, of course, no economic reward.
I repeat that we must recycle our teachers.
Only by means of a strategic European resources plan can we do so.
Lastly, I would like to express my fear that only centres of excellence will be recognised.
Mr President, I will confine myself to stressing three points tackled by Commissioner Busquin which are also referred to in the report under debate.
The first concerns the close relationship between research, economic growth and employment.
In order to respond to the challenge represented by the United States, the Union as a whole and certain countries in particular must allocate a higher proportion of their resources to research and facilitate investment by private companies.
I subscribe to the view that we need to propose tax relief, harmonised at European level, as a guideline for the Member States.
Point two: research and development have generated an extremely well integrated system.
In some areas, it is not easy to distinguish between basic and applied research.
However, public financing and the European programmes need to target chiefly medium- and long-term economic and non-economic objectives, whereas competence for market-related research should lie chiefly with the firms.
Thirdly, the tertiarisation of research policies and the consolidation of the role of the regions: The territorial aspect of research policies is important chiefly in terms of the transfer of scientific and technological knowledge towards the small- and medium-sized enterprises which characterise many industrial districts.
Small- and medium-sized enterprises are one of European industry' s strong points, in certain countries in particular, but they are still poorly integrated into the research system.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I would like to add my thanks to those that have been expressed already.
I should also like to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for the excellent report she has drawn up within a very short time limit.
I should like to thank Mr MacCormick of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and all of you for your contributions, as well as for your contributions to the debate this evening.
As I have already said, I believe that this debate requires collective action and that you, as Members of Parliament, can play a decisive role in relations with the scientific community and industry.
Rest assured that I and the other members of the Commission will be ready to pursue this dialogue and this debate tomorrow.
In this respect, I think that this Parliament resolution is going to provide strong democratic support for the text ratified by the Lisbon Council which, moreover, set practical goals and deadlines.
We should realise the extent to which the meeting of the Heads of State and Government in Lisbon served to highlight - what I believe is very important - the key role of research policy, as we have again pointed out this evening, and to acknowledge the importance of this role in the advent of a knowledge-based economy and society.
We are at a juncture which gives us hope that greater and more crucial progress may be made in this area.
In addition, I should like to stress the importance of consulting the scientific community, with its awareness of developments, but also the industrial world, which can gauge the importance of the issues at stake.
Let me now outline a few points in the resolution, not in order to reopen the debate, Mr President, given the late hour, but in order to put a few brief comments to you.
I consider that the concept of centres of excellence is one worth developing further and, in this connection, there is one essential principle, and that is that excellence is the condition sine qua non for scientific and technological progress.
Such excellence does exist in Europe, in all the Member States, but at an inadequate level of critical mass, and this is a situation which could be improved.
This is the significance of all these networks of centres of excellence that must be created without necessarily specifying the exact infrastructures involved.
It is a matter of human resources, but it is something that must be set up in order to have the ability to raise levels in Europe.
And, as Mr Harbour pointed out, this excellence may also come in a virtual form in the modern technologies and high-speed networks we wish to see set up.
As regards fundamental and applied research, I think this is a matter of balance.
These two aspects are closely linked.
Everyone accepts this, both the world of industry and the world of research, of course, in the same way as they accept multidisciplinarity, which is one of the results of scientific developments.
In order to create the necessary dynamic, it is therefore essential to develop the concept of benchmarking.
I think this is an instrument which will make it possible, at European level, to create this dynamic, and also to instigate proactive and open coordination.
I think establishing a patent is a condition sine qua non, as has been adequately pointed out.
Mr Bolkestein, who is responsible for the internal market, is well aware of this.
Indeed, I should like to take this opportunity to thank Parliament for having, with a view to the Intergovernmental Conference, insisted on initiating a discussion on a European legal body, since this is an essential condition for bringing about this Community patent.
Finally, as far as small- and medium-sized businesses are concerned, the matter of the patent is a crucial factor, quite apart from more specific elements.
The aspect of regional development has been stressed, and I attach great importance to this, as successful experiments have been conducted in some regions and these should be exhibited as an example throughout Europe.
I also attach great importance to the link between research and the Structural Funds, not forgetting the role of the European Investment Bank.
In connection with this, discussions have been held with the European Investment Bank and schemes are underway to ensure that the EIB has a still more dynamic role in matters related to innovation and transposition and, since this was mentioned, that includes with candidate countries.
The Joint Research Centre and its specialist role have been stressed, and the goal of 3% of GDP is, I believe, an ambitious but necessary goal in all Member States.
So, to be brief, I should simply like to inform Parliament of the forthcoming stages.
The first stage is clear.
I would first of all like to emphasise just how important it was that Parliament expressed its opinion today.
This is why I wished to thank Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel for drawing up her report so quickly, and also all the Members of Parliament for debating the matter in such detail within such a short time period.
The next stage, then, is the Council of Ministers responsible for Research, which will take place on 15 June.
This report will provide practical examples to support the determination that we must display.
For I have clearly understood that practical action is needed.
So, regarding the practical action, let me quickly list a few points, starting with benchmarking.
With national research policies, the methodology exists.
I think that the Member States accept this methodology, with the establishment of a high level group of representatives.
Initial results will be available by the end of the year.
A map of areas of excellence in Europe is being drawn up, with the cooperation of the national specialist institutes.
That is no surprise to anyone, I think.
I am hopeful that this map will also be ready by the end of the year.
The mobility of researchers presupposes the mobility of workers in general.
The ambition of Mrs Diamantopoulou and myself is to set up a group made up of representatives from each Member State in order to identify where the obstacles lie.
Regarding Women and Science, in fact, on the initiative of Parliament, a sizeable group of five hundred women has been set up.
You are familiar with the very interesting report that this group produced, which triggered policy in each of the Member States.
I shall be able to give you the results of this in the near future.
Finally, as regards electronic networks, Mr Liikanen and I wish to increase these to several gigabytes very soon.
That, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, is what I wanted to tell you briefly, given the time constraints and that I do not want to detain you further.
I do, however, wish to express my heartfelt thanks for the interest you have shown in this debate.
I believe we have to set up a dynamic, one that must be enhanced, and I promise that I shall give you progress reports on a regular basis.
I hope that, together, we shall be able to open up the European research area that I believe in so strongly.
Thank you very much for your contribution, Commissioner.
Given the time, we should not hold lengthy discussions.
I am not a spokesperson for this debate but I would nevertheless like to congratulate Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel at this stage on this important report.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Peking action platform
The next item is the report (A5-0125/2000) by Mrs Smet and Mrs Gröner, on behalf of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, on the follow-up to the Beijing Action Platform [2000/2020(INI)].
Mr President, this initiative report is the European Parliament' s contribution to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly which will be held in New York in three weeks' time and where the actions of the past five years will be assessed as a follow-up to the World Conference on Women in Beijing and where, at the same time, a declaration will be issued to re-establish the commitments made and to see what needs to be done in the next five years.
As such, it is an important report, because it will be the only report from the European Parliament.
I hope that we will be given the opportunity - and this is also a request to the Commission - to do some preparatory work with the Commission before we leave for New York to ensure that we are singing from the same hymn sheet.
I think it is useful to be on the same wavelength because, as regards women' s liberation, we could expect Europe to play some sort of a pioneering role.
Europe has done this in the past and we must be able to continue to do this.
But before I talk about this pioneering role, I would like to say a few words about the assessment itself.
Commissioner, it is particularly difficult to carry out an assessment if there is no data available to check on the precise extent of progress made by the different European countries over the past few years.
No statistical data exists.
There are reports on the twelve topics which we need to discuss in New York for each country, which show exactly how much progress has been made with the assessment.
I am therefore delighted that you announced in the discussion on the fifth action programme that you would like to set up a kind of observatory where an effort will be made to collate all possible gender-related data.
After all, there is an enormous gap in this field.
I would like to direct my second point to Parliament itself.
The efforts we needed to make in order to finish this report suggest that the Secretariat of the Women' s Committee is heavily understaffed.
There was very little in the way of cooperation, and had it not been for the fact that Mrs Gröner and myself had hard-working collaborators, then there would probably not have been a report now.
It is a disgrace for Parliament that other committees can apparently acquire excellent secretariats and well-equipped secretariats with many staff, but that this is not possible for the Women' s Committee.
It may be useful that we, together with the women involved, should take an initiative.
That is all I have to say as regards assessment and I will not touch on it any further.
For the next five years, I believe that the action programme, the five-year programme which the Commission is presenting for discussion at the moment, is of huge importance.
It obviously comprises the traditional themes, which is quite normal because, although the world moves on, these themes are still on the agenda.
Admittedly, there are new emphases but, at the end of the day, they are the same recurring themes.
The first theme I would like to mention is the world of employment and the new emphases which should, in my view, be applied.
These include the new technologies and the fact that there are too few women in this sector, if any.
This was also said a moment ago.
Other matters to be emphasised are the division between work and family, as is provided for in the employment guidelines, and equal pay for equal work, something which I find the Commission is not emphasising enough and which is receiving insufficient attention.
There is still a chasm between men and women in terms of wages.
Another theme is decision making.
The Commission has made efforts, as has Europe, but mainly in the political sphere.
I think that efforts should also be made with regard to both sides of industry.
Far more attention should be paid to them since they manage and control a large part of social life.
On the theme of violence, too little attention is being paid to violence within the family, in my opinion.
Attention is being paid to violence in the work sphere, and so forth, but not so much within the family.
In my view, more attention should be paid to the media, which is such a determining factor in social life.
Women are very much absent in the media.
As for women' s rights and human rights, I hope that some progress can be made at the Intergovernmental Conference.
Finally, I already said that Europe is expected to play a pioneering role.
I would mention two areas, in particular.
Firstly, if we grant development aid or if we have contacts with third countries, we should not just prescribe conditions with regard to the economic position of women.
We are now familiar with this.
We know that in many developing countries, the economy is carried by women, and we support this.
This much we now know.
What we do not emphasise enough in our contacts with third countries is that human rights should be respected with regard to women, too.
What is happening in Afghanistan is unjustifiable.
It is unjustifiable that, in a number of countries, female circumcision is still practised and that we maintain the best relations with these countries as a matter of course.
Secondly, with regard to the Union' s enlargement to include the former Eastern Bloc countries, it will be vital that the screening report to be compiled by the Commission should give a sound account of what is happening there, because there are signs of regress instead of progress in this regard.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, five years after Beijing, the implementation of the action platform is to be subjected to detailed analysis.
We in the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities have formed a critical appraisal of the twelve critical areas of concern, which are: poverty; education and training; health; violence; armed conflict; the economy; power and decision making; institutional mechanisms; human rights; media; the environment and the girl child.
It now all depends on how we use the political will to bring about improvement in these areas.
I would emphasise that the cooperation between the two co-rapporteurs has been highly constructive and we have focused on the measures taken by the EU and its Member States in this report.
We endeavour to highlight any shortcomings and to make a series of recommendations that will help to speed up implementation of the action platform.
I also see this report as an action plan for the EU delegation that is to take up an excellent negotiating position in New York, in June, and that is to strengthen women' s rights, in close cooperation with the representatives of governmental and non-governmental organisations.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the President-in-Office of the Council, Mrs Belém, and the Commissioner, for the fact that we worked so well together during the preparation process for the conference held in Brussels in February, and I hope that things will run as smoothly in future preparation processes.
We can go to New York with a whole string of achievements to our credit.
The incorporation of equal opportunities into all policy areas, i.e. gender mainstreaming, has now been adopted as the guiding principle in a wide cross-section of EU policy areas.
The accompanying positive action measures will be followed up in the fourth action platform, and no doubt in the fifth platform as well.
Notwithstanding the considerable progress we have made, one of our main tasks will be to turn rights into practice at long last.
The Treaty of Amsterdam will help us there; specifically Articles 2 and 3, in which equality is defined as a goal and task of the Community, or Article 141, relating as it does to employment policy, where there is room for improvement.
However, we still need a completely secure legal basis.
The Treaty must include a single, coherent legal basis for equality between men and women in all policy areas, and another directive on the implementation of the positive action measures in Article 141.
The fifth action platform is of prime importance and is ultimately also a decision-making Women' s and Equal Opportunities' Council.
I believe - and my co-rapporteur has already highlighted this - that the European Union should step up cooperation and emphasise the gender perspective principle in its foreign relations, in the context of the enlargement process and with developing countries.
If the empowerment of women proves to play a major part in the Fourth World Conference on Women, it will also take precedence where the development of the information society is concerned.
It is all about jobs - we have taken careful note of this - about future tasks, so as to ensure that women are not the losers in the globalisation competition.
We have also developed an impressive repertory of measures designed to boost employment.
However, the situation with regard to equal pay still leaves a lot to be desired.
For people to be able to combine family life with careers, consideration must be given to both fathers and mothers, and the image of the new man, who takes on domestic tasks, must be reinforced.
The situation is looking brighter for women as far as equality in political life is concerned.
Women account for an average of 20% of members of the parliaments of the European Union.
The figure for this Parliament is 30%.
But there is still plenty of room for improvement in this regard as well, so as to reach the critical mass, as it were.
I believe I can say, with the full support of my Group, that there is no getting away from the fact that we must introduce quotas.
We must fix quotas at long last, if we do not want it to take another one hundred years before women achieve equal representation, and I mean in every single walk of life, in the economy, at social partner level, in universities and in science.
We must also achieve a more gender-balanced participation within the mass media industry.
Violence against women is another major issue.
Here in the European Parliament, we have called for there to be a European year against violence, and are supported by 350 delegates in this.
Much still remains to be done, however.
The important thing to come out of New York will be a decision on Beijing + 10, another World Conference on Women for the 21st Century.
Mr President, Commissioner, the special session of the United Nations General Assembly, which will be held at the beginning of June under the banner 'Women 2000: Gender equality, development and peace for the 21st Century' , will be of enormous importance to the situation of women.
The monitoring of the application of the Beijing Action Platform reveals that the greatest concerns, in relation to the proposed objectives, are still education and training, power and decision making, health, poverty and violence.
The social changes of recent years have affected women in a special way.
The increase in the elderly population has had a great effect on the lives of women who, in general, when they are no longer looking after their children, have to look after their parents.
Despite considerable progress in terms of the situation of women, there are still considerable differences, especially discrimination at work and different wages for the same job.
The majority and, in many cases, all of the responsibility for domestic tasks falls to women.
The situation of women with family responsibilities, combined with the difficulties in the labour market, have led to a term which is explicit as well as unfair: the feminisation of poverty.
We still require initiatives which help to give women access to the labour market and allow them full professional development, to which end we will need to facilitate women' s 'other' work through nurseries and financial aid.
Men will have to take more family responsibilities and adapt to a society which is constantly changing and which has modified their traditional roles.
The information society requires increasing numbers of people with technological training, which women must get involved in, since this is an area for which they are particularly well-equipped.
If the number of women involved in decision making were to increase, it would become easier to resolve the problems facing them.
A lot of progress has been made, but there are still political and economic areas in which women are under-represented.
Amongst the problems which women are unfortunately facing at the moment, we must mention the violence directed at them: domestic violence, armed conflict and trafficking in women, which has been increasing in recent years.
This is a form of violence against their person, their fundamental rights and their dignity.
The Treaty of Amsterdam provides for the integration of the objectives of equality into Community policies and, especially in Article 141, positive actions in the field of employment.
Employment is usually also a solution to other problems of marginalisation, economic dependence, lack of personal freedom, etc.
The fifth Community Action Plan will have to deal with the problems still existing through a budgetary provision which will allow programmes to be implemented in the most urgent areas.
The cooperation of the media is essential to achieving these objectives.
Mr President, 'Half the sky is borne on the shoulders of women' , a successful man once said.
But the heavens are not enough.
Women account for more than half the earth' s population and yet remain unheard and under-represented within most political, economic and social spheres.
That is unacceptable.
In the course of the centuries, women have demanded their rights as full citizens.
They have ranged from, in the northern hemisphere, female campaigners for the right to vote to, in the southern hemisphere, groups opposing genital mutilation.
In the course of the Beijing Conference in 1995, a common action plan was decided upon for these different groups of women.
This was a milestone in the recognition of women' s rights as being integral to human rights in general.
Just about all the governments of the world endorsed the Beijing Conference' s action plan.
The Beijing Declaration distinguishes twelve critical areas and defines views and long-term objectives which should be adopted by governments, the United Nations, national movements and private industry in order to improve the conditions under which women live.
Five years later, discrimination against women is still widespread, and violence against women is still a global phenomenon.
A glass ceiling bars women from advancement in the professions, administration and politics.
Women constitute the overwhelming majority of the one billion people who are illiterate and who live in the most extreme poverty, and decisions affecting women are still made by men.
It is high time that, in the course of the Beijing + 5 Conference in June, concrete decisions are taken which will actually result in the objectives of the Beijing Action Platform being realised.
The report we are voting on tomorrow emphasises that progress within all twelve areas is necessary if women are fully to be able to obtain their share of human rights.
A threefold strategy is needed if the Conference is not just to be another exercise in rhetoric.
First of all, the world' s governments must adopt a concrete action plan and again undertake to fulfil the Beijing objectives.
Secondly, they must pledge financial resources with a view to implementing the decisions and, thirdly, supervisory tools must be created for the purpose of monitoring implementation.
These three tools have so far been missing in implementing the Beijing Action Platform.
The fact that the world' s governments refuse to acknowledge that, from the cradle to the grave, girls and women are exploited and persecuted has, throughout the ages, been the most flagrant and far-reaching violation of human rights.
This is something which the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities wants to change.
Women should not just bear half the sky on their shoulders, but also have the right to take responsibility for decisions affecting our entire earth.
Is that not so, Commissioner?
Mr President, we are going to New York first and foremost to discuss the position of women globally.
Naturally, there is a need in the European Union, too, to improve the position of women in all walks of life, but we are now talking more about a worldwide conference.
In my opinion, a worthwhile contribution to this event would be the concept that the empowerment of women can be regarded as a strategy for the development of society as a whole.
By investing in women, we will be helping whole communities and societies on the road to development.
The evidence in support of this is very convincing; many problems can be overcome by investing, for example, in the primary health care of women.
In the eradication of poverty, supporting women, for example by 'micro loans' (negligible amounts from our point of view) has proved a very sound strategy for promoting economic activity.
Education and training are, of course, the means for women to become members of full standing in society.
I believe that if there is anything we in the European Union can contribute to this conference, it would relate to the fact that we have launched this 'gender mainstreaming' process, which entails trying to involve the gender viewpoint in all decision making.
As all those present are well aware, this is not easy - we have a tremendous amount of work to do in this respect ourselves - but we can raise the issue that the role of women needs to be reassessed when it comes to questions of war and peace, for example.
Women are, to a very great extent, the victims and those who suffer in wars now.
Would it not be a good idea to debate what could be done by women to prevent or resolve these kind of present-day conflicts?
Five years ago, at the Beijing Conference, it was stated that women' s rights are human rights.
We quite agree with the rapporteur, Mrs Smet.
We cannot accept what is happening to women in Afghanistan and we must promote the human rights of women at the New York Conference.
Mr President, where the present report is concerned, we note that there is just about one hundred per cent agreement in the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities.
I should like, however, to point out a number of things.
We note that women' s and children' s rights form an indispensable and inseparable dimension of human rights generally.
Economic independence for women is a necessity if it is to be possible to achieve true equality.
Women both within and outside the European Union are especially vulnerable to poverty.
The 1995 action platform expressly mentions the freedom to take personal responsibility in questions affecting sexuality, as well as full respect for the individual' s integrity and equality in relations between women and men and in issues affecting sexual relations and reproduction.
These are points which religious fundamentalists of different kinds now refuse to accept.
The pro-life movement and so-called family protection groups, the Vatican and Muslim fundamentalists are very active and have been so in a very well organised way during the conferences which, in the course of recent months, have been held in, among other places, New York.
They are thereby sabotaging constructive dialogue between governments and voluntary organisations.
I should like to appeal to this Parliament' s large Christian Democratic group to distance themselves from this sabotage of the United Nations' follow-up conference.
I would also urge the governments of the Member States and the delegation from the European Parliament which is to go to New York in a few weeks' time to do all they can to bring about the final document from the Beijing + 5 Conference which is, in fact, threatened by these groups.
It is a question of producing a final document containing, still intact, the twelve points in the action plan which have been approved.
In that way, we can all of us work to advance women' s rights and equality, and not to set them back.
Mr President, we support the foundation work carried out by the co-rapporteurs, we support their approach and we support the fact that sound proposals continue to be produced, but when it comes to evaluating what has been achieved over the last five years - as has been said - we have no information, in either objective or more general terms, to provide a basis for planning new actions or finding means of rectifying failed past actions.
The European Commission will once again, therefore, be conspicuous for its grand proposals and the failure to follow them up with tangible actions.
In our opinion, on this occasion, it might be appropriate for the Union to adopt an initiative, a practical initiative which is a priority objective with set time frames.
We feel that, out of the vast amount of issues to be considered, female circumcision warrants particular attention.
We would like Mrs Diamantopoulou to inform us whether the clause on relations with third countries which deals with female circumcision is seen as particularly important and, in the interests of bringing the matter to a swift conclusion, we suggest that no further Union aid should be granted to any of those countries which permit or tolerate female circumcision.
This is a major issue, a practice so common and widespread that it is featuring increasingly, even in the European daily media.
- (EL) Mr President, Commissioner, I should like, as we are discussing the action platform on equality decided in Beijing in 1995, to take this opportunity to extol the role played, and the efforts made, by the UN on this issue and to remind the House of the important role played and the contribution made by the Union in adopting a common accepted action platform at worldwide level.
In view of the forthcoming UN conference in New York, I think it is opportune that we claim a more active and effective European and worldwide policy in all sectors, a policy which will reach as far as Afghanistan and the Gulf states, where women are still in a most unfortunate position and are denied fundamental human rights.
This does not, of course, mean that we underestimate the progress achieved and the European Union' s contribution to the dynamic presence of women in all professional and scientific circles, the performance of women at all levels of education and their successes wherever equal opportunity policies and the principle of meritocracy are applied.
However, despite the undisputed progress being made, serious problems of inequality and discrimination persist and have serious repercussions on the functioning of democracy and the failure to make full use of the valuable human resource which women represent comes at a huge economic and social cost.
This is why we need to move forward with a specific vision and specific plan, with strategies and mechanisms, with a precise timetable and indicators, with quantifiable targets so that we can appraise the preceding decade and accurately evaluate the progress made at the new UN Conference in 2005.
Today we need to extend our action to eradicate discrimination on the labour market, involve women in social dialogue and deal with violence against women.
We need to guarantee a fair redistribution of responsibilities and obligations between the two sexes, both in public and private life.
In short, we need to create a new institutional and social framework which reflects the changes which have taken place and which solves the problems and contradictions which arise from the new contract with the two sexes.
The European Union and the Member States must be on the front line of this fight.
- (EL) Mr President, I should like to start by congratulating Mrs Gröner and Mrs Smet on their exceptional and remarkable report.
Apart from the 28 specific recommendations, which are particularly helpful, both for Beijing and the Commission' s fifth programme - and I should like to assure you that complete account will be taken of them - I must also highlight the fact that they are accompanied by a particularly interesting political analysis containing information and views which is an excellent tool and which I think the Member States would be well advised to reproduce.
Five years on from Beijing, we shall be assessing the past five years.
As the speakers have said, a great deal has been done and a great deal remains to be done.
And, of course, Afghanistan will have to be discussed and reported and voted on in New York because it is one of the worst disgraces of our century, one of the worst disgraces of mankind in the year 2000.
We made commitments in 1995; these commitments have been honoured up to a point and we shall be analysing them in full at the Beijing Conference.
One question which arises is whether or not we have the information needed at European Union level.
I should like to inform you that the Commission has been endeavouring for a long time now to collate information on all the Member States, to obtain answers to questionnaires sent out more than once, to obtain answers to individual issues of legislation, infrastructures, action and statistics.
We have managed, after a great deal of trouble, I must admit, to collate a set of data and we shall be publishing a paper as quickly as possible - within a fortnight I hope - containing the data for 1999.
That was the reason for the delay.
As far as the report is concerned, I should like to refer to three points which, according to the questionnaires sent in from the countries of Europe, take priority there.
The first is new changes in the information society.
The new changes, which are changing the economy, society and the work model, are throwing up both huge challenges and huge problems, especially for the weaker groups, and huge problems for women, who are less involved in the new world of technologies and who, of course, have higher unemployment rates.
We therefore need here to highlight the new objective of education, lifelong learning, retraining and special programmes to ensure that women participate in the new information society and, hence, in the labour market.
The second point concerns democracy and is linked to the information society, which is creating a new type of communication between citizens and politicians and opening up a new route, which you need to be aware of and for which you need the right vehicle.
And, of course, there is the traditional problem of the representation of women, which all the speakers have already touched on.
The third point, which also proved to be the issue to which the Member States attach importance, is the issue of violence against women, the most important problem being trafficking in women, i.e. the modern version of the slave trade.
Unfortunately, ladies and gentlemen, we must assume that the new era is bringing with it not only electronic commerce, as defined in the economy, but also electronic commerce in women and children.
These are issues which call, of course, for innovative solutions and new approaches and cannot simply be seen as the price paid for the new era.
I think that these are the basic points which need to be assessed and, more importantly, where we need to renew our commitments.
I should like to stress that Beijing will obviously give rise to negotiating problems.
I agree that there will be centres of power and organised powers which will try to reverse all this progress and review the agenda which we have agreed on.
How we organise ourselves at all levels and how our lobby operates at all levels are extremely important, because we want to prevent any review of the agenda or a return to the past, renew our commitments and create new momentum so that our commitments are implemented in the new era.
I think that, since all negotiations depend on preparation and on being fully aware of one' s own situation and the situation of those sitting on the opposite side of the table, we at the Commission and the European Parliament need to cooperate very closely with the Portuguese Presidency.
It is, I think, superfluous, to assure you that the Commission - and I personally - am at the disposal of the Portuguese Presidency so that we can prepare for these negotiations in the best possible way.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
I would, by the way, like to congratulate all Members who are still present on their perseverance and I would also like to extend warm thanks to the staff who are still present for their prolonged efforts.
(The sitting was closed at 11.53 p.m.)
Address by Mr Kuçan, President of the Republic of Slovenia
In my capacity as President of the European Parliament, it is my honour and my very great pleasure to welcome Mr Milan Kuçan, President of the Republic of Slovenia.
This is the first time that we have had the opportunity to welcome you here, Mr President, and I am very pleased to do so.
Just ten years ago, on 8 April 1990, the first free, democratic elections were held in Slovenia, a high point in the Slovene spring.
This spring contained the seeds of the confrontations and tensions of the summer of 1991, during which Slovenia won its independence.
We are all, of course, still mindful of the images of those ten dramatic days in the summer of 1991.
At that time, the courage, love of freedom and determination of the Slovene people and their President eventually prevailed over the threats of violence.
And a free and democratic Slovenia was born.
This event at the same time marked a return to the shared European values of peace and freedom, democracy and respect for human rights.
These essential values of our European civilisation form the inalienable foundation for our joint actions, present and future.
The European Union is first and foremost a Community based on values.
I am pleased to see that after several decades of Communist dictatorship, Slovenia has enshrined these values as the foundations of the State.
And now Slovenia belongs to the greater European family which we hope to bring together in the near future.
In 1996, the Association Agreement enabled us to set up a joint European Parliament/Slovene Parliament parliamentary committee.
On 10 June 1996, your country submitted its formal application for membership of the European Union.
Negotiations began in March 1998, and I am aware that they are actively continuing under the leadership of the President of the Commission, Mr Romano Prodi, and Commissioner Verheugen.
We are aware that over the last ten years, in your capacity as President of Slovenia, you have played a key role in achieving positive development in your country.
I am therefore particularly pleased to welcome you here today.
You are most welcome, Mr President, and without further ado I shall give you the floor.
- Madam President, honourable Members, I am honoured to be able to speak in this august House.
I am especially pleased that this has been made possible for me on the 50th anniversary of Robert Schuman' s appeal to France, Germany and other countries to enter into a common economic policy on steel and coal.
That was the day when the process of European integration began.
It is your and our common European day of celebration, and I offer you my sincere congratulations.
I congratulate you with trust and faith in the European idea of association.
I am confirmed in this faith by the recent very successful visit by the distinguished President of the European Parliament, Mrs Fontaine, to Slovenia.
In her address to the Slovene Parliament, Mrs Fontaine expressed her clear commitment to furthering the project of a united Europe, saying: "It is important that we support the will to strengthen the special features of each of our countries.
We must therefore deepen the foundations of the European Union and prepare it for enlargement in such a way that it will be able tomorrow to maintain all its ability to function in response to challenges both internal and external.
This will be possible only on condition that we maintain the existing balance between the small and large countries, and continue on the path towards a Europe of citizens" .
This idea seems to me particularly important, for it emphasises coexistence.
Coexistence is the only real alternative for the future of humankind; including that of Europe.
Yet the question is: what will coexistence be founded upon?
My own firm conviction is that it should be founded, first and foremost, upon the experience we have brought with us and which has engendered the values that we have articulated as the quintessence of European democracy and declared as the principles binding together the very fabric of the new Europe.
The experience we carry into the third millennium is an experience of the rise and fall of colonial powers and ideological, political and social totalitarianism.
Set in counterpart to this, yet an integral part of our experience, is the ultimate establishment of the rule of law and human rights, the freedom of individuals and nations, democracy as the criterion of political power, social justice and stability as the goals to which we must constantly aspire.
Alongside experience, our coexistence should be founded upon a set of laws that will determine human life on the threshold of the third millennium and in which these values will be implemented and confirmed.
These are the laws of the global community.
For the moment, the global community seems limited to markets, economies and information and communication technology.
Politics is lagging behind this trend.
Yet the solid foundations of coexistence in the world demand globalised politics, which will be capable of establishing social coherence which will balance the effects of capital which has already been globalised.
Globalised politics presupposes that national politics and interests founded on the sovereignty of the nation state should be bound to the global politics of common responsibility.
This would be a kind of world 'domestic politics' , to which all countries would be bound.
It would be founded in part on the following elements: on the global spread of political and economic democracy, on binding standards of individual and collective human rights, on dialogue between different cultures, religions and civilisations, on opposition to nationalism and xenophobia, on a new balance between the economically developed and developing parts of the world, on the globalisation of learning, knowledge, research and information, on developing international and inter-regional cooperation, on constructing a social order based on the model of social justice and solidarity, on common security and defence and on the fight against organised crime.
With such politics we might seek a way of ensuring that the former ideological, political and military confrontations of the Cold War are not replaced by clashes of culture, religion and civilisation.
If we are to move towards worldwide political responsibility, we should be moving all the sooner to a policy of common responsibility in Europe; in the very Europe that right now is consolidating the foundations of coexistence for the future.
This is being heralded by common European policies - not only monetary, but also foreign, defence and security policies - the European human rights charter, and perhaps a future European constitution.
It is also heralded by the efforts to set up crisis management, which would prevent external or internal crises of countries in the region spilling over into armed conflict and aggression that might threaten the common peace, security and prosperity.
A global policy of common responsibility requires not only that we prevent the actions of others that harm the community, but also, and most importantly, that we refrain from such actions.
In the open, multipolar world where Eurocentrism is no more, Europe can be one of the standard-bearers of civilised development only if it is internally globalised, only if all of its parts are integrated within it, and if no one is excluded from the common future or marginalised.
In the ruins of the Berlin Wall, however, traces of new divisions are appearing in Europe.
In real life, several Europes exist.
Here we have the countries of the European Union and members of Nato, which are developing on the basis of the long European democratic tradition, on respect for human rights and the prospects of a new economic upswing, complete with a common European currency.
This grouping also includes some small countries that have experienced major developments within the EU and have preserved their special features.
The second Europe is one of countries that are negotiating with the European Union: countries, therefore, that are in the first or second-class waiting rooms for the European train.
The third Europe is made up of the countries of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe (Ukraine, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Albania, Macedonia and Moldova), which have not yet reached the station, although they wish to do so.
Some of them will not get there without help.
There also exists a group of countries that, for the moment, do not wish to join the EU.
They would prefer to toy with the project of a new ideological division of Europe.
We may call this the fourth Europe.
Serbia, poised to tip the scales of stability in South-Eastern Europe, has been thrust into that fourth Europe by its aggressive national political elite, which has, from time to time, been supported by the nationalist ambitions of political elites from other Balkan nations.
As it decides on the lasting foundations of peace and also, following the horrors of war in the Balkans, on the future of Kosovo and Montenegro, European unity again faces a great test.
The possibility of bloody military clashes is still real.
This unity will be all the more vital when Serbia needs to be helped in the process of democratic change, when it will be faced with the truth and with its own responsibility.
This change will open up the field of democratic, plural politics and efforts to bring the European value system back into the consciousness of the Serbian people.
It will then be necessary for Serbia - and for other Balkan countries, too - to be presented with the challenging but realistic prospect of entry into European integration; and presented to each country on the same conditions, without special favours, but for this reason requiring all the more assistance.
None of these 'Europes' is immune from political or cultural diversions, which might distort their democratic image, not even the first Europe.
I have in mind the crude forms of xenophobia and hatred of foreigners, resistance to free movement of labour, and anti-Semitism, all of which are part of today' s political populism.
This puts pressure on fundamental values, and threatens coexistence and our common future.
Insensitivity to these phenomena would create new barriers between us.
We are reminded of this by the experience we carry with us.
I believe that the reservations of certain European countries towards the position of the Austrian Freedom Party are motivated by this experience and that this response will be consistent, irrespective of who might be affected by it.
Alongside all the old divisions, new ones are emerging, and they are even more radically afflicting Europe, for the information society of today' s world is presenting challenges to every facet of our lives.
There are ever increasing signs of the emergence of two classes in society.
The world is beginning to divide in a new way.
On the one hand, there are the unemployed and those who, through inadequate knowledge, have no access to modern information technology.
They are threatened with social exclusion, stagnation and marginalisation.
On the other hand, there are those who have the necessary education and are therefore guaranteed a future.
This is a new phenomenon, which was identified recently at the EU Conference in Lisbon on social cohesion.
It is clear that, today, everyone in Europe is faced with the same problems, and we are all responding to them.
Of course, we are not responding in entirely the same way.
Nevertheless, it is essential that in seeking answers we all proceed from the same value system.
The common cornerstones of values for coexistence have been established.
Now everyone must be afforded the chance to live in accordance with those values.
Decisive importance in this may probably be ascribed to the new feeling of commitment to Europe, which I understand as a Europe-wide system of human ties, cooperation, solidarity, respect and other values.
This does not simply involve the free flow of ideas, labour, goods and capital, but also values such as respect for diversity, tolerance, equality before the law of the 'citizens of Europe' , irrespective of their national, ethnic and cultural affiliation or outlook.
This will enable a high level of identification with the same values across Europe, which, in turn, may represent the basic connective tissue of Europe.
This frame of mind would be the best guarantee that intolerance and enmity remain a marginal phenomenon.
At the same time, it would mean that in no European country could those in power dare, in the name of sovereignty or the principle of non-interference in internal affairs, to systematically stifle or limit either individual or collective human rights.
Such an event would demand common action, without wavering or compromise.
The NATO intervention in Kosovo is perhaps the first step in this direction.
The value of fundamental human rights was placed above the value of classic state sovereignty.
The systematic mass violation of human rights should henceforth not simply be the internal affair of an individual country.
It is becoming a subject of responsibility for the international community.
Whether this marks the beginning of a new chapter in international relations and international law, only time will tell.
Europe, and in particular the EU, should not be in two minds about this.
The real path of globalisation for Europe is the enlargement of the European Union to cover all European countries.
This is a challenging enterprise, for a period of enlargement of the European Union is now beginning to include countries that have a different political 'pedigree' from the current members.
Now it is the turn of countries that, in the great division of the world, belonged to the former ideological East of Europe.
It is the turn of countries that, because of this, have lagged behind in their economic development.
Yet the fact is that only this enlargement will mean the actual integration and globalisation of Europe, and will mean for the European East and West an end to the past and for both the beginning of a global European future.
For those countries, like Slovenia, that were forcibly removed by the bloc system to a different culture, inclusion in European integration would also represent proof that they had finally returned to their western civilisation.
In any case, we should not forget that these countries, including Slovenia, have shown that in a relatively short time they have been able to adopt the rules that have taken a relatively long time to become established in the EU and in the European West.
The great efforts invested in reforms may serve as a guarantee that EU enlargement will be beneficial, both for the current members and for those that wish to become members.
Holding back this enlargement would indicate that Europe has still not buried the past, that it has not learned sufficiently from history, and that globalisation is not yet its internal requirement.
It would also indicate that Europe is abandoning its influence and presence in the world.
Alongside this new qualitative step forward, doubts are emerging among the members of the EU.
They are moving from the entirely known to the not entirely known.
The decision on enlargement carries with it entirely new risks; and there must be a degree of understanding for the dilemma facing the EU.
I am thinking primarily of the implementation of serious internal, institutional and substantive reforms in the EU, of its readiness to accept new members and of postponement of the date of enlargement.
Could it be perhaps that once again the special interests of individual Member States are rising to the surface?
Does changing the view on successive acceptance of new countries, as soon as they are ready to be accepted, into a view on group acceptance of candidates in a first and second round, not mean a renewed shifting of enlargement towards the end of this first decade?
Dilemmas, doubts and uncertainties are also emerging among the candidate countries.
The impression is growing of a 'moving target' , which is shifting and dampening the enthusiasm of the better prepared candidates with the feeling that they will have to wait for the less-prepared candidates.
Clarity and transparency of these views would, of course, have an encouraging effect, and it would be especially useful if everyone could stop trying to offer each other excuses.
The EU should not use the problems among the candidate countries as an excuse to delay its own reforms, while the candidate countries should not use the difficulties of EU internal reforms as an excuse for putting off the reforms they need for full membership.
Such excuses would slow down the prospects of the rise of the future Europe, and making enlargement conditional upon bilateral demands and the interests of individual countries would have no less an effect.
This includes conditions that go far back into history and attempt to revise it, particularly the history of the Second World War.
Such demands are appearing from the position of power held by those that are in the European Union, against the powerlessness of those that are only just exercising the right to acceptance into the European Union.
At this point I would like to recall my address of November 1995 to the Committee on Foreign Policy, Security and Defence of your Parliament in its previous composition.
At that time, I argued against the discriminatory treatment of Slovenia, for the then Italian Government was preventing us, through its power of veto, from signing the association agreement, and was setting as a condition the resolving of what were for Italy issues in dispute deriving from the border treaties between Italy and the former Yugoslavia.
With its back to the wall, Slovenia signed the so-called 'Spanish compromise' .
I do not mention this episode to resurrect memories, but rather because in the current negotiations there have also appeared tendencies to raise purportedly justified interests in relation to Slovenia to the level of an EU demand.
I am thinking of the demand for restitution of property to those from whom it was appropriated following the Second World War as part of the punishing of collaboration with the Nazi and Fascist occupation regime.
In the then Yugoslavia, Slovenia did nothing that was not done in the spirit of the Potsdam resolutions by the Allies, with whom the Slovenes fought together against Fascism and Nazism.
This time, Slovenia does not wish to accept this kind of imposition of conditions, and expects understanding and sympathy from the European Union.
I believe that individual bilateral issues should not, in any event, be allowed to become a reason for placing conditions on acceptance as a full member of the EU; nor should they be allowed to gain the pragmatic support of EU members, for the sake of clear and open foundations in European integration and in its future.
Slovenia is a small nation.
For many centuries we lived in a multinational political community, in the Austro-Hungarian Empire and in two Yugoslavias.
We felt all the anguish of non-respect for national identity, of pressures towards our national identity being wiped out and of the fatal consequences of inequality in society and before the law.
The worst thing of all was the aggression during the time of the Nazi and Fascist occupation.
Our right to existence as a nation was taken away.
For this reason we value highly the efforts of those carrying forward the project of a common European home, founded on the concept of open autonomy of national and other entities of society.
Life in diversity is the key to success for European association, and Slovenia has tied its future to this.
Our historical experiences and the future of our citizens dictate that we cannot reconcile ourselves either to voluntary or forced isolation from Euro-Atlantic institutions.
Slovenia wishes to be a part of them, and is prepared to contribute what it can to the common life of European nations, but is not prepared to pay an inequitable price for it.
Slovenia will be ready for accession by the end of 2002, and believes that it will then be welcome in the club of EU Member States.
We are also pleased that, in Helsinki, the Member States of the EU committed themselves to enlargement by the same date for those candidate countries best prepared.
In order for the current goals to be achieved, negotiations should be concluded next year.
We are convinced that the current progress in negotiations should make this possible.
I would like finally to stress that I do not see globalisation and European integration as unification.
The positive effects of these processes are interdependent on the simultaneously establishing freedom of individuation and fragmentation.
This is not just the freedom and autonomy of the individual, but also the freedom of social groups to express ethnic, cultural, religious, political and spiritual affiliations and convictions.
These freedoms have a special meaning in people' s lives, and through them people express their bond with specific values.
Only respect for such freedoms can be the foundation of European coexistence.
This involves establishing the principle of 'unity in diversity' .
The alternative is clear.
If we do not succeed in finding in this new millennium the foundations of coexistence, which cannot simply be a negation of the past, but also an active acceptance of the future, including the formulation of a universal European policy of common responsibility in an open European Union, Europe will direct its destiny back into the past instead of into the future.
In the first decade of the new century and millennium, democratic Europe is also facing new trials.
My firm conviction is that united Europeans could be more than a match for these trials.
Thank you, Mr President, for addressing us in forceful, committed and frank terms.
You mentioned the fiftieth anniversary of the declaration by Robert Schuman, which Parliament has indeed celebrated formally.
I noticed, Mr President, that you spoke of "our common day of celebration."
I must tell you, we particularly appreciated this.
Thank you, too, for mentioning the visit I made to Ljubljana a few weeks ago.
This was part of the ninth meeting of the Presidents of the European Parliament and the presidents of candidate countries, a tradition initiated several years ago by my predecessors, Enrique Barón Crespo, Klaus Hänsch and José Maria Gil Robles.
During this visit, I was most honoured to be given the opportunity to address the Chamber of the Slovene Parliament and I must say that, together with Mr Podestá, the Vice-President responsible for enlargement, Mr Brok, chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, and Mr Ebner, president of the delegation, we were very impressed by the considerable progress achieved by your country on the path to accession.
Let me, finally, tell you that Parliament would, I feel, very broadly agree with the views you have expressed.
In the goals you mentioned, you spoke of wishing to enter a house that was solid, strong and united, and I think I am safe in saying that that is the wish of the majority in this House.
You also mentioned unity in diversity.
I should like to point out, in that connection, that, a few weeks ago, 80 000 young people from the countries of the European Union took part in a competition to find a motto for Europe, and the one which was adopted in the end by the grand jury was "Unity in diversity" .
I have to confess that it is not very snappy, but it is more interesting than it seems because it does appear to respond to a very deep-seated feeling shared by many of the citizens of our countries.
Finally, Mr President, you mentioned the values you hold dear, and which form the basis of European integration.
You also mentioned the hope that we would not lose sight of social solidarity in the context of globalisation.
Once again, I think your views are in total accord with the objectives of the European Parliament.
I wish you and also the Slovene authorities participating in the negotiations the very best of luck.
We sincerely hope that these negotiations will come to a successful conclusion within the expected time limits.
We wish you good luck, Mr President, and we thank you once again for coming here today and addressing us.
(The formal sitting was closed at 12.30 p.m.)