# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
United Nations
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
General Assembly
Official Records Sixtieth Session Supplement No. 12 (A/60/12)
General Assembly Official Records Sixtieth Session Supplement No. 12 (A/60/12)
United Nations • New York, 2005
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Note
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
24 August 2005
Contents
Overview
During the 18 months prior to mid-2005, significant numbers of refugees were able to return to their countries of origin.
The year 2004 was a notable “year of return” in Africa, following marked progress in resolving some of the world's longest running refugee situations.
Mass returns also continued to Afghanistan as another million persons went home, mainly from the neighbouring Islamic Republics of Iran and Pakistan.
However, continuing conflict and human rights abuses around the world prompted new or renewed flight in other areas.
“Janjaweed” militia attacks on civilian populations in the Darfur region of Sudan caused some 200,000 persons to take refuge in Chad and many hundreds of thousands more to become internally displaced in Sudan itself.
The particularly challenging nature of this situation has prompted the international community to examine more closely how to manage complex displacement emergencies through a collaborative response.
UNHCR supports the proposals to strengthen the United Nations made by the Secretary-General in his report “In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all” and is committed to United Nations reform including in the functioning of the humanitarian response system.
The Office has been closely engaged in the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) process that is seeking to strengthen sectoral capacity gaps in humanitarian response, with particular focus on internally displaced persons.
In 2004, the challenges of ensuring access to protection, making major voluntary repatriation movements sustainable and promoting the resolution of protracted refugee situations persisted.
Minimum survival needs of refugees were not always met; nor were refugees necessarily safe in countries of asylum.
In other parts of the world, the continuing growth of irregular migratory trends and the fear of international terrorism have kept asylum in the headlines as a highly charged political issue.
The total population of concern to UNHCR at the end of 2004 was 19.2 million, as presented in Table 2 - Asylum-seekers, refugees and others of concern to UNHCR (end 2004).
This is higher than the provisional figure provided in the Office's Global Report 2004 as statistical data used for the Global Report is estimated on figures available for the beginning of the reporting period in question.
This report provides an account of activities undertaken by UNHCR between January 2004 and mid-2005.
It describes major developments and challenges with respect to international protection, protection and assistance activities, and the search for durable solutions for refugees and other persons of concern to the Office worldwide.
It also covers a number of management and oversight issues, and reviews partnerships and coordination within and beyond the United Nations system.
More detailed information on regional and country activities and global priorities may be found in UNHCR's Global Report 2004 and Global Appeal 2005, and in the various reports presented to UNHCR's governance body, the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme and its Standing Committee.
All of these reports are available on the Office's website: http://www.unhcr.ch.
International protection
During the reporting period, concerns about global terrorism and the confusion between migration and asylum issues increased pressure on the international protection regime and the right of refugees to seek asylum.
Deliberately populist media efforts have succeeded in mischaracterizing security problems as well as the victims of insecurityy.
UNHCR is working in this challenging context to preserve access to asylum for those who seek it based on a well-founded fear of persecution.
The mainstreaming of the six goals and related objectives of the Agenda for Protection during the reporting period reinforced links between the Office's Department of International Protection and UNHCR's operations.
It also helped give focus to protection interventions.
In 2004 the Executive Committee adopted two thematic conclusions pursuant to the Agenda, in addition to the General Conclusion on International Protection.
One provided direction on international cooperation and burden and responsibility sharing in mass influx situations while the second provided recommendations regarding legal safety issues in the context of voluntary repatriation of refugees.
The Office continued to report periodically to the Executive Committee on progress achieved in implementing the Agenda and in ensuring it continues to serve as a practical tool for better protection.
Physical security of refugees remained a central concern during the reporting period.
In particular, the rape of refugee women as a weapon of conflict and the abduction and humiliation of refugee children continued to be routine features of displacement situations.
Instances of refoulement were also witnessed, some worryingly pursuant to arrangements specifically reached between asylum host States and the countries of origin to attempt to legitimate the illegitimate.
While the global number of refugees has been dropping, millions of persons remain in need of international protection.
Detailed information on international protection developments can be found in the 2005 Note on International Protection.
The following paragraphs give a brief overview of challenges encountered and measures undertaken by UNHCR in relation to these developments, broadly following the six goals of the Agenda for Protection.
Strengthening implementation of the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol
During the reporting period, UNHCR continued to consult with States and promote the value of accession the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (the 1951 Convention) and its 1967 Protocol, and their usefulness as primary instruments of international refugee protection, including to assist States to identify refugees when drafting legislation on the treatment of aliens.
While some States developed positive legislation, the general trend was more restrictive, with legislative amendments being viewed through a restrictive migration or counter-terrorism lens.
The Office continued to advocate for the effective implementation of international and national refugee law and to intervene where necessary to ensure that people seeking international protection gained access to asylum procedures and that they were issued with individual documentation, properly registered and adequately received.
Where UNHCR was involved in refugee status determination (RSD), the challenge remained to transfer responsibility for RSD to national refugee protection systems in a timely manner.
The Office also intensified efforts to strengthen the knowledge and capacity of UNHCR staff and partners.
In November 2004, the 20th Anniversary of the Cartagena Declaration on Refugees was commemorated by a meeting in Mexico City at which 18 Latin and Central American States reaffirmed their commitment to the Declaration and approved a plan of action to improve refugee protection in the region.
The 50th Anniversary of the 1954 Convention relating the Status of Stateless Persons in 2004 provided an opportunity for UNHCR to promote accession to both this treaty and to the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, neither of which has yet been ratified by a significant number of States.
The first global survey on steps taken by United Nations member States to reduce statelessness and to meet the protection needs of stateless persons was conducted pursuant to the Agenda for Protection, and the final report submitted with a comprehensive set of recommendations in 2004.
Protecting refugees within broader migration movements
Migration movements were increasingly recognized as a transboundary issue requiring multilateral and international cooperative action.
Throughout the reporting period, UNHCR closely followed developments in migration-related fora in order to ensure that the protection needs of the forcibly displaced and the protection responsibilities these place on States, UNHCR and other organizations were fully taken into account.
These issues came to the forefront in the Mediterranean context, where the Office has expressed its concern about the fate of migrants arriving from Africa and the Middle East in southern Europe.
UNHCR continues to stress that even when reception systems may be strained by a large number of arrivals, the maintenance of proper procedures is vital to ensure the assessment of persons with legitimate protection concerns.
These situations require political commitment and UNHCR advocates the development of multilateral approaches such as the Hague Programme within the European Union.
There were also encouraging trends, including notably in Malaysia and in Ecuador, where migration control developments were accompanied by more refugee-friendly policies.
C. Sharing burdens and responsibilities more equitably and building capacities to receive and protect refugees
The Agenda's goal of sharing burdens and responsibilities more equitably was reinforced by the Secretary-General's report “In larger freedom” which recognized “the world of interconnected threats and challenges” and cautioned that the “world must advance the causes of security, development and human rights together.” Responses to forced displacement, frequently caused by violations of these fundamental concerns, can “only be advanced by broad, deep and sustained global cooperation among States”.
UNHCR further strengthened its collaboration with other United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) during the reporting period, notably with the World Food Programme (WFP) in the area of food assistance and the International Labour Organization (ILO) to promote sustainable livelihoods and self-reliance.
In response to the Agenda's call for increased capacity building, particularly in refugee-receiving countries, the Office has developed a comprehensive framework for assessing protection capacity needs and facilitated a consultative process in four African countries to develop concrete activities to address the gaps identified.
This methodology is being rolled out in other regions.
The capacity-building function of UNHCR has also incorporated partnerships at many different levels with a variety of partners, at the regional and national levels.
In addition to advocacy for the rights of refugees, UNHCR's efforts included helping develop programmes to provide advice and legal aid centres for refugees and involving NGOs in combating problems such as sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV).
On an exceptional basis, UNHCR provided time-limited humanitarian assistance in Sri Lanka and Indonesia in coordination with United Nations Country Teams in response to the December 2004 tsunami and a request by the Secretary-General.
Addressing security-related concerns more effectively
Security issues continue to be a primary concern for refugees and for those involved in their protection including UNHCR staff, other humanitarian personnel -especially NGO staff - and States seeking to deliver protection and assistance.
During the reporting period, lack of security was frequently a factor prompting flight in situations from Darfur to Colombia and many camps remained vulnerable to infiltration and/or pillage by rebel forces.
Outside camps, displaced women, children and men too often faced hostility and physical danger from host communities, for instance as a result of ethnic or other tensions, or because of competition for local resources.
UNHCR responded by relocating camps away from volatile border situations, as was the case with Sudanese refugees in Chad.
In other situations, UNHCR negotiated a “security package” with authorities in order to stabilize the area, as in Sierra Leone.
Collaboration with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) was strengthened, especially in areas where DPKO had a clear mandate to protect refugees, such as in Liberia and Burundi (see also paragraph 60).
E. Redoubling the search for durable solutions
A key focus of the search for durable solutions during the reporting period was on comprehensive approaches to situations of sometimes prolonged displacement.
In 2004, UNHCR continued to promote the Framework for Durable Solutions.
Where large-scale voluntary repatriation was either planned or already under way, there was a clear need to ensure that such returns took place not only in safety and dignity but also on a sustainable basis.
Essential to the sustainability of return were ongoing programmes of repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and reconstruction (the “4Rs”).
In addition to the existing programmes in Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Burundi and Liberia, new programmes include large return situations in Angola, Somalia (“Somaliland”) and southern Sudan, as well as on a smaller scale in Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Gabon.
The Development Assistance for Refugees (DAR) strategy advocates for additional development assistance for countries hosting refugees, and promotes the potential of refugees as contributors to local community development while enabling them to acquire a measure of self-reliance pending the realization of an appropriate durable solution.
DAR approaches are currently being applied in Zambia and Uganda.
A third strategy of Development through Local Integration (DLI) is based on providing financial support which recognizes the needs of the entire community while refugees become self-reliant and/or integrate locally.
This is being pursued on a small scale for Somali Bantu refugees in Chogo settlement in the United Republic of Tanzania.
Meeting the protection needs of refugee women and refugee children
Efforts to enhance the protection of refugee women, men, girls and boys were strengthened during the reporting period through an age, gender and diversity mainstreaming pilot project, launched in February 2004 and implemented in 16 countries.
Teams consulted with groups of displaced adults and children, thereby strengthening the participatory assessment of their needs and enhancing awareness of their concerns.
Initiatives to tackle SGBV and violence against women and children included the distribution of educational materials and videos explaining the rights of refugees, the establishment of women's centres in refugee camps worldwide, and projects aimed at providing increased recreational activities for children.
Convention Plus
The Convention Plus initiative has continued to engage with States and other partners of UNHCR to build stronger commitments to resolve refugee situations through enhanced responsibility and burden sharing.
Strategies for rendering international cooperation more robust and effective included the drawing up of a Framework of Understandings on Resettlement by participating States in June 2004, as well as ongoing discussions on irregular secondary movement of asylum-seekers and refugees, and on targeting development assistance to achieve durable solutions to refugee problems.
Future efforts will focus on situation-specific approaches, notably for protracted refugee situations.
Beyond the political realities that impinge on durable solutions in many situations, progress also hinges on the way UNHCR, States and relevant partners cooperate in engineering them and making them sustainable.
This situation-specific approach is already evident in a number of refugee operations being pursued by UNHCR.
For instance, in Afghanistan, a more comprehensive policy framework is being developed within which displacement may be managed as a wider migration and poverty-eradication issue.
The Convention Plus initiative has also stimulated efforts to develop a Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) for Somali refugees, which is intended to be regional in scope and builds on opportunities to consolidate voluntary repatriation and reintegration activities for the more than 1 million refugees who have returned primarily to the northern parts of the country, and to prepare for voluntary repatriation to south and central Somalia, as well as other potential solutions by working with refugees in their countries of asylum.
Another innovative initiative supported by Convention Plus is the Strengthening Protection Capacity Project (SPCP), which in addition to the development of a comprehensive methodology for assessing gaps in protection capacity, has generated multilateral approaches to strengthening the protection capacity of host countries (see also paragraph 18).
The High Commissioner's Forum continued to provide a mechanism to engage a broad spectrum of States and humanitarian actors in a dialogue on issues affecting refugees.
In addition to reviewing progress on each of the three strands of Convention Plus, in October 2004 the Forum considered a methodology to make comprehensive approaches to resolving refugee problems more systematic which is being incorporated into UNHCR's annual reporting process.
Reconvening in May 2005, the Forum deliberated on a Statement of Good Practice on Targeting Development Assistance for Durable Solutions to Forced Displacement as well as ways in which refugees and returnees can contribute to achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
These discussions served to enhance understandings of the positive contributions that refugees can make to the communities in which they live.
Operations and global priorities
This section of the report provides an overview of the main operational challenges that UNHCR has faced in the reporting period, and describes a number of key strategic responses to these challenges, notably the Office's global priorities.
It does not attempt to elaborate on details of the different operational situations and responses, many of which are referred to in other chapters of this report and in a much more comprehensive way in the Global Report 2004.
New refugee outflows
During 2004, more than 232,000 refugees fled their country as part of a number of mass outflows which, in some cases, created new large-scale emergencies.
Eleven asylum countries reported more than 1,000 prima facie refugee arrivals.
The main refugee outflows concerned Sudanese refugees fleeing to Chad (130,000), to Uganda (14,000) and to Kenya (2,300).
New outflows of refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo were also reported into Burundi (20,700), Rwanda (11,300), Zambia (4,300) and Uganda (1,600).
There were significant new movements of refugees from Somalia into Yemen (16,600) and into Kenya (2,400); from Côte d'Ivoire into Liberia (5,500); and from Iraq into Syria, Lebanon and Jordan.
One of the most demanding of UNHCR's operations in the past year has been the complex humanitarian situation in Sudan's Darfur region.
The 2004 figure of 130,000 persons who sought refuge in Chad swelled to over 200,000 by mid-2005.
The Office and fellow humanitarian agencies have had to deal with huge challenges ranging from logistical problems in getting access due to the inhospitable terrain; protecting and moving refugees at risk of renewed attacks further away from vulnerable border areas; meeting basic needs and standards of assistance; resolving disputes between refugees and local residents over scarce resources; putting in place measures for the prevention of SGBV and responding to the needs of those affected by SGBV.
Even registration exercises have given rise in recent months to conflictual situations, putting staff and other humanitarian workers' safety at risk and necessitating the evacuation of staff.
Internally displaced persons
UNHCR is fully committed to the inter-agency collaborative approach to situations of internal displacement and to doing whatever possible, within its means and without detriment to its core mandate, to strengthen this approach.
As described elsewhere in this report, the Office has been reviewing possibilities for engaging more actively in IDP protection and assistance needs through participation in the inter-agency process and ongoing consultations within the IASC.
In Sudan, in October 2004 the Secretary-General requested UNHCR to take responsibility for the protection and voluntary return of IDPs to their villages of origin in West Darfur.
UNHCR chairs the West Darfur Protection Working Group and fields assessment and monitoring missions to ascertain the protection needs of IDPs and support them with targeted assistance.
In collaboration with several NGOs, the Office has set up measures for prevention and response to SGBV in IDP camps and villages of origin, including through the establishment of women's centres and delivery of protection training for other humanitarian workers.
In other areas of Darfur, UNHCR advises and supports United Nations agencies and NGOs on protection issues.
To consolidate protection interventions, quick-impact community-based reintegration projects are being implemented together with the Government of Sudan and NGO partners, within the framework of the “4Rs” approach.
These efforts have helped to bring increased protection and physical security to communities and IDPs, but they cannot substitute for a political settlement.
Another IDP situation of concern to the Office in 2004 was in Colombia, where the humanitarian crisis continued to cause significant new internal displacement (240,000).
According to the Government the estimated number of IDPs in Colombia was above 2 million by the end of 2004.
In Liberia UNHCR, in close collaboration with other humanitarian actors, assisted some 195,000 IDPs to return to their places of origin.
Some 123,000 more returned spontaneously.
C. Voluntary repatriation
During 2004, an estimated 1.5 million refugees repatriated voluntarily to their countries of origin.
The largest number of refugees repatriated to Afghanistan from the Islamic Republic of Iran (515,000) and from Pakistan (424,500).
Large-scale refugee returns also took place to Iraq (194,000), mainly from the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Some 90,000 refugees returned to Burundi mainly from the United Republic of Tanzania, and over 80,000 Angolans returned from Zambia (46,500) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (34,000).
Other significant voluntary movements concerned refugees returning to Liberia (56,900), Sierra Leone (26,300), Somalia (18,100), Rwanda (14,100), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (13,800), and Sri Lanka (10,000).
Local integration and naturalization
Naturalization is available to refugees and stateless persons in some asylum countries only and is not always reported.
In 2004, UNHCR was informed about significant numbers of refugees being granted citizenship in the Russian Federation (8,400), Armenia (4,150), Mexico (1,430), Kyrgyzstan (1,060), Ukraine (250) and Belize (130).
Some 125,000 former East Timorese refugees elected to be and were registered as Indonesian citizens.
E. Resettlement
During 2004 almost 30,000 refugees were resettled under UNHCR auspices.
The main beneficiaries included refugees from Liberia (5,610), Sudan (5,050), Somalia (4,870), Afghanistan (2,710), the Islamic Republic of Iran (2,190), Myanmar (1,900), Ethiopia (1,490) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1,290).
First-asylum countries with the largest numbers of refugees departing for resettlement were Kenya (5,640), Côte d'Ivoire (4,480), Egypt (4,110), Turkey (2,290) and Thailand (1,594).
In addition some 9,100 others of concern to the Office were resettled with UNHCR's assistance.
F. Stateless persons
UNHCR, tasked by the United Nations General Assembly through various resolutions to contribute to the reduction of statelessness and further protect stateless persons and to inform the international community regularly on the magnitude of the problem of statelessness, presented a progress report on its activities in the field of statelessness to the 33rd meeting of ExCom's Standing Committee in June 2005.
The report concludes that despite positive developments, millions of persons remain stateless throughout the world and proposes some directions for UNHCR and other relevant organizations to pursue with regard to the prevention and reduction of statelessness and the protection of stateless persons.
UNHCR is aware of 42 countries with stateless persons in this category at the end of 2004.
For the 30 countries where data was available at the end of last year, the total number of stateless persons was estimated to be 1.5 million.
Protracted situations
In 2004, some two-thirds of the global refugee population remained “in limbo” in protracted situations.
Two such cases in South Asia - Myanmar refugees in Bangladesh and Bhutanese refugees in Nepal - illustrated some of the serious challenges posed for UNHCR and other humanitarian partners in attempting to assist the populations and host governments concerned.
In the camps, frustration and resentment were rife, leading to clashes between refugees and authorities and violence, including SGBV.
Security in these camps deteriorated on several occasions, putting the lives of both refugees and humanitarian staff at risk and disrupting staff access and programme delivery.
The plight of the Saharawi refugees in camps in Tindouf in Algeria who have been separated from their communities of origin in Western Sahara for decades represents another example of an ongoing protracted situation.
With little hope of a political solution in sight, UNHCR and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara have promoted a series of humanitarian confidence-building measures involving all parties.
The first phase of these measures began in 2004 and included exchanges of family visits and a telephone service between the separated populations.
All parties have in principle indicated their willingness to continue this programme in 2005.
The final solution to these blocked situations can only come at a political level, and UNHCR continues to call upon the Governments concerned to focus attention and efforts on resolving them.
In the meantime, recent efforts to facilitate durable solutions in some situations, and to uphold protection and assistance measures in others, have focused on improving the Office's capacity to gather solid data through the Project Profile registration system; mainstreaming the use of standards and indicators and ensuring proper consideration of the specific needs of women, children and the elderly; and encouraging the authorities in the hosting countries concerned to support a shift towards self-reliance measures and thus reduce refugees' dependence on assistance.
H. Global priorities and responses to operational challenges
Identifying and measuring progress on global priorities and strategic objectives
Awareness of the need to address and measure progress on many issues on a global basis has prompted the development in recent years of a set of global strategic objectives which are reviewed and adjusted annually.
UNHCR's Global Objectives and Indicators of Progress for 2004 were based on the strategic goals established by the High Commissioner for the year.
The objectives represented a synthesis of specific objectives from various sources, including the Agenda for Protection, UNHCR's Country Operations Plans, Global Programmes and the MDGs, and are described in UNHCR's Global Appeal for 2004.
In December 2004, the High Commissioner issued Global Strategic Objectives for a two-year period (2006-2007) to all managers as the basis for the planning process for establishing regional and headquarters priorities for 2006.
In order to measure efforts to mainstream UNHCR's key policy priorities, notably on refugee women, refugee children, older refugees, education, environmental management and HIV/AIDS, and more broadly to have a sound empirical base for assessing the quality of UNHCR's protection and assistance activities, guidelines on the use of a set of core standards and indicators were introduced at the beginning of 2004, followed by regional training for field staff and workshops for headquarters staff later in the year.
This tool is also important for measuring progress in relation to the impact of the MDGs on the lives of refugees.
This practical guide is being updated and adjusted in 2005 to reflect initial experiences in the use and monitoring of these standards and indicators, as well as broadening its focus beyond refugee camps to include urban refugees and returnees.
In the second half of 2004, a study on progress to date in UNHCR's efforts to introduce results-based management (RBM) laid foundations for the development of a more comprehensive results-based approach to managing UNHCR's operations.
One key challenge will be to develop a structured, automated system to capture and manage relevant information in support of the evolving RBM process.
Registration
Another key strategic response to both protection and operational challenges has been the global roll-out of standardized registration process and a new database application under Project Profile (which provides data disaggregated by age, sex and other diversity factors).
This is aimed at enhancing UNHCR's knowledge about, and protection response for, persons of concern and ensuring a sound demographic basis for UNHCR's programmes.
The results have been very positive.
Project Profile teams have introduced new registration tools and trained staff in 30 country operations, with another 20 operations targeted for implementation during the rest of 2005.
The new system now contains individual registration records for an estimated two million refugees and other persons of concern.
Focus is also being given to the need to expand the issuance of individual documentation, and further development of the new proGres registration software will include a fingerprint biometrics facility which will help detect and prevent multiple registration in selected locations.
Refugee women, refugee children, community development and education
In the past year, the Office has pursued the introduction of a major pilot project on age, gender and diversity mainstreaming in 16 different countries through the establishment of multifunctional teams and country-level work plans.
This is designed to promote gender equality and the rights of all refugees of all ages through the meaningful participation of all refugees, strengthening institutional capacities, and supporting a rights and community-based approach to working with refugees.
Initial results of this project show that it has boosted awareness and created greater interaction between UNHCR staff and refugee men and women of all ages, generating better knowledge of refugee concerns and enabling the identification of protection risks and gaps by age and gender.
UNHCR's Guidelines on Prevention and Response to SGBV in refugee and refugee-like settings are supplemented by regular capacity-building sessions for UNHCR and implementing partner staff.
In mid-2004, a joint UNHCR-WFP study of effective operational practices in relation to women's control of food in the household and participation in food distribution reaffirmed the need for refugee women to have individual identity documents, independent of ration cards.
In collaboration with ILO, UNHCR sought technical support for refugee women entrepreneurship and economic empowerment activities in several countries.
In 2004, a rights-based approach was promoted to enhance the protection and care of refugee children, including adolescents.
This strategy included the continued prioritization of protection concerns: separation; sexual exploitation, abuse and violence; military recruitment; education; and the specific concerns of adolescents.
Collaboration with a number of fellow humanitarian agencies and NGOs resulted in the publication of a global registration form for unaccompanied and separated children.
Field-focused capacity-building initiatives, in particular through the inter-agency Action for the Rights of Children (ARC), were carried out in Africa, Latin America and Asia.
UNHCR continued to support the provision of education for persons of concern from emergency to reintegration phases, with particular focus on access to primary education.
A number of projects were pursued in 2004 related to capacity building, educational tools development and the provision of scholarships for secondary and post-secondary education.
Gaps and resources were analysed and innovative strategies were proposed through partnerships with others, including through private sector funding and support.
Positive results in Kenya in particular demonstrated the value of affirmative action for girls' education and involvement in sports activities.
Environmental concerns
In 2004, UNHCR continued its efforts to incorporate environmental concerns into all aspects of refugee operations, albeit in a relatively modest way due to limited resources.
Sectoral guidelines on forestry and livestock management and publications on permaculture in refugee situations and sustainable land use were updated.
During the year technical support was enhanced in several operations in Africa and Asia, notably during the emergency phase in Chad where, in collaboration with the Government, UNHCR carried out an environmental assessment in refugee-hosting areas and formulated short and longer-term interventions.
Findings have been reflected in the basic set-up and management of the refugee camps in eastern Chad.
Environmental education for refugees continued in cooperation with UNESCO's Programme for Education for Emergencies and Reconstruction (PEER), using a new integrated approach combining both formal and informal pedagogical methods to raise awareness and compliance with environmental strategies.
In June 2004, UNHCR became the 10th Cosponsor of UNAIDS, opening the way for greater synergy and coordination of action in combating HIV/AIDS amongst refugees, returnees and other persons of concern, as well as ensuring that the human rights of those living with HIV/AIDS are duly respected.
Since then, issues of conflict, displacement and refugees have figured more prominently in global and regional strategies on prevention, education, food and nutrition, and interventions in emergency settings.
Practical interventions by UNHCR staff have improved reporting and measures to reduce incidents of stigmatization or discrimination against refugees related to HIV/AIDS.
Advocacy efforts have opened up new avenues of access for refugees to public sector care and treatment programmes, including antiretroviral therapy.
Given the displacement cycles of refugee populations, collaboration with partners and governments on sub-regional initiatives was prioritized.
In addition to a recent memorandum of understanding signed with the Great Lakes Initiative on AIDS (GLIA), UNHCR worked on developing similar initiatives in West Africa and in Central Africa with the aim of improving continuity of services for mobile populations.
The strategy includes building agreements on diagnostic and treatment protocols, bulk ordering of medication and supplies in the sub-regions and helping with repatriation planning and implementation.
Coordination and partnerships
This part of the report covers some key aspects of the Office's work in coordination with other bodies within the United Nations system, including bilateral partnerships, as well as partnerships with non-governmental organizations.
Coordination within the United Nations system
UNHCR continues to participate in developing more effective inter-agency coordination within the United Nations system in a number of ways.
An area of particular interest in the past year has been the Humanitarian Response Review commissioned by the Emergency Relief Coordinator.
As mentioned elsewhere in this report, within the ongoing IASC consultative process on various IDP issues, UNHCR has reaffirmed its commitment to the collaborative approach to situations of internal displacement and is responding to the request of the Emergency Relief Coordinator for agencies to take a more active and predictable engagement in IDP situations.
This includes effectively addressing the protection challenges posed by internal displacement.
This IASC process has accelerated since June 2005 and UNHCR has been further engaged in exchanges on how to strengthen sectoral capacity gaps in the overall humanitarian response, particularly in relation to IDPs.
Sectoral “clusters” of agencies have worked over the summer months to examine the possible role of a “lead agency” in each sector, complemented by the activities of others in the corresponding cluster, in order to suggest which agency should assume that lead role.
The aim is to ensure that capacities within the sector are strengthened at the regional and global levels, and that accountability and predictability of the response at the field level are enhanced.
UNHCR has led the groups in the areas of protection, camp management and emergency shelter.
IASC Working Group and Principals' meetings will be held in September to agree on how to take this work forward and plan to address other humanitarian reform initiatives.
As part of inter-agency efforts to develop guidelines and training support, UNHCR has been developing Emergency Team Leadership Training as well as helping to strengthen areas such as HIV/AIDS field training; an early warning/early action system; and gender-based violence interventions in humanitarian settings.
Collaboration on lessons learned is a key function of any inter-agency forum and under the auspices of the Consolidated Appeals Process, UNHCR has been involved in reviewing and adjusting the needs assessment framework into a more analytical tool which is being piloted in 2005 in Burundi, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and the Occupied Palestinian Territory (albeit the last-mentioned not by UNHCR).
Within the expanded ECHA Core Group, the Office has participated in and provided comments on the DPKO/OCHA study of United Nations integrated missions.
Work is in process to promote and to implement the Secretary-General's Bulletin on sexual exploitation and abuse as widely as possible.
As part of the efforts to develop a more systematic and timely system of reporting on key protection concerns in armed conflict situations, in June 2004 UNHCR convened an Experts Meeting on maintaining the civilian and humanitarian character of asylum.
Operational guidelines on the separation of armed elements from refugee populations are under preparation.
UNHCR and DPKO have also begun a staff exchange programme to operationalize the five areas of cooperation agreed to in 2004, namely: refugee/returnee security; the rule of law; DDR; mine action; and technical cooperation.
Concrete results of membership of the United Nations Development Group are starting to show.
United Nations development actors have now adopted a common policy on the importance of attaining durable solutions for displaced persons and on how to incorporate this into joint planning and implementation strategies.
Emphasis will continue to be placed on the needs of refugees and other displaced persons in the ongoing discussions on the MDGs and in preparation for the High-Level Plenary meeting of the General Assembly in September.
One year after becoming a Cosponsor of UNAIDS, the benefits of this partnership continue to emerge (see paragraph 53).
Bilateral partnerships with fellow United Nations bodies
The constructive working relationship between UNHCR and the World Food Programme (WFP) continues to grow.
Faced with frequent challenges in order to get an acceptable level of food and water to refugees, UNHCR and WFP are working to develop a joint donor communication strategy and have agreed that a special space will be reserved for WFP in all future UNHCR appeals and reports.
The recent announcement by the Executive Director of WFP on strengthening the Programme's organizational capacity to deal with refugee issues is very welcome.
In the first half of 2005, the Office signed a cooperation agreement with the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) with the aim of further enhancing the productive capacity and self-reliance of refugees and other persons of concern to UNHCR in the area of agriculture and in other rural livelihood sectors.
This UNHCR/FAO collaboration is already targeting situations in Burundi, Chad, Liberia and Sudan.
In the past 18 months, several livelihood experts from the International Labour Organization (ILO) have been helping UNHCR country offices to develop employment-oriented strategies to assist displaced populations.
The recently signed joint statement by the Heads of the two organizations will assist in consolidating this ILO-UNHCR partnership.
Almost 700 UNVs were deployed to UNHCR operations in 2004 in a greatly valued collaboration.
A Handbook on UNVs in UNHCR is being produced to help to ensure more consistent conditions of deployment and administration, and a memorandum of understanding between UNHCR and UNV is also nearing completion.
Non-governmental organizations
Partnership with NGOs continues to evolve beyond the traditional core operative arrangements to a much more comprehensive collaboration, wherein complementarity and mutually reinforcing roles are vital.
NGOs are playing an increasingly important role in all areas of UNHCR's work - particularly in the continuum from humanitarian to development assistance and durable solutions.
NGOs are now becoming much more actively involved, from the initial assessment and planning stages of an operation through to the implementation and evaluation phases.
One example of this has been NGO participation in the preparation of most of the 2005 and 2006 Country Operation Plans.
Another was the participation of an ICVA representative in the ExCom Chairman's mission party to Chad and Sudan earlier this year.
In 2004, implementation agreements were signed with over 600 NGOs with a total budget of almost a quarter of a billion US dollars.
Some 450 of these implementing partners are national NGOs, many of which need to acquire tools and support to enhance their capacity to respond to needs and to be fully accountable.
The Office is in the process of establishing appropriate guidelines to build the capacity of national NGOs to respond effectively to protection and assistance needs in field operations.
Further details of collaboration with NGOs and other partners are provided in UNHCR's Global Report 2004.
Management and oversight of programmes
Funding
In 2004, UNHCR stayed within the total financial resources available and maintained relative financial stability, helped by an unexpectedly high carry-over from 2003 and careful management.
At the beginning of 2004, as a precaution against potential shortfalls in the Annual Programme Fund, programme budgets were capped at 95 per cent and non-staff administrative cost budgets at 90 per cent.
A fluctuating US dollar placed additional pressure on projected expenditures to the end of the year.
The mid-year review of total operations in 2004 reconfirmed the projected funding shortfall, necessitating further budgetary revisions to ensure that expenditure for the year remained within total projected funds available.
Total income for 2004 amounted to US$ 1,001.2 million.
Contributions and miscellaneous income (including currency exchange gains) received in the course of the year amounted to US$ 805.2 million for the Annual Programme Budget plus US$ 10 million for Junior Professional Officers (JPO).
The United Nations Regular Budget provided US$ 27.7 million.
Contributions towards the 2004 Supplementary Programmes totalled US$ 158.3 million.
Expenditure in 2004 totalled US$ 1,062.6 million as shown in Table 1.
Broken down by region and type of assistance, expenditure in 2004 was highest in Africa (some US$ 468 million), followed by CASWANAME (some US$ 192.5 million).
In terms of assistance, the largest share was for durable solutions (37 per cent).
Progress achieved in fund raising included a strengthened partnership with traditional donors, complementary sources of funding and increased contributions from the private sector.
Following the World Economic Forum in Davos in January 2005, UNHCR convened a Council of Business Leaders, whose tasks will include providing advice on strategic engagement with the corporate sector and building networks to assist the Office in maximizing sources of financial and other support.
These strategies have been complemented in the period under review by renewed efforts to engage and involve Executive Committee members in consultations on budget and funding issues with a view to moving closer to a needs-based planning approach.
Particular focus has been given to evaluating the pilot scheme on the use of a second category of UNHCR's Operational Reserve as a mechanism for receiving additional funding in the course of a programme year for core activities that had not been budgeted for in the annual programme budget.
An agreement in principle to biennialize UNHCR's programme budget will receive further consideration in the year ahead.
Oversight and audit
OIOS Audit Service
During the period 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005, the Audit Service of the United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) covered operations and activities with expenditure amounting to US$ 362 million, or 34 per cent of UNHCR's total expenditure of US$ 1,063 million in 2004.
OIOS audits covered operations in 26 countries in the Field, and the payroll, mobility and hardship allowance and various aspects of the Management Systems Renewal Project (MSRP) at Headquarters, as well as conducting a comparative review of the functions of desk officers at Headquarters.
OIOS also reviewed two international NGOs at their respective headquarters to assess their systems and procedures and provide advice on how to comply with United Nations auditing requirements.
Inspection and Investigation
The Inspector General's Office has three main functions: to assess the quality of UNHCR's management through timely inspections of operations; to address allegations of misconduct by UNHCR personnel; and to conduct enquiries into incidents of violent attacks on UNHCR staff and operations as well as other types of incidents that could directly impact the Office.
The Inspector General's Office upholds an environment of integrity in UNHCR by contributing to the maintenance of the highest standards of personal and professional conduct by its staff and other personnel with direct contractual links to the organization, in accord with its Code of Conduct.
In 2005, several steps were taken to enhance the work of the Office of the Inspector General and in particular to ensure its operational independence and transparency.
In addition to these measures, Executive Committee members will henceforth receive inspection reports at their request and regular summary reports covering the main categories of investigations, the number of such types of investigation, the average time taken to complete investigations and a description of related disciplinary action.
In 2004, the IGO undertook standard inspections of management and activities in Japan, Sierra Leone and Spain, and ad hoc inspections in Kazakhstan, Uganda and Uzbekistan.
It also undertook operational reviews in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Somalia, Sri Lanka and Sudan, to assess the appropriateness of specific operational strategies with particular focus on finding solutions to refugee problems, and the effectiveness of UNHCR's partnerships with other organizations.
In 2004, the Investigation Unit registered fewer complaints than in previous years.
In approximately one third of the 105 cases where the investigation supported a finding of misconduct, the cases were forwarded to the Division of Human Resources Management for disciplinary action.
Where allegations were deemed to be unfounded, the cases were closed.
The Investigation Unit produced a number of management implication reports to highlight vulnerabilities in UNHCR operations and to assist managers to adjust their actions as required.
In September 2004 the terms of reference of UNHCR's Oversight Committee were revised and strengthened, and it was reconstituted as a decision-making body chaired by the Deputy High Commissioner with a limited number of senior managers.
The Committee was mandated to “decide on and oversee administrative measures that may be required in cases of continuing failure to comply with oversight recommendations.” The IGO no longer acts as secretariat of the Oversight Committee; however the Inspector General continues to attends meetings on an ex-officio basis.
C. Evaluation and policy analysis
In addition to producing evaluations on UNHCR's operations worldwide, the Evaluation and Policy Analysis Unit (EPAU) has been working on the development of tools and techniques to enable staff to validate and implement recommendations contained in evaluation reports.
These include guidelines on organizing participatory self-evaluations and on managing evaluations.
Building performance-related accountability
In line with General Assembly resolution A/57/278, UNHCR has undertaken two major studies pertaining to governance structures, principles and accountability.
In August 2004, the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) issued a “Review of Management and Administration in the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees”.
The report was considered by the Executive Committee in October 2004 and appropriate courses of action in response to various recommendations are under debate by ExCom members through a series of informal consultative meetings of the Standing Committee in 2005.
Also in mid-2004, the Executive Committee and the external auditors recommended that UNHCR commission an independent review of its senior management structure, to encompass issues raised by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Executive Committee.
A Geneva-based consultancy was contracted to carry out an independent study, which was presented to members and observers of the Standing Committee at an informal consultative meeting in February 2005.
A number of the issues raised are being discussed within the consultative process and others are being pursued internally.
Operations management
With a view to examining how Headquarters supports UNHCR's field operations, a Headquarters Process Review was also undertaken in 2004.
This focused on several areas including resource allocation, workforce strategy and accountability.
The Review led to a reaffirmation of the organization's commitment to instituting RBM.
Part of the strategy for achieving this is to empower managers, particularly in the Field, to plan and manage resource allocations and to be accountable for measurable results.
In support of this, the MSRP information technology system is being tailored to develop UNHCR's capacity to provide real time information on the progress of project management throughout the planning, budgeting and implementation phases.
At the same time, adjustments to the planning process now require field offices to provide comprehensive needs assessments as part of moves to streamline and modernize the resource allocation process.
Information management
The Division of Information Systems and Telecommunications (DIST) was created in August 2004 to provide a coherent structure for the overall management and coordination of UNHCR's information and communications technology (ICT) activities.
Two previously separate services, the Information Technology and Telecommunications Service (ITTS) and the Management Systems Renewal Project (MSRP) were integrated to form the new Division.
This move aims to optimize the use of ICT resources across the organization and respond more efficiently to operational needs.
In addition to ongoing maintenance and support of 35 applications in over 300 offices across the globe, an ICT strategic plan for 2005-2007 includes a number of initiatives on new applications development at Headquarters and in the Field, data analysis and archiving and the decommissioning of legacy corporate systems after the introduction of MSRP.
Technical expertise is also being provided in support of the organization's work in developing results-based management and standards and indicators.
Security risk management
In 2004, UNHCR's newly established Steering Committee on Security Policy and Policy Implementation produced a report on the state of the organization's security management.
Staff security has always been a feature of UNHCR's work.
Whether operating in remote or difficult duty stations, confronting crime and banditry, or dealing with emotionally-charged asylum-seekers, UNHCR staff members frequently have to deal with a wide range of insecure situations.
More recently however, the security environment in which UNHCR and other humanitarian organizations have been operating has significantly deteriorated.
The recommendations emanating from the Steering Committee's report identify a number of areas where changes are required in order to enhance the culture of security so that it is integrated in all aspects of UNHCR's work, both at Headquarters and in the Field.
In 2005, the Steering Committee launched a two-year work plan to implement these recommendations.
A Security Working Group chaired by the Director of the Emergency and Security Service is responsible for the management of the work plan, and regular updates on progress will be provided to ExCom members and observers at Standing Committee meetings.
Human resources management
During this period, the Division of Human Resources Management (DHRM) revised and issued a number of human resources policies and guidelines such as the Consultancy Policy and Flexible Working Arrangements.
Significant progress was achieved in reducing the number of staff-in-between-assignments (SIBAs), and in regularizing temporary assistance lines in Headquarters and in the Field.
To fill vacancies in emergency operations as rapidly as possible, Fast Track announcements were issued for posts in critical areas such as Burundi, Chad and Sudan.
This procedure will be reviewed in 2005 to assess its effectiveness to facilitate the efficient deployment of staff.
To proactively fill identified gaps in the staffing profile, particularly in remote duty stations, the International Professional Roster was established and has attracted many applications.
DHRM represented UNHCR in a number of inter-agency fora including the United Nations Human Resources Network, the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC) and the Inter-Agency Human Resources Task Force on HIV/AIDS in the United Nations, with a view to contributing to the accountability framework, stigma and discrimination issues and the resourcing of specialists in this area.
The Division also participated in the Inter-Agency Working Group for Harassment that developed an interactive training on anti-harassment for United Nations staff, to be disseminated in 2005.
Moreover during this period, DHRM disseminated guidelines for managers on the Code of Conduct, extended access to grievance mechanisms; revised management learning programmes and promoted enhanced performance management practices.
Conclusion
Many new UNHCR initiatives have been launched in recent years with a view to improving the Office's internal functioning and external response and performance.
In the year ahead, specific areas to be pursued and strengthened include notably UNHCR's partnerships with others in the United Nations system and beyond.
Collaboration and mutual support will be vital as UNHCR, with its sister agencies and partners, seeks to implement the Secretary-General's reforms, to pursue the realization of the MDGs, to build greater accountability and transparency, and to improve its all-round performance.
A/57/12/Add.1, Annex IV.
A/AC.96/1008, 4 July 2005.
To date, more than 650 UNHCR staff members have participated in the Protection Learning Programme.
This has taken place in Benin, Burkina Faso, Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania and is funded by the European Commission and the Governments of Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.
See Executive Committee Conclusion No. 101 (LV), 2004.
See also, UNHCR, Handbook for Repatriation and Reintegration Activities, May 2004 and UNHCR, Handbook for Planning and Implementing Development Assistance for Refugees (DAR) Programmes, January 2005.
EC/55/SC/CRP.13, 7 June 2005.
Practical Guide to the Systematic Use of Standards and Indicators in UNHCR Operations, First Edition (January 2004).