# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
The present Report has endeavoured to make a strong case for focusing on the inequality predicament, a situation that jeopardizes the quest for social justice and social development — the very same quest that led world leaders to gather at the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen 10 years ago and commit themselves to specific actions to bring about the social betterment of humanity.
Addressing the inequality predicament requires a multifaceted normative and policy approach that puts human beings at the centre of development, one that considers economic growth as a means and not as an end in itself — an approach for which the ultimate goal is to increase, protect and attain improvements in the quality of life of current and future generations.
The approach should be socially sustainable in reducing poverty and inequality and in promoting social justice.
It should be culturally sustainable, conserving values, practices and symbols of identity that determine social cohesion and national identity over time.
It should be politically sustainable, deepening democracy, transparency and accountability, and thereby guaranteeing the access to and participation of all sectors of society in public decision-making.
Finally, the approach should be environmentally sustainable, taking into account access to and use of natural resources and the preservation of biodiversity.
This approach is based on the fact that social development and economic development are two sides of the same coin.
They are equally important and mutually reinforcing; one cannot be achieved without the other.
Societies that do not provide educational opportunities for all, adequate health care, and decent employment are doomed to fail.
Countries in which the needs and rights of future generations are not considered, in which women do not enjoy the same rights as men, and in which social disintegration is rife will not achieve sustainable economic development.
There are countless examples of such societies, both present and past.
There is an urgent need to create an environment in which a multitude of positive examples can be provided in the future — one in which a holistic view of development prevails.
The comprehensive vision of social development agreed upon at the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen in 1995 and reaffirmed in Geneva in 2000 and in New York in 2005 has yet to receive the attention it deserves.
The enabling environment envisaged by the Copenhagen Declaration was conceived so as to create the conditions for people to achieve social development.
The economic, political, social, legal and cultural dimensions embedded in it are especially important.
The commitments on eradicating poverty, promotion of full employment, and social integration were accompanied by far-reaching policy recommendations based on the axiom that the well-being of people should be the centrepiece of national and international public attention.2 Its implementation ought to dominate and shape the agendas of national Governments and international organizations in order to achieve sustainable social and economic development and foster the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
A. Redressing global asymmetries
The imbalance between the pace of globalization and the prevailing regulatory framework has produced many asymmetries requiring correction.
At the political and institutional levels, emphasis should be placed on the equitable distribution of the benefits in an increasingly open world economy, with actions that promote democratic participation by all countries and peoples in the decision-making processes that govern international relations.
Implementing people-centred development requires an approach that places the highest priority on the long-term objectives of social development.
These overarching policy goals require the following:
• That actions are taken by the international community to lend political and institutional support to national capacity-building in the developing world, particularly to restoring the regulatory capacity of public institutions and especially in areas where privatization of the delivery of social services has created new challenges to and difficulties in the actual exercise of individual and collective rights to education, health and other social rights of citizenship;
• That a necessary balance is established between market forces and the public interest, especially through appropriate State regulation and oversight of corporate power and market forces;
• That flexibility is introduced into macroeconomic policies in order for national policies to counter the negative impacts of globalization on social development.
Such an undertaking entails mainstreaming employment and poverty objectives into short-term macroeconomic policies and structural adjustment programmes.
This step is particularly important in view of the constraints arising from competitive pressures brought about by international trade.
Specific measures should also be introduced in foreign direct investment to promote domestic productive linkages and job creation;
• That a global minimum standard is established for social protection in order to stabilize incomes, distribute the gains of globalization for the benefit of all, and support the development of new capabilities.
The international standard, built on and harmonizing all the initiatives analysed in the present Report, would prevent the “race to the bottom” in which countries are forced to overlook or limit social rules and regulations in order to remain competitive in the international market;
• That proposals for the reform of global financial architecture translate into action, particularly by increasing the surveillance and regulation of international capital flows providing adequate room to manoeuvre for the counter-cyclical macroeconomic policies of developing countries; and by strengthening regional cooperation efforts;
• That the various international social and economic regimes are reoriented towards a more coherent and integrated approach, with special attention given to the harmonization of relevant WTO agreements with other multilateral agreements in the social arena;
• That innovative ideas guaranteeing sufficient and stable financing to achieve major international development objectives are introduced to generate new sources of finance for development.
The General Assembly and the Bretton Woods institutions should, in that regard, take the political decisions to advance some of the proposals that are under consideration.
Restructuring the social sector to promote equality and social integration requires political will, an effective State, and sufficient financial resources.
To support this process it may be necessary to provide assistance aimed at strengthening the managerial, administrative and financial capacities of the State (United Nations, 2003a).
The principal objective of such a strategy should be the democratization of the public education system through improvements in the coverage and quality of the primary and secondary levels within that system.
Suggested taxes on currency transactions, arms sales, and the consumption of fuels producing greenhouse gases could generate enough funds to combat hunger and poverty worldwide.
Other initiatives could include the proposed International Finance Facility (IFF), the use of special drawing rights (SDR),3 and the creation of a lottery whose revenues would be used for development aid.
In addition, the transfer costs of remittances should be reduced (Atkinson, 2004).
B. Intensifying integrated strategies and policies for poverty eradication
As a fundamental principle, policy decisions aimed at poverty reduction and eradication should be structured in such a way that these issues are addressed directly, instead of simply assuming that the trickle-down effects of other policies promote economic growth and development.
Towards that end, specific policies and actions must be implemented to guarantee that the dimensions of equality are explicitly incorporated in policies and programmes designed to achieve poverty reduction; they must be complemented by specific measures to guarantee access by marginalized groups to assets and opportunities in general, and in particular to education, land, capital and technology.
Many aspects of social development, including poverty, gender equality, education and health, are addressed in the Millennium Development Goals and have therefore received increased global attention.
However, the Goals, despite their galvanizing effect, are not a substitute for the much broader social development agenda.
The international goal of halving the number of people living on less than US$ 1 a day by 2015 has become a universally recognized benchmark for evaluating development progress.
Nonetheless, poverty alleviation strategies require a holistic approach that includes addressing inequalities, both within and between countries, in opportunities and access to resources, as well as promoting decent work.
In support of this notion, it was stressed at the 10-year review of the World Summit for Social Development that the Millennium Declaration and the Copenhagen Declaration should be considered mutually reinforcing (United Nations, 2005a).
The gap between Africa and the rest of the world remains and has even widened in some respects.
The marginalization of Africa in a globalizing world and the human suffering associated with a lack of development in the region are unacceptable.
Foremost among the key areas of international action is the commitment that technical and financial assistance will be earmarked in explicit quantitative targets to guarantee, within the framework of the New Partnership for Africa's Development, a favourable environment for social and economic development in Africa.
National institutions for social development need to be strengthened.
To further this goal, it is necessary to include institution-building in development and poverty reduction strategies, including PRSPs.
Increased emphasis must be placed on national ownership of the PRSPs; the policy formulation and development process should also involve civil society more effectively.
Most policy prescriptions are still developed and implemented largely without adequate analysis of how they affect the poorest and most vulnerable in society.
In many countries, these groups still find themselves excluded from the planning processes and concrete actions designed to alleviate their plight.
Efforts must be made to include the excluded and chronically poor in the consultative and participatory processes that accompany the development and review of poverty programmes.
C. Guaranteeing employment opportunities for all
The Secretary-General of the United Nations has stated that “the best anti-poverty programme is employment.
And the best road to economic empowerment and social well-being lies in decent work” (Annan, 2004).
In order to reduce poverty in a sustainable manner and promote the development of a more just and equitable society, it is important to focus on expanding and improving opportunities for employment, with emphasis on both the quality and quantity of jobs.
An employment strategy aimed at promoting decent work under conditions of equality, security and dignity should be a fundamental component of any development strategy, and must be oriented to include employment creation in macroeconomic policy.
Such a strategy also requires undertaking employment impact analysis as a basic criterion for macroeconomic policy and for policy decisions adopted in other areas.
Furthermore, it calls for adopting specific measures to incorporate the informal sector in social protection programmes and for establishing incentive structures that promote employment creation by directing investment to sectors that are productive and labour-intensive, with a special view to promoting small and medium-sized enterprises.
In pursuing such a strategy, it is critical to invest in people, including their education, skill development, lifelong learning, and health and safety, and to improve market access for informal producers.
The goal is to move workers and economic units into the mainstream so that they are covered by legal and institutional frameworks (International Labour Organization, 2002a).
In addition, improvements in the policy and legal environment are needed to lower the costs of establishing and operating a business.
Specific measures should include the development and application of simplified registration and licensing procedures, appropriate rules and regulations, and reasonable and fair taxation.
Policies should be advanced to discourage businesses from shifting from the formal to the informal economy, and to enable new businesses to enter the formal economy and maintain labour standards.
An expanded formal economy not only provides benefits for participants, but also helps to raise State revenues (International Labour Organization, 2002a).
Economic growth alone is not enough.
Both productivity growth and employment creation are needed to reduce poverty in general and poverty among the working poor in particular.
Regions of the world that have achieved both an increase in productivity levels over the long run and the creation of new employment opportunities for their growing labour forces have been the most successful in reducing overall poverty.
As the ILO has observed, opportunities for decent employment address more than the income component of poverty; those who are able to secure decent jobs and receive adequate compensation, benefits and protection under the law are also empowered to voice their concerns and participate more actively in decision-making in the world of work, and are able to gain more respect for the work they do (International Labour Organization, 2005c).
Contrary to the expectations of development experts, the informal economy has not declined as a natural outgrowth of economic development but has instead expanded over the past two decades.
Consequently, the policy prescriptions relating to the informal economy and inclusive development outlined at the World Summit for Social Development remain valid for achieving development and the reduction of inequality.
Informal enterprises should be integrated into the formal economy through access to affordable credit, exposure to information on markets and new technologies, and the ability to acquire technological and management skills.
Further efforts should include extending labour standards and social protection to the informal economy without compromising its potential for generating employment (United Nations, 1995).
Governments should enhance their efforts in the area of youth employment.
This is becoming increasingly important, as large and growing numbers of young people are entering the labour market and are unable to find work.
The inability of the market to absorb them generates frustration and a sense of unfairness among youth and increases the likelihood of conflict.
Fostering social integration and cohesion
Consideration should be given to the importance of explicit policies to counter both the negative effects of globalization on social development and the new threats posed by market-driven reforms.
Deliberate action must be taken to guarantee that cultural, religious and ethnic identities and rights are explicitly protected in international agreements and in national and local legislation, and that such protection translates into an enforceable code of conduct for national and transnational corporations and private interests operating under national jurisdictions.
There is an urgent need to expand opportunities for participation in decision-making processes; in particular, specific areas of public policy formulation that have not yet incorporated participatory mechanisms should be identified, and steps should be taken to ensure unrestricted legal access to information among citizens in general and to establish mechanisms for the more open review of government policies.
Although targeting can be a useful approach to achieve equality, it should not become a substitute for universal coverage.
From a social inclusion and empowerment standpoint, the economic benefits of targeting may be offset by the social costs.
In addition to the feelings of stigmatization that targeting can generate, there is also the danger that non-targeted groups will grow resentful of those receiving assistance.
In some cases, there may be little that separates a target group from a non-target group in terms of need.
Under a targeted system, the determination of who receives assistance and who does not may be based on a variety of factors external to the level of need among individuals or groups, including donor preferences, programme design, political considerations or geographical location.
If targeting is to be employed, one of the more promising forms is community-based targeting, in which the community is directly involved in identifying beneficiaries using eligibility criteria of their own choosing.
People at the community level are more likely than programme administrators to be aware of the actual circumstances in which people live, and the participatory process itself can be quite empowering for the community as it increases local control over programmes.
Community-based targeting is an attractive option for two main reasons: it draws upon local knowledge, thereby increasing accuracy; and it involves beneficiaries directly in the decision-making process, thereby promoting equality (Devereux, 2002).
Experience has shown that the most effective targeted programmes are those that are supported by specific institutions, involve community participation, and are backed up by adequate resources (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, 2000b).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, evidence from different countries has shown that targeting can be counterproductive.
Targeting programmes are often characterized by poor coverage and high cost, and can also provoke social divisions, discourage saving, jeopardize employment creation, and encourage premature withdrawals from the labour force (Mesa-Lago, 2004).
With a more universal approach to the provision of social services, many of the problems associated with targeting can be circumvented.
The poor are mainstreamed along with other groups, thereby promoting social inclusion.
Universal social services and benefits also carry the advantage of being more politically acceptable.
When a broader range of people stand to benefit, it becomes easier to gain the support necessary to ensure the allocation of sufficient resources to put the universal protections in place.
In developing countries, however, resource constraints pose the greatest challenge to pursuing this universal approach.
For indigenous peoples, poverty is closely linked with discrimination and the loss of control over their traditional lands and natural resources; therefore, programmes to alleviate poverty among these groups must be designed not only to facilitate social protection and social integration but also to address land and resource issues.
With regard to this last aspect, the incorporation of indigenous history and culture in educational curricula can play an important role in reducing prejudices.
Since the creation of the United Nations, persons with disabilities have moved from accepting others' definitions of the parameters of their lives to becoming active in asserting strength and confidence in their own abilities to lead self-reliant and independent lives.
The role of NGOs has been important in this process, and the efforts of the United Nations have contributed to the transformation as well.
The consultations for the development of the Comprehensive and Integral Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities represent further proof of the prominence given to the issue of persons with disabilities.
Programmes designed for persons with disabilities must emphasize equality of opportunities, both through individual rehabilitation and through the introduction of mechanisms for eliminating social and physical obstacles in order to facilitate their integration into society.
Governments should consider how their economic, social and environmental policies are likely to affect future generations and, by adhering to the implicit terms of the intergenerational contract, ensure that no generation lives at the expense of another.
Steps should also be taken to identify and implement appropriate measures to address the societal impact of demographic shifts such as the growth of the ageing population in developed countries and the emergence of youth bulges in many developing countries.
The costs associated with old-age support are often covered by a combination of private resources and State-provided resources.
In countries in which pensions are provided by the State, particularly in those relying on transfers from younger to older generations, the shortfall will be considerable over the coming decades owing to a significant decline in the relative proportion of contributors, and will eventually become unsustainable (World Bank, 1994; Chand and Jaeger, 1999; Bongaarts, 2004).
To ensure that they are able to maintain pension systems compatible with the intergenerational contract, States should avoid depleting funds earmarked for pensions and old-age health coverage for future generations.
A first step in this process would be to balance national budgets.
In recent years, the international agenda has been dominated by security issues and concerns relating to armed conflict.
As one of the underlying causes of conflict is social disintegration, it is essential that Governments recognize that social integration is a key condition for creating and maintaining peaceful societies.
Social integration can only be achieved by ensuring the full participation of all groups in the social, economic, political and cultural aspects of life.
Two particular areas of concern are the challenges faced by youth, who are two to three times more likely than adults to be unemployed, and the horizontal inequalities between ethnic groups.
It is essential that opportunities be provided for young people to obtain decent work and to participate in the political process; it is equally important to implement policies that counter horizontal inequalities.
The most effective long-term solution is universal education.
The enforcement of anti-discrimination legislation is crucial as well.
In conclusion, inclusive development incorporates the creation of an enabling environment that promotes more equitable access to income, resources and services, as well as international cooperation in the development of macroeconomic policies and in the liberalization of trade and investment in order to promote sustained economic growth and employment creation.
The principles of equality should continue to guide social and economic policy-making to ensure that economic growth is conducive to social development, stability, fair competition and ethical conduct (United Nations, 1995).
If this course of action is followed, inequality will no longer be the predicament it is today.
Notes
1 This chapter draws heavily from the “Review of the further implementation of the World Summit for Social Development and the outcome of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly: report of the Secretary-General”, submitted to the Commission for Social Development at its forty-third session (E/CN.5/2005/6; see United Nations, 2004c).
2 The people-centred approach to development was also highlighted at the 10-year review of the World Summit for Social Development (see E/CN.5/2005/L.2; United Nations, 2005a).
3 As noted in chapter III, the International Finance Facility would leverage new long-term donor commitments by issuing bonds in the capital markets, and special drawing rights could be particularly useful during times of crisis, as they would supplement the existing official reserves and could be used as an emergency financing facility to help countries overcome liquidity problems, to allow them to avoid borrowing at high market rates when attempting to build up their reserves, or to finance development (Atkinson, 2004).
Annex
The ten commitments of the World Summit for Social Development
At the World Summit for Social Development, held in March 1995, Governments adopted the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development, and identified the eradication of poverty, the promotion of full employment, and the fostering of social integration as goals of the highest priority for achieving secure, stable and just societies.
At the heart of the Copenhagen Declaration are the ten commitments to social development agreed by the heads of State and Government at the Summit, which embody the global drive for social progress and development.
The commitments are as follows:
Commitment 1.
Create an enabling environment for social development
“We commit ourselves to creating an economic, political, social, cultural and legal environment that will enable people to achieve social development.”
Commitment 2.
Eradicate poverty
“We commit ourselves to the goal of eradicating poverty in the world, through decisive national actions and international cooperation, as an ethical, social, political and economic imperative of humankind.”
Commitment 3.
Support full employment
“We commit ourselves to promoting the goal of full employment as a basic priority of our economic and social policies, and to enabling all men and women to attain secure and sustainable livelihoods through freely chosen productive employment and work.”
Commitment 4.
Promote social integration
“We commit ourselves to promoting social integration by fostering societies that are stable, safe and just and that are based on the promotion and protection of all human rights, as well as on non-discrimination, tolerance, respect for diversity, equality of opportunity, solidarity, security, and participation of all people, including disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and persons.”
Commitment 5.
Achieve equality and equity between women and men
“We commit ourselves to promoting full respect for human dignity and to achieving equality and equity between women and men, and to recognizing and enhancing the participation and leadership roles of women in political, civil, economic, social and cultural life and in development.”
Commitment 6.
Attain universal and equitable access to quality education and primary health care
“We commit ourselves to promoting and attaining the goals of universal and equitable access to quality education, the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, and the access of all to primary health care, making particular efforts to rectify inequalities relating to social conditions and without distinction as to race, national origin, gender, age or disability; respecting and promoting our common and particular cultures; striving to strengthen the role of culture in development; preserving the essential bases of people-centred sustainable development; and contributing to the full development of human resources and to social development.
The purpose of these activities is to eradicate poverty, promote full and productive employment and foster social integration.”
Commitment 7.
Accelerate development in Africa and the least developed countries
“We commit ourselves to accelerating the economic, social and human resource development of Africa and the least developed countries.”
Commitment 8.
Ensure that structural adjustment programmes include social development goals
“We commit ourselves to ensuring that when structural adjustment programmes are agreed to they include social development goals, in particular eradicating poverty, promoting full and productive employment, and enhancing social integration.”
Commitment 9.
Increase significantly and/or utilize more efficiently the resources allocated to social development
“We commit ourselves to increasing significantly and/or utilizing more efficiently the resources allocated to social development in order to achieve the goals of the Summit through national action and regional and international cooperation.”
Commitment 10.
Promote an improved and strengthened framework for international, regional and subregional cooperation for social development
“We commit ourselves to an improved and strengthened framework for international, regional and subregional cooperation for social development, in a spirit of partnership, through the United Nations and other multilateral institutions.”
Bibliography
Adams, R.H., Jr., and J. Page (2003).
International migration, remittances and poverty in developing countries.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, No. 3179.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
December.
Allen, J. (2003).
Voices of migrants in Asia: a panorama of perspectives; voices, experiences and witness accounts of poor economic migrants in Asia.
Paper presented at the Regional Conference on Migration, Development and Pro-Poor Policy Choices in Asia, Dhaka, 22-24 June.
Altimir, O.
Economic development and social equity: a Latin American perspective.
Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs (summer/fall).
Annan, Kofi (2004).
A fair globalization: implementing the Millennium Declaration.
Address given on 20 September.
Reducing risks from tsunamis: disaster and development.
Policy brief.
Available from http://www.undp.org/bcpr/disred/documents/tsunami/ undp/rdrtsunamis.pdf (accessed 18 April 2005).
______ (2005b).
Remarks at a Security Council meeting on cross-border problems in West Africa, New York, 25 February.
Atkinson, A.B. (2003).
Income inequality in OECD countries: notes and explanations.
Mimeo.
Oxford.
______, ed.
New Sources of Development Finance.
United Nations University/World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU/WIDER) Studies in Development Economics.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Bales, K.
Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global Economy.
Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Barro, R. (1991).
Economic growth in a cross section of countries.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 106, No. 2, pp. 407-443.
______, and X. Sala-i-Martin (1992).
Convergence.
Journal of Political Economy (April), p. 100.
Behrman, J., N. Birdsall and M. Szekely (2000).
Economic reform and wage differentials in Latin America.
IADB Research Working Paper, No. 435.
Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.
Ben-David, D.
Equalizing exchange: trade liberalization and income convergence.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 108, No. 3, pp. 653-679.
Berry, A., and J. Serieux (2002).
Riding the elephants: the evolution of world economic growth and income distribution at the end of the 20th century (1980-2000).
Unpublished manuscript.
Toronto: Centre for International Studies, University of Toronto.
All about the giants: probing the influences on world growth and income inequality at the end of the 20th century.
Center for Economic Studies and Ifo Institute for Economic Research.
CESifo Economic Studies, vol. 50, No.
1/2004, pp. 139-175.
Bigsten, A.
Globalisation and income inequality in Uganda.
Paper presented at the Conference on Poverty and Inequality in Developing Countries: A Policy Dialogue on the Effects of Globalisation, Paris, 30 November- 1 December 2000.
Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Birdsall, N.
A stormy day on an open field: asymmetry and convergence in the global economy.
Paper presented at the 2002 Reserve Bank of Australia Conference on Globalization, Living Standards and Inequality: Recent Progress and Continuing Challenges, Sydney, 26-28 May.
Available from http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Conferences/2002/Birdsall.pdf (accessed 31 January 2005).
______, D.
Ross and R.H. Sabot (1995).
Inequality and growth reconsidered: lessons from East Asia.
World Bank Economic Review, vol. 9, No. 3 (September), pp. 477-508.
Bongaarts, J. (2004).
Population aging and the rising cost of public pensions.
Population and Development Review, vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 1-23.
Bourguignon, F.
Crime, violence and inequitable development.
Paper prepared for the Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, Washington, D.C., 28-30 June.
______, and C. Morrison (2002).
Inequality among world citizens: 1820-1992.
American Economic Review, vol. 92, No. 4 (September).
Brody, Jennifer (2002).
The global epidemic of childhood obesity: poverty, urbanization, and the nutrition transition.
Nutrition Bytes, vol. 8, No. 2, article 1.
Caprio, G., and D. Klingebiel (1996).
Bank insolvencies: cross country experience.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, No. 1620.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Cardoso, F.H. (1995).
Estado, mercado, democracia: ¿Existe una perspectiva Latinoamericana?
Socialismo y Participación (Lima), vol. 71 (September), pp. 85-94.
Civil society and global governance.
Paper presented to the Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations — Civil Society Relations, New York, 2-3 June, p. 3.
Carr, Marilyn, and Martha Alter Chen (2002).
Globalization and the informal economy: how global trade and investment impact on the working poor.
Working Paper on the Informal Economy, Employment Sector, No.
Geneva: International Labour Office, pp. 2, 6, 7 and 9.
Castro-Leal, F., and others (1999).
Public social spending in Africa: Do the poor benefit?
World Bank Research Observer, vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 49-72.
Chand, S.
K., and A. Jaeger (1999).
Aging Populations and Public Pension Schemes.
Occasional Paper, No. 147.
Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Charmes, Jacques (1998).
Informal sector, poverty, and gender: a review of empirical evidence.
Background paper commissioned for the World Development Report, 2000/2001.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Chen, Martha, Renana Jhabvala and Frances Lund (2002).
Supporting workers in the informal economy: a policy framework.
ILO Working Paper on the Informal Economy, Employment Sector, No.
Geneva: International Labour Office, pp. 2, 3, 11, 13, 25 and 39.
______, Jennifer Sebstad and Leslie O'Connell (1999).
Counting the invisible workforce: the case of homebased workers.
World Development, vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 603-610.
Chen, Shohua, and M. Ravallion (2000).
How did the world's poorest fare in the 1990s?
World Bank Policy Research Working Series, Paper No.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank Development Research Group.
Chopra, M., S. Galbraith and I. Darnton-Hill (2002).
A global response to a global problem: the epidemic of overnutrition.
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. 80, No. 12.
Geneva: World Health Organization.
Chu, K., H. Davoodi and S.
Gupta (2000).
Income distribution and tax and government social spending policies in developing countries.
United Nations University/World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU/WIDER) Working Paper, No. 214.
Helsinki.
Cichon, M.
Are there better ways to cut and share the cake?
The European welfare states at the crossroads.
Issues in Social Protection Discussion, Paper No. 3.
Geneva: International Labour Office.
Commission for Africa (2005).
Our Common Interest: Report of the Commission for Africa.
March.
Available from http://www.commissionforafrica.org/english/ report/thereport/english/11-03-05_cr_report.pdf (accessed 20 April 2005).
Commission on Human Security (2003).
Human Security Now: Protecting and Empowering People.
United Nations publication, Sales No.
03.III.U.2; published with Communications Development Inc., Washington, D.C., p. 17.
Copeland, Brian R., and M.
Scott Taylor (2004).
Trade liberalization and poverty: the evidence so far.
The Journal of Economic Literature, vol. XLII, No. 1 (March), pp. 72-115.
Cornia, G.A. (2004).
Inequality, growth and poverty: an overview of changes over the last two decades.
In Inequality, Growth, and Poverty in an Era of Liberalization and Globalization, G.A. Cornia, ed.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 11.
______, T. Addison and S. Kiiski (2004).
Income distribution changes and their impact in the post-World War II period.
In Inequality, Growth and Poverty in an Era of Liberalization and Globalization, G.A. Cornia, ed.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
______, and J. Court (2001).
Inequality, Growth and Poverty in the Era of Liberalization and Globalization.
United Nations University/World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU/WIDER) Policy Brief, No. 4.
Helsinki.
______, and S. Kiiski (2001).
Trends in Income Distribution in the Post-World War II Period: Evidence and Interpretation.
United Nations University/World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU/WIDER) Discussion Paper, No. 89.
Helsinki.
______, and Leonardo Menchini (2005).
The pace and distribution of health improvements during the last 40 years: some preliminary results.
Draft paper prepared for the UNDP-French Government Sponsored Forum on Human Development, Paris, 17-19 January 2005.
Dealogic (2004).
Analytics and Market Data/ProjectWare.
Available from http://www.dealogic.com (accessed 4 June 2004).
Deininger, K., and L.
Squire (1998).
New ways of looking at old issues: inequality and growth.
Journal of Development Economics, vol. 57, No. 2 (December), pp. 259-287.
Dessalegn, R. (1987) Famine and Survival Strategies: A Case Study from Northeast Ethiopia.
Food and Famine Monograph Series, No. 1.
Addis Ababa University, Institute of Development Studies.
Devereux, Stephen (2002).
Social Protection for the Poor: Lessons from Recent International Experience.
Institute of Development Studies, Working Paper No. 142.
Brighton, Sussex, United Kingdom.
January, p. 11.
Diwan, I.
Labour shares and financial crises.
Preliminary draft.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Dreze, J., and A.
Sen (1989).
Hunger and Public Action.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dwan, Renata, and Micaela Gustavsson (2004).
Major armed conflicts.
SIPRI Yearbook, 2004: Armaments, Disarmament and International Security.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Easterly, W. (2001).
The effect of IMF and World Bank programs on poverty.
Paper prepared for the United Nations University/World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU/WIDER) Development Conference on Growth and Poverty, Helsinki, 25-26 May.
Economic Commission for Africa (2003).
Economic Report on Africa, 2003: Accelerating the Pace of Development.
United Nations publication, Sales No.
Addis Ababa.
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (1997).
The Equity Gap: Latin America, the Caribbean and the Social Summit.
United Nations publication, Sales No.
Santiago de Chile.
Equity, Development and Citizenship.
United Nations publication, Sales No.
Santiago de Chile.
______ (2000b).
The equity gap: a second assessment.
Paper prepared for the Second Regional Conference in Follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development, Santiago de Chile, May.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 1999-2000.
United Nations publication, Sales No.
Available from http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/DesarrolloEconomico/2/LCG2102PI/lcg2102iChapterVI.pdf (accessed 18 April 2005).
______ (2005b).
Latin America and the Caribbean 10 years after the Social Summit: a regional overview.
Paper submitted to the Panel Discussion of Regional Commissions on the Follow-up to Copenhagen during the forty-third session of the Commission for Social Development, New York, 9-18 February.
The Economist (2004).
In the shadows.
17 June, p. 92.
Equator Principles (2004).
The Equator Principles: an industry approach for financial institutions in determining, assessing and managing environmental & social risk in project financing.
Available from http://www.equator-principles.com/documents/Equator_Principles.pdf (accessed 18 April 2005).
Fajnzylber, P., D. Lederman and N. Loayza (2002).
Inequality and violent crime.
Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 45, No. 1, pp. 1-40.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Farrell, Diana (2004).
The hidden dangers of the informal economy.
McKinsey Quarterly, No. 3.
Feige, Edgar L.
The Underground Economies: Tax Evasion and Information Distortion.
Cambridge, New York and Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.
The underground economy and the currency enigma.
In Public Finance and Irregular Activity, Werner W. Pommerehne, ed.
Supplement to Public Finance/Finances Publique, vol. 49, No. 46, pp. 119-136.
Fischer, R. (2000).
The evolution of inequality after trade liberalization.
Discussion draft.
Universidad de Chile.
Flegal, K.M., and others (1998).
Overweight and obesity in the United States: prevalence and trends, 1960-1994.
International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 39-47.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2000).
Global Network on Integrated Soil Management for Sustainable Use of Salt-Affected Soils.
Land and Plant Nutrition Management Service.
Available from http://www.fao.org/ag/AGL/agll/spush/intro.htm.
(accessed 7 April 2005).
The developing world's new burden: obesity.
Available from http://www.fao.org/FOCUS/E/obesity/obes1.htm (accessed 7 April 2005).
The State of Food Insecurity in the World, 2004: Monitoring Progress towards the World Food Summit and Millennium Development Goals.
Rome.
The State of Food Insecurity in the World, 2004.
United Nations publication, Sales No.
______(2005b).
State of the World's Forests, 2005.
United Nations publication, Sales No.
Frey, Bruno S., and Werner Pommerehne (1984).
The hidden economy: State and prospects for measurement.
Review of Income and Wealth, vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 1-23.
Galbraith, J.K., and L. Jiaqing (1999).
Inequality and financial crises: some early findings.
University of Texas Inequality Project Working Paper, No. 9.
Austin: University of Texas at Austin/LBJ School of Public Affairs.
García, A.B., and J.V. Gruat (2003).
Social protection: a life cycle continuum investment for social justice, poverty reduction and sustainable development (version 1.0).
Geneva: International Labour Office.
Geda, A.
Openness, inequality and poverty in Africa: exploring the role of global interdependence.
Paper prepared for the workshop on regional studies, held on 17 and 18 June in preparation for the fourth meeting of the International Forum for Social Development: Equity, Inequalities and Interdependence, held in New York on 5 and 6 October.
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (2005).
Available from http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/in_action/events/worldtbday/2005/ (accessed 19 April 2005).
de Graaf, Paul M., and M. Kalmijn (2001).
Trends in the intergenerational transmission of cultural and economic status.
Acta Sociologica, vol. 44, pp. 51-66.
Grumberg, I., and S.
Khan (2000).
Globalization: The United Nations Development Dialogue; Finance, Trade, Poverty, Peace-Building.
New York: United Nations University Press.
Guadagni, Alieto Aldo (2004).
Comercio, desarrollo y pobreza.
Available from http://www.eclac.cl/prensa/noticias/comunicados/1/14671/GuadagnipresentacionCEPAL040504.pdf, pp. 22-25.
Guimarães, Roberto (1996).
¿El leviatán en extinción?
Notas sobre la reforma del Estado en América Latina.
Pretextos (Lima), No. 9 (November), pp. 115-143.
______ (2004) Waiting for Godot: sustainable development, international trade and governance in environmental policies.
Contemporary Politics, vol. 10, Nos. 3-4 (September-December).
Gurr, Ted Robert (1968).
Psychological factors in civil violence.
World Politics, vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 245-278.
Gustaffson, B., and M.
Johansson (1999).
In search of smoking guns: What makes income inequality vary over time in different countries?
American Sociological Review, vol. 64, pp. 586-605.
Harrison, B., and B. Blustone (1988).
The Great U-Turn.
New York: Basic Books.
HelpAge International (2004).
Age and Security: How Social Pensions Can Deliver Effective Aid to Poor Older People and Their Families.
London: HelpAge International.
Heyzer, Noeleen (2002).
Combating trafficking in women and children: a gender and human rights framework.
Plenary address at the Conference on the Human Rights Challenge of Globalization: Asia-Pacific-US: The Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, Honolulu, 13-15 November.
Human Rights Watch (2004).
Human Rights Watch World Report, 2004: Human Rights and Armed Conflict.
New York: Human Rights Watch.
Humphreys, Macartan (2003).
Economics and violent conflict.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University.
Iadicola, Peter, and Anson Shupe (2003).
Violence, Inequality, and Human Freedom, 2nd edition.
New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, pp. 154-155.
Instituto de Promoción de la Economía Social (1999).
IPES 1998/1999: Facing Up to Inequality in Latin America.
Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.
International Fund for Agricultural Development (2004).
Over one billion people lack access to basic financial services.
IFAD Press Release, No.
November.
International Labour Conference (2005).
A Global Alliance against Forced Labour: Global Report under the Follow-up to the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work 2005.
Report I (B), submitted to the International Labour Conference at its 93rd session, Geneva, 31 May-16 June.
Geneva: International Labour Office.
International Labour Organization (1997).
World Labour Report, 1997-98: Industrial Relations, Democracy and Social Stability.
Geneva: International Labour Office, pp. 237-238.
Conclusions concerning decent work and the informal economy.
Adopted by the International Labour Conference at its 90th session, Geneva, 3-20 June.
International Labour Conference Provisional Record (Geneva), No. 25, para.
______ (2002b).
Women and Men in the Informal Economy: A Statistical Picture.
Geneva: International Labour Office/Employment Sector.
Working out of poverty: report of the Director-General.
Paper submitted to the International Labour Conference at its 91st session, Geneva, 3-19 June.
Geneva: International Labour Office, p. 73.
Report of the World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization — A Fair Globalization: Creating Opportunities for All.
Geneva: International Labour Office, paras.
Database on Key Indicators of the Labour Market (KILM).
Available from http://www.ilo.org/public/english/employment/strat/kilm/ kilm08.htm (accessed 25 February 2005).
______ (2005b).
Decent work — the heart of social progress.
Available from http://www.ilo.org/public/english/decent.htm (accessed 2 May 2005).
______ (2005c).
World Employment Report 2004-05: Employment, Productivity and Poverty Reduction.
Geneva: International Labour Office, p. 24.
International Monetary Fund and International Development Association (2003).
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative — Status of Implementation.
Washington, D.C.
Jackson, Tim, and Laurie Michaelis (2003).
Policies for Sustainable Consumption: A Report to the Sustainable Development Commission.
London.
Jelin, Elizabeth, and Rita Díaz-Muñoz (2003).
Major trends affecting families: South America in perspective.
In Major Trends Affecting Families: A Background Document.
New York: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, p. 119.
Johnson, Simon, Daniel Kaufmann and Andrei Schleifler (1997).
The unofficial economy in transition.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2.
Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution, pp. 159-239.
Joint United Nations Programme on HIVAIDS (2004).
AIDS Epidemic Update, December 2004.
Available from http://www.unaids.org/wad2004/report.html (accessed 13 April 2005).
Jomo, K.S. (2003).
Globalization, liberalization and equitable development: lessons from East Asia.
Overarching Concerns Paper, No. 3.
Geneva: United Nations Research Institute for Social Development.
July.
Growth with equity in East Asia?
Paper prepared for the workshop on regional studies, held on 17 and 18 June in preparation for the fourth meeting of the International Forum for Social Development: Equity, Inequalities and Interdependence, held in New York on 5 and 6 October.
Kelly, P., and V. Saiz-Omeñaca (2004).
The allocation of government expenditures in the world, 1990-2001.
Unpublished paper.
November.
Klare, Michael T.
The global trade in light weapons and the international system in the post-cold war era.
In Lethal Commerce, Jeffrey Boutwell, Michael T. Klare and Laura W. Reed, eds. Cambridge, Massachusetts: American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Committee on International Security Studies.
Kramer, R. (2000).
Poverty, inequality and youth violence.
The Annals of the American Academy of Political Science, vol. 567, No. 1 (January).
Lindert, P., and J .Williamson (2001).
Does globalisation make the world more equal?
NBER Working Paper, No. 8228.
Paper presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference on Globalization in Historical Perspective, Santa Barbara, California, 3-6 May.
Lloyd-Sherlock, P. (2000).
Old age and poverty in developing countries: new policy challenges.
World Development, vol. 28, No. 12, pp. 2157-2168.
Lowi, T.
Our millennium: political science confronts the global corporate economy.
International Political Science Review, vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 131-150.
Mayer-Foulkes, D.
Convergence clubs in cross-country life expectancy dynamics.
United Nations University/World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU/WIDER) Discussion Paper, No.
Helsinki.
Melchior, A., K. Telle and H. Wiig (2000).
Globalisation and inequality.
Studies on Foreign Policy Issues, Report 6B.
Oslo: Royal Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Mesa-Lago, Carmelo (2004).
Models of development, social policy and reform and Latin America.
In Social Policy in a Development Context, Thandika Mkandawire, ed.
Geneva: United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, pp. 175-204.
Milanovic, B.
Income, Inequality and Poverty during the Transition from Planned to Market Economy.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Morales-Gomez, D.
A new development paradigm.
Ottawa: International Development Research Centre.
Available from http://web.idrc.ca/en/ev-27516-201-1-DO_TOPIC.html (accessed 17 May 2005).
Morley, S.
Distribution and growth in Latin America in an era of structural reform.
Paper presented at the Conference on Poverty and Inequality in Developing Countries: A Policy Dialogue on the Effects of Globalization.
Paris, OECD Development Centre, 30 November-1 December.
Narayan, Deepa, and others, eds. (2000).
Voices of the Poor: Crying Out for Change.
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press (for the World Bank).
Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (2003).
Review of Nordic Monitoring of the World Bank and IMF Support to the PRSP Process.
Oslo, p. 23.
Ocampo, José Antonio (2002a).
Developing countries' anti-cyclical policies in a globalized world.
In Development Economics and Structuralist Macroeconomics: Essays in Honour of Lance Taylor, Amitava Dutt and Jaime Ros, eds. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
______ (2002b).
Rethinking the development agenda.
Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 26, No. 3, pp. 393-407.
Globalization, development and democracy.
Paper prepared for the first annual International Forum for Development, New York, 18-19 October 2004.
Also in Items and Issues, vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 11-20.
______, and Juan Martin (2003).
Globalization and Development: A Latin American and Caribbean Perspective.
Palo Alto, California: Stanford University Press; and Santiago de Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean.
ORC Macro (2005).
MEASURE DHS STATcompiler.
Available from http://www.measuredhs.com (accessed 15 February 2005).
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2001).
The DAC Guidelines: Helping Prevent Violent Conflict.
Paris.
Final ODA data for 2003.
Available from http://www.oecd.org/ dataoecd/19/52/34352584.pdf (accessed 12 May 2005).
Development Assistance Committee (DAC) International Development Statistics (IDS) online.
Available from www.oecd.org/ dac/stats/idsonline.
______ (2005b).
Official Development Assistance increases further — but 2006 targets still a challenge.
11 April 2005.
Available from http://www.oecd.org/document/3/0,2340,en_2649_201185_34700611_1_1_1_1,00.html (accessed 20 April 2005).
Petersilia, Joan (2001).
Invisible victims: violence against persons with developmental disabilities.
Criminal Justice and Behaviour, vol. 28, No. 6 (December), pp. 655-694.
Pinstrup-Andersen, P., and J. Babinard (2001).
Globalization and human nutrition: opportunities and risks for the poor in developing countries, African Journal of Food and Nutritional Sciences, vol. 1, pp. 9-18.
Ravallion, M.
Growth, inequality, and poverty: looking beyond averages.
In Growth, Inequality and Poverty: Prospects for Pro-Poor Economic Development, Anthony Shorrocks and Rolph van der Hoeven, eds. United Nations University/World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU/WIDER) Studies in Development Economics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chap. 3, table 3.1, p. 69.
Rawls, J. (1971).
A Theory of Justice.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press/Harvard University Press.
Razavi, S.
Women, work and social policy.
UNRISD News (Geneva), No. 27 (March), p. 6-7.
Renner, Michael (1999).
Ending Violent Conflict.
Worldwatch Paper, No. 146 (April).
Washington, D.C.: Worldwatch Institute, p. 40.
Ricupero, Rubens (2001).
A face visível da desigualdade.
A Follha de São Paulo (8 July).
Available from http://www.jornal.ufrj.br/newsletter/anteriores/ news138.html#28 (accessed 20 April 2005).
Rodrik, D (2002).
Globalization for whom?
Time to change the rules — and focus on poor workers.
Harvard Magazine, vol. 104, No. 6 (July-August), p. 29.
Roper, J., and R.W. Roberts (1999).
Deforestation: tropical forests in decay.
Forestry Advisors Network of the Canadian International Development Agency (CFAN-CIDA).
Available from http://www.rcfa-cfan.org/index.html (accessed 9 February 2005).
Sahn, David E., David Stifel and Stephen Younger (1999).
Inter-temporal changes in welfare: preliminary results from nine African countries.
Cornell Food and Nutrition Policy Program Working Paper, No. 94.
Ithaca, New York: Cornell University.
______, and Stephen Younger (2000).
Expenditure incidence in Africa: microeconomic evidence.
Fiscal Studies, vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 329-347.
Sainz, P. (2004).
Poverty, unemployment and income distribution evolution in the nineties.
Paper prepared for the workshop on regional studies, held on 17 and 18 June in preparation for the fourth meeting of the International Forum for Social Development: Equity, Inequalities and Interdependence, held in New York on 5 and 6 October.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier (2002).
The disturbing “rise” of global income inequality.
NBER Working Paper, No. 8902.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research.
April.
Sanne, Christer (1997).
Lifestyle and consumption: prospects of cutting consumption in wealthy countries.
Paper presented at the Conference on Environmental Justice: Global Ethics for the 21st Century, Melbourne, Australia, 1-3 October, pp. 1-8.
Schneider, Friedrich (2002).
Size and measurement of the informal economy in 110 countries around the world.
World Bank Working Paper.
July.
Schölvinck, Johan (1996).
Environment and quality of life in urban areas: production, consumption and environmental degradation.
In Proceedings and Recommendations of the International Symposium on Human Settlements and Habitat, 31 March-2 April 1996, Dolores A. Wozniak and others, eds. San Diego: International Institute for Human Resources Development, pp. 2-8.
Sen, Amartya (1995).
Inequality Re-examined.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Development as Freedom.
New York: Anchor Books/Random House, Inc.
Shaw, M., J. van Dijk and W. Rhomberg (2003).
Determining trends in global crime and justice: an overview of results.
Forum on Crime and Society, vol. 3, Nos. 1-2.
Skeldon, R. (2002).
Migration and poverty.
Asia-Pacific Population Journal, vol. 17, No. 4 (December).
Bangkok: Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific.
SOPEMI (Continuous Reporting System on Migration) (2003).
Trends in International Migration: Annual Report, 2002 Edition.
Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
South-North Development Monitor (2005).
Argentina: economic growth doing little to reduce rich-poor gap.
No. 5773 (5 April).
Available from http://www.sunsonline.org/contents.php?num=5773 (accessed 20 April 2005).
Spilimbergo, A.J., L. Londoño and M. Skézely (1999).
Income distribution, factor endowments and trade openness.
Journal of Development Economics, vol. 59, pp. 77-101.
Stiglitz, J. (1998).
More instruments and broader goals: moving toward the post-Washington consensus.
Paper presented at the United Nations University/World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU/WIDER) Annual Lecture, Helsinki, 7 January.
UNU/WIDER Working Paper, No. 215.
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (2003).
SIPRI Yearbook, 2003: Armaments, Disarmament and International Security.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
SIPRI Yearbook, 2004: Armaments, Disarmament and International Security.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, L.
(2004) External liberalization, economic performance, and distribution in Latin America and elsewhere.
In Inequality, Growth, and Poverty in an Era of Liberalization and Globalization, G.A. Cornia, ed.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Timmer P.C., and A.S. Timmer (2004).
Reflections on launching three books about poverty, inequality, and economic growth.
WIDER Angle, No. 1, p. 3.
Trebilcock, Anne (2004).
Decent work and the informal economy.
Paper submitted to the Conference on Unlocking Human Potential: Linking the Informal and Formal Sectors, Helsinki, 17-18 September, organized by the Expert Group on Development Issues (EGDI) and United Nations University/World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU/WIDER), p. 20.
United Nations (1995).
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995.
Sales No.
Changing consumption and production patterns: report of the Secretary-General.
30 January.
Submitted to the Commission on Sustainable Development at its fourth session, New York, 18 April-3 May.
United Nations Millennium Declaration.
General Assembly resolution 55/2.
18 December.
Prevention of armed conflict: report of the Secretary-General.
7 June.
Improving public sector effectiveness: report of the Secretary-General.
3 December.
Submitted to the Commission for Social Development at its forty-second session, New York, 4-13 February 2004.
______ (2003b).
Report on the World Social Situation — Social Vulnerability: Sources and Challenges.
Sales No.
______ (2003c).
World Population Prospects: The 2002 Revision.
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
Human Rights and Poverty Reduction: A Conceptual Framework.
New York and Geneva: Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
______ (2004b).
The relationship between disarmament and development in the current international context: note by the Secretary-General.
23 June.
Submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session.
______ (2004c).
Review of the further implementation of the World Summit for Social Development and the outcome of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly: report of the Secretary-General.
1 December 2004.
Submitted to the Commission for Social Development at its forty-third session, 9-18 February 2005.
______ (2004d).
World Economic and Social Survey, 2004.
Sales No.
Declaration on the tenth anniversary of the World Summit for Social Development.
9 February.
Draft submitted by the Chairperson of the Commission for Social Development at its forty-third session, 9-18 February 2005.
______ (2005b).
Discussion.
United Nations Department of Disarmament Affairs.
May.
______ (2005c).
In larger freedom — towards development, security and human rights for all: report of the Secretary-General.
21 March.
Submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session.
______ (2005d).
World Economic and Social Survey, 2005.
Sales No.
Chap. 4.
United Nations Children's Fund (2001).
A Decade of Transition.
Regional Monitoring Report, No. 8.
Florence: Innocenti Research Centre.
Factsheet: trafficking.
Available from http://www.unicef.org/ protection/files/trafficking.pdf (accessed 8 February 2005).
State of the World's Children, 2005: Childhood Under Threat.
Sales No.
E.05.XX.1, p. 53.
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (1992).
Agenda 21, para.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2000).
Report of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on its tenth session, Bangkok, 12-19 February.
21 September 2000.
(See also: Plan of Action.
18 February.
Trade and Development Report, 2003: Capital Accumulation, Growth and Structural Change.
Sales No.
Least Developed Countries Report, 2004: Linking International Trade with Poverty Reduction.
Sales No.
______ (2004b).
UNCTAD XI — The Spirit of Sao Paulo.
17 June.
Submitted to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its eleventh session, Sao Paulo, 13-18 June.
United Nations Development Fund for Women (2001).
Gender Budget Initiatives.
New York.
Published with the Commonwealth Secretariat, London; and International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, p. 1.
Available from http://www.gender-budgets.org/uploads/user-S/10999516661ACF31B2.pdf (accessed 2 March 2005).
Not a Minute More: Ending Violence Against Women, p. 17.
United Nations Development Programme (1998).
Human Development Report, 1998: Changing Today's Consumption Patterns — for Tomorrow's Human Development.
Sales No.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Overview, p. 2.
Human Development Report, 1999: Globalization with a Human Face.
Sales No.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Human Development Report, 2002: Deepening Democracy in a Fragmented World.
Sales No.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Chap. 1.
Human Development Report, 2003 — Millennium Development Goals: A Compact among Nations to End Human Poverty.
Sales No.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Draft country programme document for the Republic of Azerbaijan (2005-2009).
Paper presented at the 2004 annual session of the Executive Board, Geneva, 14-23 June.
______ (2004b).
Human Development Report, 2004: Cultural Liberty in Today's Diverse World.
Sales No.
New York: Oxford University Press.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (2005).
Education For All, 2005: The Quality Imperative.
Global Monitoring Report.
Paris.
United Nations Environment Programme (2002).
The Sustainability of Development in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Sales No.
Published with the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, Santiago de Chile, pp. 147-148.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (2005a).
Asylum levels and trends in industrialized countries, 2004: overview of asylum applications lodged in Europe and non-European industrialized countries in 2004.
March.
______ (2005b).
Refugees: 2004 Year in Review, vol. 4, No. 137 (January).
United Nations Millennium Project (2005).
Investing in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
New York, p. 263.
United Nations Population Fund (2005).
Trafficking in human misery.
Available from http://www.unfpa.org/gender/trafficking.htm (accessed 5 February 2005).
United Nations Research Institute for Social Development (2005).
Executive summary.
Gender Equality: Striving for Justice in an Unequal World.
Paris, p. 13.
United States Department of Justice (2004).
Bureau of Justice Statistics: Crime Data Brief.
Washington, D.C.: Office of Justice Programs.
November.
United States Department of State (2004).
Trafficking in Persons Report: June 2004.
Washington, D.C.
United States General Accounting Office (2000).
Public health: trends in tuberculosis in the United States.
Report to Congressional Requesters, No.
Washington, D.C. October.
Urdal, Henrik (2004).
The devil in the demographics: the effect of youth bulges on domestic armed conflict, 1950-2000.
Social Development Papers: Conflict and Reconstruction Paper, No. 14.
Oslo: International Peace Research Institute.
July.
Walker, A.
My mother and father's keeper?
The social and economic features of intergenerational solidarity.
Paper presented at the Conference on the Finnish Welfare State at the Edge of Change.
Jyvaskyla, Finland, 26 May.
Helsinki: National Research and Development Centre for Welfare and Health.
Weeks, J. (2004).
Trends in inequality in the developed OECD countries: changing the agenda.
Paper prepared for the workshop on regional studies, held on 17 and 18 June in preparation for the fourth meeting of the International Forum for Social Development: Equity, Inequalities and Interdependence, held in New York on 5 and 6 October.
Women in Informal Employment: Globalizing and Organizing (2004a).
Fact sheets: globalization and the informal economy.
Available from http://www.wiego.org/ ,aom/fact3.shtml (accessed 14 December 2004).
______ (2004b).
Fact sheets: home-based workers.
Available from http://www.wiego.org/main/fact4.shtml (accessed 14 December 2004).
______ (2004c).
Fact sheets: women in the informal economy.
Available from http://www.wiego.org/main/fact2.shtml (accessed 14 December 2004).
World Bank (1994).
Averting the Old Age Crisis: Policies to Protect the Old and Promote Growth.
Washington, D.C.
Poverty in Russia: An Assessment.
Report No.
Human Resources Division.
Europe and Central Asia Country Department III.
Available from http://www-wds.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer /WDSP/IB/1995/06/13/000009265_3961019104239/Rendered/PDF/multi0page.pdf (accessed 18 April 2005).
World Development Report, 1997: The State in a Changing World.
New York: Oxford University Press.
World Development Report, 2000/2001: Attacking Poverty.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Global Economic Prospects, 2005: Trade, Regionalism and Development.
Washington, D.C., p. 13.
November.
______ (2004b).
Inequality in Latin America: Breaking with History?
Washington, D.C.
______ (2004c).
Social Development in the World Bank Operations: Results and Way Forward.
Washington, D.C., p. 17.
Board presentations of PRSP documents.
Available from http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPRS1/Resources/boardlist.pdf (accessed 29 April 2005).
World Economic Forum (2004).
Voice of the people, 2004: survey on trust, 2004.
Available from http://www.weforum.org/site/homepublic.nsf/Content/ Surveys%5CVoice+of+the+People+2004 (accessed 21 April 2005).
World Health Organization (2002).
World Report on Violence and Health.
Geneva, p. 89-91 and 100.
The World Health Report, 2003: Shaping the Future.
Geneva.
The World Health Report, 2004 — HIV/AIDS: Changing History.
Geneva.
Obesity and overweight.
Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health.
Available from http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/ publications/facts/obesity/en/ (accessed 12 April 2005).
______ (2005b).
The World Health Report: Making Every Mother and Child Count.
Geneva.
World Information Transfer (2005).
World Ecology Report, vol. XVII, No. 1 (spring).
Worldwatch Institute (2003).
Severe weather events on the rise.
Vital Signs, 2003.
New York: W.W. Norton and Company.