# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Mr President, I speak on yesterday's Minutes and something which is not in them.
Yesterday evening I raised two points.
One was on the success of Euro 2000.
The second one was on whether or not Mr Helmer joined with me in congratulating Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II on welcoming the introduction of the euro into the UK.
I do not see that minuted.
Could you change that please?
Mr President, there was a very large number of MEPs who could not be here yesterday because we were let down by the flight connections.
I can inform you that 25 Scandinavian MEPs and interpreters took between 10 and 20 hours to arrive here in Strasbourg.
I hope you will convey this to our French President and tell her that our having to meet here in Strasbourg is almost intolerable and a constant strain.
I would also ask the President to contact Air France, which is about to take over the carrier which cancelled its flight to Strasbourg yesterday.
I would ask her to urge Air France to retain the route and to operate it punctually so that we might avoid these constant problems in connection with our meetings.
It would be best, of course, if we did not have to come to Strasbourg at all, but that is an entirely different matter.
Mr Haarder, I shall of course take note of your comments.
I think that in most of your cases you must also have seen that a survey is being carried out by the French Government, specifically asking you to say what problems you have in getting to Strasbourg by air.
I am aware that many Members of Parliament had problems yesterday, but let me point out that when I am in the chair I am no longer French but European.
Mr President, I would like to take up this issue.
Many people were unable to get here on time because of air traffic problems.
I actually managed to, but I did not even find a list to sign, so I hope that this will be recorded in today' s Minutes.
Mr President, I was on the flight concerned yesterday.
It took me 12 hours to get to Strasbourg.
What is more, I also had problems obtaining a seat at all on a flight to Strasbourg.
It is quite unacceptable for MEPs to have to spend time which should be devoted to political work or to their electorate at home on wondering how they will manage to get to their place of work and also on working out where they are going to spend the night.
MEPs who are not so lucky as to win the lottery here in Strasbourg and to have permanent hotel rooms have, on each occasion, to ponder such matters as where they are going to sleep and how they are going to get a room at their hotel in town.
We need some orderly arrangements if this Parliament is to continue.
I address you as a Frenchman - even though I appreciate that your nationality has nothing to do with your role as President - for the EU has a French Presidency now, of course, and, as far as I know, it is in France' s interests for the Parliament to remain in Strasbourg.
I would request that the President of France be informed of the impossible working conditions to which we are exposed because Parliament meets in Strasbourg.
Mr President, I just want to say that, after 11 years as an MEP, I am familiar with the French airline concerned.
For that reason, I chose another and arrived on time.
Mr President, I understand our Danish colleagues' concern about this air traffic problem.
Yesterday was quite catastrophic, but I would remind you all at the same time that when the Danes' problems started, I myself had already been travelling for five hours on my way to Strasbourg.
I took the shortest route possible from a European capital to Strasbourg via another European capital, and the journey took fourteen hours.
I have always cast my vote in favour of Strasbourg' s special status, including on Friday.
But things cannot go on like this.
I am gradually coming round to the opinion that we must assemble in Brussels, which does not take fourteen hours to reach.
Ladies and gentlemen, your comments are completely justified, and will be passed on to the relevant departments.
I can see the requests to speak piling up on my desk.
I hope your points are not just to do with problems of air travel to Strasbourg, as we have a lot of work on this morning.
Mr President, this is nothing to do with aeroplanes, although I could speak about flights if you wished me to.
I want to refer partly to a point of order and partly to yesterday's Minutes.
As you will recall, the first thirteen items of yesterday's agenda took the best part of an hour to get through.
We then had the privilege of the Prime Minister of Portugal speaking.
At the moment the Prime Minister spoke about half the Chamber got up to walk out.
This may have been because they had other meetings, or whatever, but it is a gross discourtesy for people to walk out when the Prime Minister is speaking.
I would ask you to ask the political groups and Parliament to try to ensure that when there are heads of state or prime ministers speaking in this Parliament there are not other meetings happening at the same time, which give people the opportunity to walk out.
Your comments will be passed on to the leaders of the political groups and we will have an opportunity, in a few moments' time, to see if the message has been received.
Mr President, I wanted to briefly draw your attention to the admission procedure for visitors in Brussels.
I can inform you that, when we receive visitors in Brussels at the moment, they are admitted and then required to identify themselves.
Subsequently, however, their identity cards are collected at reception.
I must admit, I find this rather an odd procedure.
Why should someone who comes to visit us, one of our citizens, hand over their identity cards?
The cards are then thrown into a box and when they want to leave the Parliament building, they have to wait for fifteen minutes before they get their identity cards back.
I would like to ask you what the reason is behind this procedure.
If someone has identified themselves, surely that is sufficient?
Surely there is then no need to seize their identity cards or driving licences?
I would like to ask you, Mr President, to change the admission procedure in Brussels back to how it used to be: you identify yourself, a badge is made and you are admitted.
Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel, the simplest way of dealing with the problem you raise is to refer the matter to the quaestors directly.
I shall, of course, ensure that this is done.
Mr President, I should like briefly to draw the House's attention to current developments in Cyprus.
The Turkish checkpoint has been moved into the buffer zone, thereby hampering the movements of the United Nations forces and cutting off a Greek village.
Turkey is a candidate country and should show more willing, through Turkish Cypriots, as regards the commitments which it entered into in Helsinki.
The situation could spiral out of control and I would like the support of the House on this and, more especially, of the British Government, which has a special responsibility in Cyprus.
I too wish to raise exactly the same issue: as you know, the third round of talks between the two communities is about to start.
Despite the fact that the Greek-Cypriot side has no intention of boycotting the third round of talks, the Turkish side has invaded the buffer zone, creating problems for the United Nations Organisation.
I should like to ask the European Parliament, through its President, to write to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr Kofi Annan, on this matter and to draw attention to Turkey, a candidate country which, in essence, is inciting the Turkish-Cypriot side to take certain measures or is tolerating the measures being taken.
Turkey cannot behave in this way and continue on its path towards Europe and the European Parliament should make that clear.
Mr President, I wish to raise the same issue and to condemn the provocative action by the occupying forces in Cyprus.
Turkey is obviously feeling daring as the result of the policy applied to it by the European Union, a policy which, in the final analysis, rewards its provocative actions.
Turkey has also been encouraged by recent statements by Mr Verheugen in connection with the role of the Cypriot forces and the way in which G7 is dealing with the Cyprus problem.
Under these circumstances, the future of Cyprus should give us serious cause for concern.
Mr President, I merely wished to inform you in this connection that Turkish forces have proceeded 300 metres into the buffer zone alongside the British base in Cyprus and that they did so with the blessing of the British.
What my fellow member Mr Ályssandrakis said is true; this is the outcome of several events which have encouraged Mr Denktash and the Turkish Government, such as the Helsinki conclusions, which, to all intents and purposes, recognise the invasion and occupation of 38% of Cyprus in that they state that the Cyprus question need not be resolved in order for Cyprus to join the European Union, the declaration by G7, which has abandoned action under the UN resolutions in order to resolve the Cyprus question - and G7 includes Member States of the European Union - and the Verheugen statements, which basically recognise the occupation and the partition of Cyprus in that Mr Verheugen has stated that there is no problem and that the free part of Cyprus will be able to join the European Union.
The question, is this: what is the European Parliament doing in order to get the Turkish forces to withdraw immediately from the 300 metres which they have occupied, thereby extending the territory which they occupy and, more to the point, what is the European Parliament doing to free Cyprus from the occupying forces?
Mr President, I am taking the floor regarding the issue of Cyprus and the situation there because I do not think that it should only be our Greek colleagues who alert us to the problem which has now existed since 1974.
It is unacceptable that a country seeking membership of the European Union and with which negotiations to accord it pre-accession status have now been going on for 27 years can occupy an area covering 40% of Cyprus.
I think it is crucial for Parliament to make known its position on this problem and for us to make it clear to Turkey that the continued abuses - the green line has been overstepped - will lead to the immediate cessation of all negotiations with Turkey concerning the latter' s membership of the Union.
Thank you, Mr Camre.
If I might be permitted to make an observation, when chairing a sitting one is forced to note that every time the Minutes are adopted there are some Members who want to embark upon a political debate, and as soon as the political debate gets under way, the Members leave the Chamber.
I think that one day we shall have to rethink the way in which these debates are conducted here in this Chamber.
(The Minutes were approved)
1998 discharge
The next item is the joint debate on:
the report (A5-0190/2000) by Mrs Stauner, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on giving discharge to the Commission in respect of implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1998 financial year (SEC(1999) 412 - C5-0006/1999 - 1999/2050(DEC))
the report (A5-0167/2000) by Mrs Rühle, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the financial management of the sixth, seventh and eighth European Development Funds for the 1998 financial year (COM(1999) 227 - C5-0003/1999 - 1999/2004(DEC))
the report (A5-0189/2000) by Mr Kuhne, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on giving discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Communities for the 1998 financial year (Section I - European Parliament/Ombudsman Annex) (SEC(1999) 414 - C5-0008/1999 - 1999/2051(DEC)).
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, on 6 July, this House will decide whether to grant discharge to the Commission in respect of the general budget for the 1998 financial year.
As it is almost a year since the new Prodi Commission took up its duties, with the lofty promise of pursuing a policy of zero-tolerance towards fraud in dealings with the European tax-payer' s money, this budgetary discharge has special significance.
This is the new Commission' s first opportunity to show how seriously it is taking this fresh start.
On 13 April, Parliament postponed the decision on granting discharge for the 1998 financial year, at the same time citing 17 conditions that the Commission was to fulfil by 15 May.
These conditions corresponded in large measure to the demands contained in the report by the Court of Auditors, such as the commitment to ultimately arrive at a positive statement of assurance.
The Court of Auditors declined, for the fifth time in succession, to provide an assurance that the Commission' s handling of the finances for the 1998 financial year had been careful and economical.
In addition, they demanded measures for dealing with the unfinished business of the three notorious fraud cases concerning Fléchard, ECHO and MED, and for issuing penalties in respect of them.
The Commission was criticised for being slow to produce documents and information, and likewise, there was criticism of the lack of transparency and independence as regards disciplinary procedures.
Since the Commission had at least fulfilled some of the conditions within the period stipulated, and the appointment of a new Secretary-General of the Commission had signalled a fresh start on the personnel front, I moved in my follow-up report that discharge be granted, or at least I recommended that the Commission recover the funds from the Fléchard and ECHO cases, which are estimated to total approximately 17 million ecus, for the EU' s coffers.
Furthermore, the Fléchard case should be kept open since a new state of affairs came about at the end of May, due, in particular, to the stand taken by the Court of Auditors.
On 27 June 2000, a majority of the Committee on Budgetary Control rejected the call for the money to be recovered.
If the House fails to bring about a change of heart here - and I would urge the honourable members to give me their backing - then this money will be lost to EU coffers.
I believe these comments alone ought to be enough to inspire the Commission to take action on its own account to recoup the funds.
What is more, it would be extremely easy in the Fléchard case, for this firm appears to still do good business with the Commission.
The Commissioner for the Budget informed us on 15 June that up until 1996, a further three contracts were concluded with Fléchard.
My more probing question as to how much the Fléchard firm received in Community subsidies for exports to third countries has failed so far to elicit a response from the Commissioner for the Budget.
I would therefore ask you once again, Madam Commissioner, whether it is true that the Fléchard firm received around FF 29 million for export reimbursements in 1996 alone, around FF 105 million in 1997, and FF 72 million in 1998?
Why did you not provide us with this information earlier?
Are you unwilling to cooperate or did your own colleagues leave you in the dark?
I read in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung this morning that you wrote to Mr Schmidhuber, the former Commissioner for the Budget.
I am certain you will be hearing from him shortly.
But Mrs Schreyer, I would very much like to have heard from you, rather than the press, as to when you are actually going to respond to my questions.
When are you going to provide us with the figures that you promised more than a month ago to the Committee on Budgetary Control?
Do you still stand by your statement that at the time, there were no grounds for involving the Fléchard firm, even though Commissioner Schmidhuber had raised the same question?
Have you ever asked your fellow Commissioner Mr Lamy why none of Mr Schmidhuber' s representatives were invited to the meeting on 7 January 1994 in his office?
I have also put this question to Mr Lamy in writing but have not received an answer.
Mrs Schreyer, I do not expect you to answer my questions any differently to the way in which you answer those put to you by Mrs Morgan, for example, who, as I have now seen, received detailed answers from you on 23 June, or do you perhaps apply different standards to the way you answer letters from delegates?
Stonewalling and appeasement do not, I feel, constitute a sound strategy.
It is not just the European citizen that rightly asks cui bono? (what is the good of this).
We expect you to be consistent as regards the promised changes to the disciplinary procedures and the reorganisation of internal financial control.
This must not lead to a de facto abolition of financial control on account of decentralisation.
It is recommended that the Commission be granted discharge for the 1998 financial year.
However, as I see it, this discharge implies a weighty responsibility on the part of the Commission.
I can only hope that you give Parliament' s new act of faith due recognition, and would urge you to do so.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I recommend to you today to grant discharge to the Commission for its budgetary management of the sixth, seventh and eighth European Development Fund in the 1998 financial year.
There has been a great deal of speculation in the run-up to the grant of discharge.
I would like again to make it clear beyond doubt that to me, and, almost certainly, the overwhelming majority of the Committee on Budgetary Control, this was never about having a trial of strength with the Commission, or about weakening it.
We have always recognised that the current Commission can only be held responsible to an extent for the mistakes of the past.
After all, the current Commission only took up office in the summer of 1999 and we are examining the 1998 financial year.
On the other hand though, this discharge can definitely be regarded as a test of the Commission' s willingness and ability to undertake reform.
The Commission must also be given the opportunity, in the eyes of the public, to demonstrate that it is capable of tackling poor management and ensuring that corrective measures are taken within an appropriate timeframe.
To this end, we proposed postponement and requested an action plan in April of this year.
We were waiting for a clear signal that there would be a shift to greater accountability and better management, because EU external aid is highly significant.
It accounts for approximately 55% of international development aid.
I am now in a position to assess this action plan and have to say that after April of this year, this plan and cooperation with the Commission stepped up the pace of the reforms already introduced within the Commission.
We found the Commission and its officials to be extremely willing to cooperate as regards the development fund, and we therefore have no hesitation whatsoever in recommending that this House grant discharge, because we believe that the right lessons have been learnt from past mistakes.
That said, I would stress again that it was right to move and decide on postponement.
Indeed Commissioners have since publicly acknowledged that there were major problems in this area.
For example, on 15 May of this year, Commissioner Nielson told the Financial Times that the Commission machine was never constructed to deliver development assistance.
It was designed for producing directives, regulations, conducting trade negotiations, and to facilitate political relations between the EU States.
He said it does not work for development assistance.
On 16 May of the same year, Commissioner Patten informed the House that there were over EUR 21 billion outstanding commitments awaiting payments, and that, in other words, there was an enormous disparity between payment appropriations and commitment appropriations.
He said this was an embarrassingly large figure and that the Commission wanted to devolve more responsibility to delegations, and where possible, to national authorities in the field, so as to improve financial management.
I would stress again that I believe our action plan is heading in the right direction in this very respect and that it will enable us - Parliament and the Commission that is - to jointly take more responsibility for this area and to ensure that there is better management.
But Parliament must also take it upon itself to behave more responsibly from the outset during the forthcoming discussions on the budget, i.e. it must produce better planning in these areas from the outset and not just see its responsibility as being to adopt the budget and monitor the financial year at a later stage.
Strictly speaking, we must now introduce a monitoring process for all areas so as to ensure that we no longer have to face problems of the kind that cropped up in the 1998 financial year.
We take it as read that we have done the necessary groundwork to this end.
Accordingly, I would like to reinforce the point that in future, we in the Committee on Budgetary Control expect to receive a six-monthly report from the Commission - indeed we have already been promised one - and that this close cooperation will enable us to simplify matters for the 1999 financial year and, I feel it is safe to say, for the 2000 financial year, and we will no longer be forced to use deferral as a means of bringing pressure to bear.
However, I would emphasise, on behalf of the entire Committee on Budgetary Control, that this deferral was an important step towards accepting joint responsibility for the budget and making a joint declaration to the effect that we want to strengthen the European institutions and leave the European tax-payer in no doubt as to the fact that their money is being put to good use, that we are handling payments responsibly and are monitoring the Commission responsibly.
But, and this brings me to my final point, I would also like once again to make it clear, as I started to earlier, that the debate about budgetary control and the budget must lead to a strengthening of the European institutions and not to weakening on both sides.
I therefore also believe that in future, the Committee on Budgetary Control is going to have to concentrate much harder on the essential guidelines and not get so bogged down in the detail.
I think we will be able to work well together with the Commission in this respect.
Mr President, far from granting discharge to the Commission in April, not only did Parliament defer the grant of discharge at the time, it also attached specific conditions to the recognised shortcomings, some of which had deadlines.
As such, only Recital 33 of the motion for a resolution passed in April had still to be completed for the purposes of this report because we had requested additional information.
I will make no bones about the fact that as rapporteur, I feel that if we are to take the discharge procedure seriously, we should not use discharge reports to fulfil additional requests, by way of a kind of safety net.
Christmas is not for six months.
Therefore we should only concentrate on the requests that were actually made.
Both texts - that of 13 April and this one - must be read in conjunction with each other as a contribution to Parliament' s own reform process.
What were the main shortcomings?
Firstly, an unacceptably high level of so-called direct contracts or 'private procedures' , which jeopardises the administrative culture because it means that there is no longer anyone looking into whether we could get better value for money.
We are aware that steps have been taken that will hopefully bring about a change in this situation before long.
Secondly, there is an unacceptably high level of inventory losses.
Thank God it has not all been stolen, rather the money cannot be traced because of an antiquated inventory system.
An electronic inventory system is in its early stages and we intend to enquire how this inventory system is working in practice in the course of future discharge procedures.
Thirdly, promotions were not being awarded in accordance with legally watertight criteria.
The Bureau has taken steps to prevent such things from happening in future.
Here too we have yet to see how this new procedure will work out in practice.
I can confirm that the Secretary-General of Parliament has provided all the information requested, as he did in April.
I am therefore in favour, as I was in April, of granting discharge.
A broad majority of the Committee on Budgetary Control has signed up to this.
In Recital 33 of the April motion on Parliament' s grant of discharge, the discharge was linked with the Court of Auditor' s report on the finances of the groups, although everyone knows that only the groups themselves are responsible for their financial affairs.
Yes indeed, these are public funds and so they must be accounted for.
Although one can understand the attitude of the Court of Auditors, which only cooperates with Parliament as an institution and has therefore failed to cite the names of individual groups associated with specific shortcomings, I still feel that we should discuss this with the Court of Auditors so as to agree a different arrangement for the future.
As a member of my group, I, for one, would not wish to be arrested for the financial misdemeanours of other groups.
I believe the members of the other groups would feel exactly the same.
I therefore think we should talk to the Court of Auditors about this, with a view to devising a more pragmatic reporting procedure for the future.
Consequently, I was quite amazed to hear that the groups are no longer allowed to sweep certain abuses under the carpet, for fear of being seen as birds of a feather that stick together.
I believe that any attempt to put all this off or suggestion that we should wait another year until everything has sorted itself out, would be doomed.
The issue would catch up with us again sooner than we might think.
It is quite remarkable, to my mind, that some groups did not keep their promise to the Bureau to publicise the reports by independent auditors.
Of course they were not obliged to do this, and rightly so, but they did promise after all.
All the more reason why it should strike me that one group is financing a foundation from its funds (i.e. the EU' s funds) which has a value of EUR 10.3 million on the stock exchange, under Luxembourg law.
The law of Luxembourg is not particularly transparent and I feel we are entitled to expect such practices to cease.
The real sting in the tail is that the group involved was the one that pushed for Parliament to defer its grant of discharge in April, in line with the German principle that there should be no holds barred on the information front.
I am certain that they only did it so that we could all give in-depth consideration to these issues.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is our second debate on granting discharge to the Commission for the 1998 financial year.
On 13 April, Parliament decided by a majority to postpone the discharge and ask the Commission to supply further reports and information.
Naturally the Commission abided by Parliament' s wishes and on 11 May it submitted the following documents, among others: the Financial Controller' s report on the corrections made to ex-ante controls, a report on the conclusions drawn from the investigative committee into customs procedures, a report and overview in connection with the contracts of scientific visitors, a report on the number of disciplinary proceedings associated with financial irregularities undertaken since 1998 and the outcome thereof.
The Commission made it known that it has taken certain measures, with the aid of OLAF, among others, and that it has set up certain action plans in a binding manner and taken the first steps towards implementing the European Development Fund, for example.
Although the Court of Auditors had granted the Commission a statement of assurance (albeit restricted) for implementation, the Committee on Budgetary Control, and specifically the rapporteur, Mrs Rühle, were not satisfied with this, instead they wanted and called for more steps to be taken to improve the outcome.
I can say without hesitation that the action plan, which was not just drawn up at Parliament' s request, indeed we actually enlisted Parliament' s cooperation, will serve to increase the transparency and efficiency of external aid.
I would particularly like to thank those who were themselves working on this issue at the time, for their cooperation, and to reaffirm the Commission' s promise to report every six months on the implementation of the action plan.
In its report on the implementation of the 1998 budget, the European Court of Auditors had granted the Commission a statement of assurance for the revenue side of the budget and also for the implementation of commitment appropriations, but not for the implementation of payments from the budget.
The number of errors committed in the implementation of the budget is too high.
The Commission, and particularly myself as Commissioner for the budget, are completely in agreement with the Court of Auditors and Parliament on this.
Accordingly, the Commission has already instigated, or rather, adopted, a number of measures to improve the implementation of the budget and reduce, in fact avoid, errors.
Firstly we need error prevention measures, such as - to quote but one example - a measure to reduce the number of invitation to tender and award procedures for external aid - be it the PHARE, MEDA or other programmes - from the 80 different procedures we have had up until now (would you believe?) to 40.
The reduction of errors also entails better monitoring, which is what the Commission' s administrative reforms are largely designed to achieve.
In future, the individual administrations that actually spend European money will have more personnel at their disposal for monitoring purposes, and they will also be able to inspect the monitoring systems in the Member States more effectively..
Reducing errors also involves taking effective punitive measures, making demands for the return of funds, and instigating the necessary disciplinary proceedings in the event of conscious violation of official regulations.
I would remind you again that my colleague Mr Kinnock is to submit a draft on the reform of disciplinary proceedings before the summer recess.
The present report is critical of current financial control because ex-ante control is said not to have denied any requests for payment.
However, that is no indication as to whether financial control does or does not work.
I would again point out that even the Court of Auditors has said that the errors it uncovered could not have been detected ex-ante, and the Commission has taken this to mean that we must substantially reinforce ex-post control, by setting up an independent revision service, for example.
The Commission has other priorities besides improving financial management, avoiding errors and delays, for example, and improving the efficiency with which funds in short supply are employed, because it is also absolutely intent on fighting fraud.
This concerns the future and the past.
I repeat: the Commission has nothing to hide, and so I will also address the questions the House has raised in connection with the Fléchard case.
The Court of Auditors has reviewed the decision taken by the offices of the Commission in 1994, i.e. six years ago.
The Commission set out to ensure that the report and the response from the Commission, which also details the sequence of events, would not be kept secret or confidential but would be officially available, and indeed they can now be called up on the Internet.
However, it is still a moot point in the debate between the Court of Auditors, as to whether the Commission is entitled, or perhaps even obliged, to apply the principle of proportionality when fixing financial penalties.
The current Commission takes the view that it is entitled to do so.
Whilst the Court of Auditors considers that only the courts can apply the principle of proportionality, we believe that this is a general administrative principle.
The former Commission felt the same and I would like to quote what Mr Schmidhuber, the erstwhile Commissioner for the budget and financial control, had to say on the Fléchard case.
He wrote: "In the opinion of the Financial Controller, this does not rule out reaching a negotiated solution with regard to the principle of proportionality" .
Therefore, there is agreement on this point, and, at the same time, the Commission, for its part, suggested that it would have been worthwhile investigating in more detail at the time, why the exported butter was diverted from its destination in Russia and ended up being sold in Poland.
As to whether we should have demanded the return of the money, I would again point out that this depended on legal proceedings before the Irish High Court.
This culminated in a legally valid settlement, which is something the present Commission is also bound by of course.
The Commission must uphold the principles and rules of legality in the current fight against fraud and in the efforts being made to shed light on cases from previous years.
The same applies to information issues.
If OLAF is asked, in preliminary investigations taking place at Member State level, to pass on information for reasons of investigation secrecy, at an appointed time, then this is a binding legal basis for OLAF.
This applies to the Director of OLAF as it does to the Commission.
In this connection, I would again point out that OLAF is independent where investigations are concerned and it was this very House that insisted on this being so at the drafting of the corresponding legal basis.
This means that OLAF is also independent with regard to reporting procedures and that we still need an answer to the question as to whether information belonging to OLAF can be published by the Director, in full implementation of his responsibilities.
Turning now to the question as to whether further contracts were concluded with the Fléchard firm, I have advised the committee that for its part, the Commission can say that there were further contracts in the sphere of invitation to tender procedures, and concerning the question as to whether export contracts were concluded at national level or whether export business was conducted, I would point out that the payment of individual recipients throughout the agricultural sector can only take place at Member State level.
This follows from the fact that the payments offices are responsible for payments.
The Commission can apply for access to the data pursuant to a regulation, and is able to investigate which payments go where.
However, I feel I should also point out that Regulation 2390/1999 states that the Commission safeguards the confidentiality and security of electronic data transmitted by the Member States.
The Commission would be more than willing, with the committee' s approval, to ask the Member States to duly respond, that is, to grant the necessary permission for data to be passed on.
I would remind you that the principles to do with passing on information also feature in the agreement between Parliament and the Commission on the transfer of information.
This agreement should provide a clear basis for this important aspect of relations between Parliament and the Commission, and consequently, it should also form a sound basis for the procedures pertaining to the discharge process.
I would like to thank the Members of the Committee on Budgetary Control, who have contributed enormously, not only to the report, but also to the results, the assessments, the observations, and, above all, to the many proposals for improvement and the challenges we have faced.
The Commission will implement the concrete measures of the aforementioned action plan and the comprehensive steps of Commission reform, as well as set up an independent audit service and carry out the audit recommendation to the letter.
It will be rigorous in reforming the disciplinary procedures, building OLAF up in staffing and operational terms and implementing the strategy for combating fraud with the aid of comprehensive legislation and stringent and reinforced cooperation with the Member States and other States, with the clear aim of restoring the confidence of the population in the sound management of European finances, first and foremost in conjunction with the European Parliament and the other institutions.
Mr President, I would like to comment on Mr Kuhne' s speech, which contained some scandalous comments to my mind.
He used his contribution as one of Parliament' s rapporteurs as an opportunity for polemics.
Since I have no wish to involve myself in polemics, I most certainly would not wish to remind Mr Kuhne that his European party is happy for large numbers of staff to be funded by their own group.
I do not wish to go any deeper into this, but he ought to have mentioned it.
All will become clear as to why I requested the floor.
Mr President, I urge you to clarify, via the Bureau of the European Parliament, to what extent a rapporteur of this Parliament is allowed to include personal polemics in his or her report.
I think this is irresponsible, and if we want to maintain a common style in this House, and eliminate abuses - which are also perpetrated within our groups - something I wholeheartedly embrace, then this must be done in a spirit of cooperation and not using polemics in the way that Mr Kuhne just has!
I urge you to have the Bureau look into this matter.
(Applause from the right)
I understand your concern, Mr Poettering, but I do not wish to get involved in an argument and I hope that your comments are not going to start one.
Mr President, on a point of order, I wish to point out that it was the PPE who insisted that we looked at the whole question of the funding of political parties in this report.
It was the PPE and it was you, Mr Elles, who insisted on that.
We are responding to that request.
You insisted on it, we are responding.
Mr President, I shall do my best to say what I have to say in the two minutes I am allowed.
On behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, I should like first of all to point out that there has been considerable development in relation to the report on which we are to give our opinion.
Let me remind you that the basic position of the Committee on Foreign Affairs was that we should look resolutely to the future, give ourselves the resources for a practicable policy and, in any case, also give ourselves, i.e. Parliament, real resources to monitor the action undertaken on behalf of the Commission, particularly as regards expenditure of the type we discussed.
We noted that Mr Prodi' s statement was indeed very positive in this respect.
He announced that collaboration with Parliament would be a fresh collaboration.
As time has passed, we have observed that this collaboration is indeed in operation.
Many Commissioners have had no trouble in appearing before our committees in order to answer questions, particularly the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
We also thought it would be rather clumsy of the committee to hold the current Commission responsible for the attitudes of previous Commissions.
On the other hand, it is also obvious that we are continuing to demand that the present Commissioners show the utmost transparency with regard to Parliament.
I think this is essential and indeed I believe it is the case.
Finally, I should also like to say that, in the context of this Commission, we feel that Parliament will have to take firm control of OLAF because this is in fact one of the key means that we are going to be able to develop for the future.
Whatever the case, Mr President, I think that the salient conclusion that should be drawn from our work - and this view is shared by a good number of fellow Members of all political complexions - is that henceforth, firstly, we shall do our utmost to monitor what is going on and, secondly, we shall insist, as a basic requirement, that the Commission should be open with us.
Mr President, I should like to make one observation on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and one on behalf of the Socialist group as a whole.
With regard to the development budget, the cooperation between Mrs Rühle and ourselves was excellent.
Initially, the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Development and Cooperation kept themselves to themselves, according to their own focus.
Later on, we joined forces and managed, in tandem with the Commission, to put certain things in order thanks to the action plan.
This conceals, of course, a particularly grave situation, which cannot simply be attributed to one single person.
In actual fact, we have a budget for the development fund and, in broader terms, the development sphere, where clear goals are lacking and where staffing levels are inadequate within the critical spheres, which need to be worked on.
All of this sets the scene for enormous backlogs and for a control culture dominated by self-interest and fear, rather than actual results and a duty to achieve results and take action.
I believe that we are on the brink of a cultural revolution, which will bring about this change.
This means that the 2001 budget will make it possible to set clear goals within education and health care.
Amounts will be made available which allow for sufficient personnel and which can subsequently be verified to see whether the plan actually worked.
But this requires delegation, responsibility, and - in a word - a modern efficient budget coupled with a modern insight into how budgetary policy works within development policy.
This is how I see the action plan; this is how I see our joint action.
I see it as a joint effort with the Commission.
I am thrilled about the fact that we can, as it were, close off a chapter of fear and a culture of self-interest.
I know there are many motivated officials within the Commission who will now be given the opportunity to perform within the sphere which we would all like to see do well, namely to give people who live in difficult circumstances - one in five still have no access to clean drinking water or primary education - a better chance of a decent life.
We in Europe want to play a key role in establishing this with the necessary resources.
But this means that we need to actually make this change within the next couple of months.
This brings me to the more general comment I wanted to make.
The whole discussion here today will eventually culminate in the 1998 discharge.
For the Socialist group, this will also signify, more generally, the closing off of the chapter of fear and working towards the chapter in which we as Commission and European Parliament take joint responsibility.
In this respect, the Kinnock reforms, or the general internal reforms, are essential.
After all, if we do not succeed in building a new system of financial control and Activity-Based Budgeting, and if we fail to reallocate sufficient personnel to those areas where we need more people, then all we do is create more paperwork, shift more bits of paper with more control and fail to come up with the goods at the end.
And this is, at the end of the day, what the European citizen judges you as Commission and us as Parliament on.
It would mean a great deal to me if in the course of the forthcoming budget, we could, as it were, set our good intentions on a new course for 2001.
I wish the Commission every success in advance.
Mr President, I am going to confine my comments to the general Commission discharge for 1998, which has taken on a highly political and divisive tone right from the start of our discussions.
I feel that we have been through several rounds of a boxing match but ultimately the whole committee, including the rapporteur, said that discharge should be granted.
Rather than stick with the hysterical, drum-beating report that the rapporteur produced, which, if truth be told, had little originality, no sense of direction and no suggestion on how to move ahead constructively, the committee decided back in March to postpone the discharge and to set out seventeen clear conditions which we expected the Commission to sign up to in the space of a couple of months.
We were delighted that the rapporteur saw the error of her ways and supported our way of thinking.
Round one to us, the anti-PPE alliance.
The rapporteur then tried a fast left hook with her headline-grabbing explanatory statement.
She lost.
Round two to the anti-PPE alliance.
The Commission responded constructively to most of the points we set out in March.
The next Stauner report was in the same hysterical tone as the first round but this time we were ready for her.
Round three to the anti-PPE alliance.
We thought the fight was over, but no, we were in for more with the new explanatory statement.
We have yet to see the result of that round but we are confident about the final knock-out round and we confidently predict what will happen on Thursday.
The only real question that remains is why her name is still on the report.
The truth is, we know that the Commission has a long way to go in getting its act together.
The Court of Auditors was right in not giving its O.K. to the Commission expenditure in 1998, but we are willing now to give the Commission the benefit of the doubt.
We think that this is a genuine attempt at reform and the Commission needs a certain amount of time to implement the necessary changes.
We will keep an eye on the situation and make sure the Commission sticks to the promises it has made.
For example, the promise to cut the number of errors is a major promise but it will not happen unless we have the commitment and the resources to go with it.
Commissioner, can you assure us that particularly in the areas of high risk, agriculture, structural funds and research, we will see more checks rather than fewer, as happened in 1998?
Will we see significantly more resources for auditing within the DGs in cooperation with the internal audit service?
Can you give us these figures, please?
You know, Commissioner, that one area where we were dissatisfied with your answers was in response to lessons learned from Fléchard.
We know from the Court of Auditors, unlike Mrs Stauner, that we cannot get the money back.
Will you make a commitment though to cooperate fully with our internal inquiry committee and give us the information we request?
Finally, I hope that in our committee, we will be able to stop fighting each other and get on with fighting fraud.
Mr President, on a point of order I just want to ask you whether it is customary when the spokesman for a political group fails to turn up for the debate that the spokesman can then be inserted later.
It seems to me that if a spokesman cannot take the trouble to be here for this entire debate and be here on time for his own speaking time he should not be allowed to speak at all.
It is at the discretion of the chair, Mr van Hulten.
I think Mr Pomés Ruiz is perhaps just a few seconds late.
It is not always easy to get here on time with the lifts we have in Strasbourg.
So, if you have no objections, I shall give him the floor straight away.
Mr President, thank you very much for your generosity, and thanks also to my fellow Member for his understanding and kindness.
I would like to begin, not with the most important report, but by replying to the comments of Mr Kuhne which I really consider to be unfortunate.
At the moment, the political groups - as you know - do not have a genuine regulation.
My political group, and practically all the others, are complying with the existing regulations.
Your political group has its way of organising its finances, as do all the others.
Fifteen offices of this Parliament are devoted to the European Socialist Party, and a crowd of officials, who are paid from public funds, are dedicated exclusively to the work of one political party.
Other political groups prefer to have their offices outside Parliament, and have their own officials and adopt totally legal financing formulae.
Therefore, at a time when we are asking for a statute for the parties - because Europe needs not only European parliamentary groups, but also European political parties - at a time when there is a certain harmony amongst all the groups, I consider the references in his report to peculiar things to be unfortunate - as the chairman of our group, Mr Poettering, has correctly pointed out.
Mr Kuhne, you know that that is not the case.
We lack regulation.
My political group, like all of them, is going to comply with the regulations and provide information when it is appropriate to do so.
However, when free to do so, each group has managed its finances in the way they considered appropriate.
I would like to highlight the work of Mrs Stauner in this extremely important report, but I would like to point out, briefly, that we are not trying to weaken the new Commission, on which we have placed so many hopes, as we have on the Commissioner responsible for the budget and for financial control, Mrs Schreyer.
We are analysing a financial year of the last Commission, and we have asked the current Commission to diligently manage issues which were pending from the previous Commission.
The proof that we are fundamentally satisfied with its work lies in the fact that we are going to propose the discharge, obviously with reserves, of the accounts for 1998.
We believe that the Commission is taking its time.
Logically, at the beginning it needs more time, but we hope that other decisions will be taken much more quickly.
We also hope that the Interinstitutional Agreement which we have finally reached will improve our relations, so that we can provide each other with mutual support and build Europe more quickly.
We also understand that you are immersed in a process of administrative reform, which in my opinion and in the opinion of other MEPs, is not ambitious enough: decisions are lacking and there are matters which it is not dealing with.
It is not your direct responsibility, but you already know that we believe that a lot of funds are wasted as a result of this passive attitude, the lack of motivation amongst officials and the failure to take responsibility, because people are too concerned with controlling errors or seeking their own promotion.
To end, I would like to say that we agree with the discharge of the accounts which the three reports refer to.
Mr President, I think that Commissioner Schreyer has already noticed in her first year of appearing before this Parliament that this Parliament is a force to be reckoned with.
I can assure her that this will continue to be the case for the next four or five years.
All I can say is that so far, she has throughout the discussions shown herself to be a worthy opponent.
I would now like to comment on Mrs Stauner' s report on the resolution, which accompanies the discharge.
With regard to the resolution, what matters most to the Liberal group is that so far, the Court of Auditors has failed to arrive at a positive statement of assurance.
The error rate is still too high and I feel we need to clearly stick to the points made in the resolution: the Commission must ensure that a positive statement of assurance can be issued by 2003.
Definite deadlines are needed and it would be useful if the Commission could clearly state, both internally and externally, which categories of the budget we want to reach a very low error rate in, where possible.
Another important point is that these days, documents have suddenly gone missing not only within the European Commission, but all over Europe.
We have heard that the Commission will set up an archiving system by the end of the year which will ensure that mistakes which have been made in the past - I particularly refer to the butter export to the Soviet Union - will no longer occur.
As for those butter exports, the Commissioner has already commented on them in her response to the earlier interventions.
There is a clear difference of opinion between the European Commission and the European Court of Auditors.
It was evident from both the European Court of Auditors and the most recent report by the Committee of Wise Men that the Commission did not have the authority in terms of proportionality, retro-activity and such like, which it claims to have, or claims to have at least to a certain extent.
It is up to Parliament to establish this and we will certainly do this.
We expect constructive cooperation from the Commission on this score.
Mr Kuhne has already mentioned the salient points in his report: a neutral staff policy on merit within Parliament, public service contracts and better management of the inventory.
Concerning Mrs Rühle' s report, we could not agree more with the comments she made about the need for better coordination between the Member States and the European Commission.
It is the Member States that foot the bill for the European Development Fund.
If the Member States vote for a certain policy, which the Commission proposes within the European Development Committee, it seems only logical to me that, if they are in favour of this policy, they will pursue the same policy using their own bilateral resources.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in my opinion, the 1998 discharge was a fascinating exercise in terms of both the budget of Parliament and that of the Commission.
In April, the power of the plenary meeting became evident.
Against the Committee on Budgetary Control' s judgement, we rejected the European Parliament' s discharge, and we formulated five requests for the Secretary-General of this Parliament.
This illustrated that we can be just as firm with Parliament as we can with other institutions, notably the Commission.
I should like to express my personal and heartfelt thanks to Secretary-General Priestley and his staff for the efficient and bold manner in which he met this request and has provided us with the information required.
In my opinion, the 1998 discharge was a fascinating and at the same time useful exercise.
And we can now grant this discharge with a clear conscience whilst taking into consideration the comments included in the Stauner, Kuhne and Rühle resolutions.
But I am left with some concern, as if something bad could happen at any time.
Indeed, the framework agreement between the European Commission and Parliament which is due to be voted on tomorrow is hanging over us like a sword of Damocles.
I call on all MEPs, including the MEPs who are following this debate in their chambers, to study this framework agreement carefully and to examine how Parliament' s powers in respect of the grant of discharge are being whittled away.
I would invite you to read Paragraph 17, which contravenes Article 276 of the Treaty of the European Union, and would also invite you to read Annex 3, which is clipping the wings of the individual MEPs and rapporteurs.
I would call on you to fight the establishment of this Parliament, the establishment within your own groups and not to consent to this framework agreement tomorrow.
Mr President, when we talk of discharge, there is a poor spirit prevailing among the groups.
I would like to show my support for Mrs Stauner, despite the fact that the Social Democrats criticise her.
This may be based on the fact that during the Fléchard case, when Delors was the President of the Commission, the Head of his Private Office was the present Commissioner Lamy.
Under no circumstances can we accept that certain documents, which would shed some light on the use of funds, have vanished.
I would also like to support Mr Kuhne in the assessments he makes in his report, which, for its part, was criticised by members of the European People' s Party and European Democrats.
In my opinion, parliamentary rapporteurs have to speak and write what they think about the use of parliamentary funds, in which case the interests of no group can put up a barrier.
Our group agrees with the conclusion that discharge may on this occasion be granted.
Mr President, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group is unable to recommend giving discharge for the 1998 accounts concerning either the Union' s general budget or Parliament' s budget.
We are, however, able to give discharge for the European Development Fund.
It is true that what happened in 1998 is not the responsibility of this Commission, but I think there has been insufficient willingness to assign responsibility for the mistakes of the past.
Where the general budget is concerned, I just want to highlight two serious issues, the Fléchard case and the problems surrounding ECHO's humanitarian aid, and also to emphasise that the whole budgeting process is characterised by a lack of precision.
This is what we normally view as the existence of unused appropriations.
Budgeting is not just about coming up with a few figures.
It is just as much about designing one' s administrative and production machinery in such a way that the objectives laid down in the budget can be achieved.
Like the ECHO case, the Fléchard case is an example of the irresponsible use of European taxpayers' money.
It has not happened during the period of the present Commission, but in both cases I have just mentioned we see an insufficient willingness on the part of the Commission to hold high-ranking civil servants accountable.
The Commission knows that there are criminal activities behind these cases.
The Commission knows that certain illegal forces have made anonymous threats to our colleagues, Mrs Stauner and Mr Blak, and this ought to make the Commission realise that a much more vigorous approach is required if action is to be taken against the internal forces partly responsible for the fact that European taxpayers' money can disappear into the pockets of criminals.
We now seem, of course, to have two spokespersons for the Commission: the official one, Commissioner Schreyer, and the unofficial one, Mrs Morgan.
The latter' s statement here aptly illustrates why this Parliament is in no position to be more effective in cleaning up the administration.
In the Danish Parliament, we have a saying about the Finance Committee.
We ask, 'Do you know what a cat is?' , and the reply is, 'A cat is a tiger which has been to a consultation with the Finance Committee.'
That is not the case here.
Mrs Schreyer can always come here sure in the knowledge that Parliament' s Committee on Budgetary Control will not hurt a hair of her head.
Where Parliament' s 1998 accounts are concerned, I would note that the problem is the same as in other areas of the Union, namely an all too careless attitude to the way in which the money is used.
On the subject of the Spinelli building, I would point out that it was acquired at too great an expense and in an unusual way, not easily seen through.
I should like to add that this is not a criticism I am directing at the Secretary-General, for I do not believe there is any basis for such criticism.
Rather, it is a criticism to be directed against the system itself, for this is not good enough.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first of all like to thank Mr Kuhne and Mrs Rühle for their reports, especially the well-balanced one from Mr Kuhne.
We have taken the discharge procedure most seriously and I should also like to thank the administration and the Secretary-General for their collaboration in this exercise.
I think it was a good approach to clarify matters, look into them more carefully and solve some outstanding problems with a properly argued report enabling Parliament to have all the facts in order to grant discharge to the administration and the President of the European Parliament.
This is whom discharge is addressed to, even though it concerns the administration.
I am pleased to see that discharge has been granted to Parliament.
I think we have done an excellent job.
Group finances are also going to be more transparent and more appropriate to the exercise we are making ready for if we wish to continue along the road of financing political parties.
It was a useful exercise, properly carried out, and Mr Kuhne should be congratulated.
I think we should be able to vote broadly in favour of his report the day after tomorrow.
I cannot say the same for Mrs Stauner' s report.
I feel it is misguided to attempt to use the rapporteur' s role to one' s own ends: it is deceiving Parliament and deceiving oneself.
This practice has been appalling.
Right up to the very end, we shall have been witness to abuse of the procedure.
More than 60% of the report voted upon consisted of amendments.
Mr President, it is extremely rare for a report to be quite so turned around after the vote in committee.
This clearly demonstrates that the rapporteur must interpret the committee' s opinion logically.
If the rapporteur does not interpret the opinions expressed by the committee accurately then the report will be beset by amendments.
The rapporteur is supposed to be the spokesperson for the parliamentary committee.
I feel that a situation where 60% of the amendments are adopted is verging on the nonsensical, and indicates some deep-seated malaise.
The practice of playing games with the explanatory statement must stop.
It is not acceptable to attempt, as Mrs Stauner did, to include points in the explanatory statement which had not been accepted by the majority in committee.
It is a matter of some importance.
This Parliament has no clear majority or minority.
We have to rely to a certain extent on parliamentary fair play.
If a clear majority emerges, then this majority feeling should be expressed in all the aspects of a report, without resorting to playing on words or abusing procedures.
Furthermore, some of the pictures shown on television from Germany, involving extremely prominent people, suggest to me that one must look to one' s own backyard before preaching to Parliament and to Europe.
We must ensure that private and public matters are not muddled.
We shall therefore grant the discharge.
We shall support this report which the rapporteur is clearly against.
Rest assured, Mr President, that the TDI group will vote in favour of discharge, at least the radical wing of the group which I represent here.
Mr President, they are good reports we are debating today, but I am unable, for all that, to vote in favour of the reports as long as we have no guarantee that those who are to audit the accounts are being given all the information they need.
The ombudsman is not entitled to receive full information; the Court of Auditors has complained that it is unable to obtain full information; in Parliament' s Committee on Budgetary Control, it is a permanent topic on the agenda; and our President, Mrs Theato, has severely criticised the new draft agreement between Parliament and the Commission, for the draft agreement will not give us the documents we are requesting, either.
Let us reject it tomorrow.
My personal experience of the Commission is of encountering a good deal of beating about the bush whenever I ask for information which ought to be available.
Those who vote in favour of the draft agreement do not know how many committees and committee meetings they are approving.
Nor do they know if there are any problems regarding the competence of any of the participants.
Indeed, as a rule we do not know everyone involved in day-to-day legislation and in the administration of the now 800 billion being used.
Nor do we know how much is being paid out to, for example, Danisco.
As long as the Commission is not making the information available that the Court of Auditors and elected representatives are requesting, my group can be relied upon to vote against approving the accounts.
Mr President, the European institutions must be aware that they have a responsibility and also an obligation to guarantee the European citizen an efficient and economical administration.
Unfortunately though, the opposite still holds true, as borne out by cases such as Fléchard and the ECHO administration.
The Commission is still denying Parliament access to information on these misdemeanours to this day, which on no account should we take lying down.
Nor should we be surprised if European citizens continue to lose confidence in these administrative systems.
Consequently, we Independents have no intention whatsoever of granting discharge to the report on the general budget.
This ought to send out a clear signal that we are committed to creating efficient and economical administrative systems in Europe.
Mr President, this brings us to the conclusion of a momentous two years for the European Union, which began with the 1996 discharge and its refusal.
I should like to congratulate Mrs Stauner on the courage which she has shown in getting her report - although not much of it is in its original form - through this Parliament.
We need, in this debate, to associate the 1998 discharge with that of the framework agreement which we will be voting on tomorrow.
Hopefully we will see signs of a more democratic Europe as a result of these last few months.
First, Parliament's role in the discharge has been shown to be one of extreme importance.
The Council, by its absence today, shows its lack of interest in the way in which we, as a Parliament, have used our powers to begin the birth of a political Europe.
Without the 1996 discharge there would have been no Wise Men's report, no Commission resignation and no real urgency for Commission reform.
But not all of us in this House have been heroes.
We have found ourselves split between countries, within countries, within delegations, often with strongly held views.
It was the Socialist leader, Mrs Green, who took the biscuit by voting for a motion of confidence on a motion of censure, which she did indeed get.
Miss Morgan now continues this particular inheritance by asking for a depolitisation of the discharge process.
Indeed, one or two of her amendments, like removing paragraphs 47 and 48 of the discharge report today show that some of these amendments look more Commission-born than in Parliament's interests.
But where to now?
Monitoring is necessary to make sure that what we have gained as a Parliament is maintained.
Mr Prodi needs to be supported in his reforms of the Commission.
Last but not least, our most important role is to make sure we have greater accountability and more democracy and that it is not the beginning of the end but the end of the beginning for Parliament's rights in the European institutions.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to repudiate what Mr Poettering said about Mr Kuhne.
Mr Poettering, this draft report by Mr Kuhne was adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control by a large majority.
It is in the nature of budgetary control that there always has to be somebody who feels their toes have been trodden on.
In this case, Mr Poettering, you are the one.
Alternatively, it might be French MEPs, or sometimes it might be colleagues from another area.
Mr Poettering, people are labouring under a misapprehension as far as budgetary control is concerned, not just in the Commission but also in this House.
(Heckling from Mr Poettering) Please do not interrupt me, Mr Poettering, it cannot be translated.
You are not speaking into the microphone.
That is one of the problems we are facing, and I would add that Mr Dell'Alba' s attack on Mrs Stauner should be repudiated in just the same way.
Some serious work has been done here and it is only natural that it should contain personal touches and reflect the writer' s own cultural background to some extent, but I repudiate determinedly, and with a sense of consternation, the fact that the integrity of rapporteurs is under attack here.
It is hardly surprising that two Members of the Conference of Presidents should have a problem with the control and authority exercised by the Committee on Budgetary Control.
I would like to endorse Mr Staes' comment that the stipulations contained in this framework agreement on the transfer of documents are an affront, and no Parliamentarian worth his salt can do other than regard them as such and repudiate them accordingly.
I have a problem with your closing comments, Mrs Schreyer, in which you again presented the new Commission' s entire reform project, and would remind you of what President Prodi said in this House about Parliament' s access to documents, namely transparency and open access.
What we have today are secret negotiations and countless dossiers, and I ask myself how, at the end of the day, we are supposed to come into our own as representatives of the European tax-payers?
(Applause)
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, firstly, I regret the tone that has crept in here, even though we are discussing some very promising and highly detailed work.
I would not wish to sink to the level that some of those present have opted for.
Parliament postponed the discharge for the 1998 financial year in April, but with no intention whatsoever of provoking a trial of strength with the Commission or even working towards a refusal of discharge.
There was a need for further clarification, which would take time and effort, and it was always my aim, as Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control, to complete the discharge process by the summer recess.
As these reports show, the past few weeks have been used to answer questions - albeit not all of them - and consequently, although our recommendation in respect of the outstanding discharges may not be unanimous, it is a positive one.
I welcome with open arms the fact that the Commission is willing to work towards a reduction of errors in budgetary management, with a view to receiving a better statement of assurance as soon as possible.
I detect a certain candour where the so-called old cases of suspected fraud are concerned.
We have never held the new Commission responsible for these cases as such, but would still like to know that the right lessons have been drawn from the past through reappraisal, so that these cases do not come back to haunt us one day.
There is something I would like to ask you in this connection, Mrs Schreyer.
When are the legislative proposals for a comprehensive legal and judicial area for the protection of the Union' s financial interests to be submitted?
We agreed, on the basis of my report in January, that they were to be submitted by 30 June.
It is 4 July today.
If there is one thing all those involved should be clear about where the impending grant of discharge is concerned, then it is this: We are not talking about a certificate of non-objection here.
In future, the institution must be more willing to cooperate and provide the Committee on Budgetary Control with the information it needs to do its work, promptly and without evasion.
If we build up confidence, reduce the amount of bureaucracy and exercise democracy openly - and this applies to so many areas - then I believe we will get back to being able to grant discharge on time each April.
Mr President, the new Commission should be judged on whether it has the courage and the will to implement reforms and put the legacy of the past in order.
Our granting discharge for 1998 is, in reality, a vote of confidence.
We are giving the Commission a chance to prove that it is different from the old Commission.
I would also take the opportunity to call for a cessation of hostilities here in Parliament.
Let us unite all the forces that are in favour of the Commission' s developing into a modern, open and effective institution.
The European project can only succeed if we show zero tolerance for fraud, nepotism and corruption.
Otherwise, we shall never get the people on our side.
Let us cut across party lines and national allegiances.
Constructive criticism of the Commission must not go unheard due to Parliament' s internal bickering.
There are more and more people who think that we should simply forget the past and concentrate on changing the general way in which things are done, but I disagree with that view.
We need to clean up the legacy of the past, or matters will never improve.
I do not think we have received enough in the way of admissions from the Commission when it comes to the events of the past.
This applies both to the Fléchard and ECHO cases, and I can assure the Commission that these matters have not been buried away, just because we are now giving discharge for 1998.
We shall not forget them until they have been resolved in a proper and dignified manner.
I am, on the other hand, very satisfied with the new initiatives the Commission has taken to clean up the area of development aid, but these have also been overdue.
Both Mr Patten and Mr Nielson have been very critical of the way in which development aid has been administered.
Mr Patten has said it is embarrassing for the EU and the Commission and called it the worst way of providing development aid.
For Mr Nielson, it was enough to call it a 'a pizza service without delivery' .
I am also very pleased that Mr Nielson has instituted an investigation into the extent to which the delegations are fulfilling their responsibilities in the high-risk countries.
He has also promised that disciplinary action will be taken if they are not in fact fulfilling these, and I am very pleased about that development, but do not imagine that we shall forget you.
Finally, I wish to say that I think it was a shameless attack which Mr Dell'Alba made on Mrs Stauner.
Mr President, let me first say a few words regarding the quality of the work of our rapporteur Mrs Stauner.
She has been criticised, particularly in the Committee on Budgetary Control, yet she has produced an outstanding piece of work, and I wished to make that point today.
Let me also say a few words regarding the speeches made by the Socialist Members.
In all sincerity, without adding to the controversy, I feel that we have nothing to learn from the European Socialists regarding the use of funds.
Let me say a few words on the Rühle report.
We were all extremely shocked both by the massive misappropriation of European Development Fund resources and also by the Commission' s attitude, which was to carefully conceal its dealings from the Court of Auditors, the former UCLAF (unit for the coordination of fraud prevention) and the European Parliament.
In spite of this particularly scandalous state of affairs, we have nonetheless adopted a positive attitude and have attempted, along with the new Commission, to provide valid and practical solutions to the underlying problem.
The purpose of the agreements between the European Union and a good number of third world countries is to enable the latter to have balanced and sustainable development but, in order to do so, the funds allocated would actually have to get to the end-users and, as we have known for a long time, corruption and fraud are depriving entire regions of the greater part of these sums.
To take just one example, the medical aid granted the Ivory Coast, particularly to combat AIDS, we are talking about some 38% of the aid being misappropriated, or almost EUR 30 million!
Mrs Rühle' s report represents, then, the very last warning issued to the administration of the European Development Fund, who have until October to implement radical reforms in order to fulfil the expectations of Parliament, all the citizens of the European Union and, most especially, the populations of the countries concerned, who still have a vital need for European aid.
So, until October, when we shall meet again.
Mr President, could I just remind Mr Poettering and his friends in the PPE group that, when the Court of Auditors drew up its report on the financing of political parties, it was his group which was criticised and it was the Socialist and Liberal groups which received a clean bill of health.
Maybe this is due to the fact that the PPE-DE group is not one group, that the British Conservatives are allowed to run their own shop and that they keep their own accounts.
It is they who must improve their books.
Mrs Stauner had to be stopped for speaking too fast at the beginning of this debate.
It is a telling metaphor for the work she did in committee.
She ran ahead of the committee without the rest of us realising what was going on.
She tried and condemned the Commission for not sharing the outlandish views she has of financial management and control.
Even the Court of Auditors does not agree with her.
The job of the Committee on Budgetary Control is not to hang the Commission out to dry for the duration of a parliament, but to ensure that Europe's citizens are served by an executive that implements its political priorities efficiently and effectively.
Fortunately that view was shared by the majority of the committee.
One of the disastrous consequences of this whole standoff has been the proposal that is before us tomorrow for a framework agreement on relations between Parliament and the Commission.
This agreement will restrict the rights of individual MEPs, of rapporteurs, to ask for information from the Commission.
It is a short-sighted proposal and if we do not postpone the debate until September then we should vote against it.
Finally I should just like to say, as we are about to listen to Mr Chirac and what he has to say about the French presidency, that I hope that he will also listen to what this Parliament has to say, and in particular to Parliament's view that it should be able to decide for itself where it meets, when it wants to meet, and that this should not be imposed by the governments of the Member States.
Mr President, I ought to have expressed my admiration at the time, when BSE was on the agenda and the rapporteur was starting out on his lonely journey.
It has taken a long time for responsibility to be accepted and also acted on.
The instructions and legislation in force today bear this out.
I also want, and feel compelled, to express my admiration of our rapporteur, Gabriele Stauner.
With her sharp legal mind, and the courage of her convictions, she concentrated on the facts of the matter, helped to shed light on errors and gave us all - and by that I mean all the EU institutions involved - time to reflect, at last opening the eyes of those who had persisted in their blindness.
Personnel were reorganised and many initially invisible doors were opened.
I too had many discussions on behalf of the research sphere.
The storm gradually died down.
At first, we approached each other cautiously, but watchfully, then we began to work constructively together.
In fact the media and the public should be made aware of this, because at the end of the day, we are all in the same boat.
I would therefore like to thank all our opposite numbers, be they from the Commission, the Court of Auditors or the European Parliament.
That said, I was disappointed at first, because some of my proposed amendments were defeated 10 to 10.
But it was still a good outcome.
Everyone should know by now what is going to matter most in the future.
It is all about the credibility of the EU, and in my research area it is about the pure necessity of regarding research as a great asset which lends enormous European added value, and about dealing with it in a suitably careful manner in future, so that we are in a position to grant discharge to the Commission with a truly cheerful heart for once.
We have long memories though!
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen of the House, ladies and gentlemen of the Commission, the statements made by some of my fellow Members have already contributed significantly towards expressing the discontent aroused by the report on discharge.
I should like to address you in the same vein.
Mrs Stauner' s initial report on discharge for the year 1998 gave rise to a great many questions and criticisms, which were expressed, in particular, in the vote in favour of an amendment noting the discrepancies between the compromise resolution and the explanatory statement.
In drawing up her second report, the rapporteur apparently did not take account of her fellow members' general lack of satisfaction.
Once again, we must deplore Mrs Stauner' s method.
She kept on asking the Commission for more and more information, going beyond the recommendations made in the resolution adopted on 13 April.
Today she is still asking questions which have already been explicitly answered.
This attitude has led the majority of members of the Committee on Budgetary Control to make radical changes to the draft report.
This is the reason why the text on which we are to vote during this part-session is substantially different from the initial draft.
This text does now afford us a more comprehensive overview of the Commission' s implementation of the 1998 budget, but at the price of a political conflict dominated by a feeling of frustration.
We can only deplore the far from constructive attitude of the rapporteur both within the parliamentary committee and with regard to the European Commission.
We cannot fail to note the same petty political excesses that some of us already condemned in the initial report on discharge for the year 1998.
Our objective must be to work in close collaboration with the Commission in the interest of our fellow citizens and of the implementation of our policies, and to make the discharge report a proper assessment of the implementation of the European Union budget in both quantitative and qualitative terms.
Mr President, I would also like to congratulate the rapporteurs - and indeed the people of Wales, because I did not realize they were so concerned about the Commission's welfare that they had elected someone to represent the Commission's views in Parliament rather than their own!
I would also like to say, just to correct something that Mrs Morgan said earlier, that I am very lucky in this debate, because my party declared in our manifesto - which helped so many of us on this side get elected - that we would not give discharge to any EU accounts until the Commission reform process had been successfully implemented.
I cannot therefore follow the lead of our excellent rapporteur, who recommends granting discharge to the Commission, for the reasons I have already given and because many people outside this place have been wondering what actually improved between 1996 and 1998.
Most people believe that things got worse within the Commission in that time rather than better.
I only joined the Committee on Budgetary Control a couple of months ago, and to me the meetings and the reports of the last two months have raised probably more questions than they have answered.
To close, I would like to ask two of those questions.
Firstly, can the Commission confirm whether Mr Fléchard is related in any way to Mr Delors and/or members of his cabinet?
Secondly, can he confirm whether any of his or Commissioner Kinnock's cabinet have actively lobbied MEPs for support of the Socialist Group, and in particular for Mrs Morgan's amendments on the Stauner report?
If they have, would this not be an abuse of their position?
(Applause from the right)
Mr President, I want to thank Mrs Stauner, my colleague and good friend, for her report.
Sometimes we seem to forget that we are dealing with the discharge in respect of 1998.
I have carefully read the Court of Auditors' report on the accounts for that year, particularly in relation to agriculture and the Structural Funds.
I have come to the conclusion, having had a lot of experience in Parliament and with European affairs, that things have been steadily improving and that 1998 was one of the best performances we had.
The difficulties which occurred - a 4% possible error in the area of agriculture and a little more in the area of Structural Funds - did not result from the failure of the European Commission to dispense those funds in an efficient way, but from a failure - and it was a small failure - to control the Member States and the European governments and to ensure that the Member States and their administrations had done the job in the way it should have been done.
That is my first point.
The second point is in relation to Fléchard.
I do not think it is reasonable to inform the people of Europe that there was a loss of EUR 14 million to the European budget arising out of this case.
To say this is to use a sort of accountancy jargon that puts the whole issue beyond the understanding of the ordinary European citizen.
The truth is that in the Fléchard case, Fléchard was suspected of fraud, the Irish government fined and punished them to the extent of EUR 17 million.
Fléchard took the Irish government to court and won an injunction preventing the Irish government from taking the EUR 17 million.
The European Commission intervened at that point and proposed a settlement.
The worst thing you can say about that settlement is that it was made on a legal basis which was not in effect when the crime was committed, but was in effect while the case was still open.
It seems to me that equating that with a loss of EUR 14 million is a gross exaggeration.
Finally, the lesson to be learned from this is that in the future we in Parliament have to cooperate with the European Commission to ensure that national governments do not, as in the past, interfere in their responsibilities, and that when the Commission takes national governments to task, it can rely on our support.
Mr President, I would like to repudiate in the strongest possible terms, the accusation levelled at me by Mr Dell'Alba that I used my role as rapporteur for the discharge of the budget for the 1998 financial year for personal ends - I repeat, for personal ends - and his comment that as a German, I, or rather, we Germans, if I understood the translation correctly, would do well to put our own house in order.
It went beyond personal insult and such verbal attacks are unworthy of our Parliament.
I urge you to take suitable steps towards ensuring that Mr Dell'Alba avails himself of democratic manners like everyone else, even if - as I readily grant him - he obviously finds it difficult!
Statement by Presidency-in-Office of Council - Action programme of French presidency
The next item is the statement by the Presidency-in-Office of Council on the French presidency' s action programme.
It is my very great pleasure to give the floor to the French President, Mr Jacques Chirac.
(Loud applause)
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament, thank you for welcoming me here today.
Since 1 July, France has held the presidency of the Council of the European Union, and I shall be chairing the meetings of the European Council on two occasions.
I therefore thought it appropriate to present the priorities of the French Presidency to this House.
Last winter, when I was invited to participate in the inauguration of this new Chamber, I made a commitment to involving Parliament fully in the work of our presidency.
I think it natural and necessary to conduct discussions and debates within the European Union in close collaboration with the men and women that represent the citizens, the men and women elected by the people of Europe, who have the task of representing their opinions in the debate on the future of Europe.
Therefore, the French Presidency, represented in particular by Mr Hubert Védrine, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Mr Pierre Moscovici, Minister of State for European Affairs, intends to maintain an ongoing open dialogue with Parliament.
The citizens of Europe want more transparency in the operation of the European institutions.
The time when decisions could be taken behind closed doors has passed.
Nowadays, discussions within the European Union must take place in the light of day and, of course, here in the European Parliament.
We shall also be working hand in hand with the European Commission.
I should like today to express my confidence in and support for Mr Romano Prodi, the European Commissioners and all the parties cooperating with the Commission.
Having come into office in quite exceptional circumstances, they have managed to lay the foundations for a radical reform which will bear fruit in the future.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, just fifty years ago the 'Schuman declaration' laid the foundations for the building of Europe, undertaking primarily to reconcile Germany and France.
I should, at this point, like to pay tribute to the memory of one of the great and ardent Europeans who paved the way for Europe, Pierre Pflimlin.
He devoted his life to France, of course, and Europe, a bold and noble idea of Europe.
This House acknowledged his commitment by electing him its president.
We have lost a great and fine figure in this venture we are all involved in.
Ladies and gentlemen, half a century of European construction has given rise to a profoundly original European Union, based on the common will of the nations which make up that Union, and today we clearly feel that we are entering a new phase in the history of European construction, which has already brought us peace, economic success and social progress.
The fine and necessary project of enlargement is going to change the European Union, its modus operandi and, perhaps, even its very nature, at a time when it is intensifying its political dimension.
At the same time, as the areas in which the European Union is becoming involved are expanding, the citizens are demanding, quite rightly, that it should be more democratic, more transparent and more efficient, and that it should be more diligent in respecting the principle of subsidiarity.
The debate on the future of Europe has thus been launched, and this is good news because is it essential in crucial periods to look further than the immediate concerns and time limits, and to set the course for the future.
I had the opportunity to express my views on this subject last week.
My comments were intended to shed light on the future and to express what the Europe of tomorrow could and should be.
They, of course, extend beyond the limits of the French Presidency of the European Union.
One thing is clear, however, and I stressed this in Berlin: all further progress of the European Union is conditional upon the success of the institutional reform.
If the IGC were not successful, then it would be pointless to consider the next stages.
The French authorities are fully aware of the responsibility they bear in this respect and they are approaching this presidency with the ambition to achieve progress or a successful conclusion in all the matters impacting on future development.
They shall do so with a commitment to safeguard, and improve, that which gives our whole project meaning: the protection of fundamental values and the respect of national and cultural identities, the continual determination to reconcile economic performance and social progress and to fulfil the practical expectations of the citizens, and the strengthening of Europe' s role as a major player on the international scene.
This is the spirit in which France intends to take forward the remarkable work achieved by the Portuguese Presidency, in close liaison with the Swedish Presidency which is to follow us on 1 January next year.
We have outlined four objectives for this six-month period: firstly, to make the European Union ready for enlargement, next, to place Europe more at the service of growth, employment and social progress, to bring the European Union closer to the citizens in order to drive the message of our shared project home, and finally, to affirm Europe' s position in the world.
The Presidency' s first focus is on making preparations for the future of Europe, post-enlargement.
As I said, the reform of the European institutions is one of the primary issues of our presidency.
Let us not make the mistake of underestimating the importance of the matters on the agenda.
The composition of the Commission, revision of the weighting of votes and the extension of qualified majority voting are all of critical importance given the prospect of the enlarged Europe.
If we do not manage to resolve these matters, the European Union will be sentenced to paralysis in the short term, and I am convinced that all the Member States are aware of this and are in favour of finding solutions.
The French Presidency is also determined to make progress on the matter of intensified cooperation, which was added to the IGC agenda at the Feira European Council.
The objective is not to set the divisions between Europeans in stone, but rather to introduce greater flexibility into the operation of the enlarged European Union by allowing those who wish to do so to travel more quickly along the common path.
You may rest assured that we shall provide ourselves with all the necessary means to make a success of these negotiations, in which the European Parliament will, of course, continue to be very closely involved.
The European Council in Biarritz, two months before the Nice Council, will be an informal summit, chiefly devoted to institutional reform.
It should give the necessary impetus for an agreement to be signed in December, an agreement which is worthy of the importance of the issues involved.
None of us, neither you nor us, can be content with a minimum agreement.
(Applause)Reform of the institutions will pave the way for enlargement of the European Union.
I am, as you know, a staunch supporter of enlargement.
It will be an achievement for peace and democracy in our continent, and it will make the European Union all the stronger.
The French Presidency is, therefore, determined to achieve real progress in the accession negotiations with all the candidate countries, based on their individual merits and implementing the principle of differentiation.
Our objective at the European Council in Nice is to arrive at as comprehensive as possible an overview of the state of negotiations, in order to provide effective guidance for the work of future presidencies and to clearly signpost the route to accession.
Bilateral dialogue with the candidate countries will, moreover, be stepped up, and dialogue will also be emphasised in the European conference of Heads of State and Government which I shall be convening in Nice prior to the European Council.
The second focus of the French Presidency is a Europe at the service of growth, employment and social progress.
Opting for the euro means opting for growth and employment.
It is a success.
We can already see the positive effects in all the countries of the European Union.
Coordinating our monetary policies, however, must necessarily be accompanied by serious social ambitions and improved coordination of our economic policies.
For many long years, France has been putting the case for employment to be the focus of the concerns of the European Union and the central objective of its policies.
A great deal of progress has been made thanks to successive presidencies, particularly in Amsterdam, Luxembourg, Cardiff and Cologne.
The Lisbon European Council in March marked a crucial phase.
It was there that we affirmed our strategic objective to restore full employment and activity for all, increasing employment rates among the working-age population of Europe to 70%, and we set ourselves a target of 3% average annual growth.
The French Presidency will be following up the action initiated by this Lisbon Council.
On the first day of France' s presidency, I was keen to invite the European Trade Union Confederation to visit me.
As you know, I attach great importance to affirming the European social model as based on social dialogue, on social protection appropriate to the requirements of our time and on acknowledgement of the role of the state as the guarantor of social cohesion.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights will have to support this model.
Our priority, then, will be the adoption of a "European social agenda" .
Economic growth and industrial modernisation are meaningful only if they represent a rapid fall in the rate of unemployment which, despite the positive results recorded throughout Europe in recent years, is still far higher than in the United States or Japan.
Europe at the service of the nations also means the determination to make great efforts to achieve social justice, improve the protection of children and boost commitment to combating exclusion in all its forms, particularly in the face of the new challenges of the knowledge-based economy.
The social agenda will make it possible, on the basis of the communication which the Commission has just submitted, to outline a five-year working programme involving all the operators concerned: Member States, the European Parliament, the Commission, unions and management.
We are looking for ambitious projects in fields as important as social protection, the involvement of employees in company decisions, reconciling family life and a career and lifelong training.
This is how we intend to support our European social model: by making progress on practical projects, backed by a strong political will.
At the same time, we must step up liaison and coordination between our economic policies.
This is necessary in order to consolidate the euro and to make sure that the current growth in Europe lasts.
The French Presidency is today proposing to improve the operation of the 11 euro states, shortly to become 12, by making its work more visible and more authoritative, to enhance the coordination of our budget policies by making the Community inspection procedures more effective, to make progress in the harmonisation of our tax policies in the wake of the European Council at Feira and, finally, to take action to prepare our citizens for the forthcoming advent of the euro.
It is vital that the citizens accept the euro.
Everything possible must be done to make a success of this crucial phase in both practical and human terms.
Finally, we must put Europe at the forefront of the information society, build up growth in the European Union on the basis of our training schemes - some of the best in the world - our tremendous scientific and intellectual potential and our industry, which is a world leader.
France will be endeavouring to develop fully the decisions taken under the Portuguese Presidency: support for innovative firms thanks to new risk capital developments, the establishment of a Community patent, the framing of a European scoreboard for innovation, the creation of a highly flexible network of scientists and the development of European projects, the fight against cybercrime.
We must also ensure that the benefits of these new technologies are accessible to all, avoiding the creation of a digital divide, and, in particular, supporting Internet connections for all European schools by the end of 2001, as decided.
We shall also be very attentive to enhancing Europe' s position in the highly strategic biotechnology sector, while, of course, monitoring the observance of the ethical rules which must be applied to any scientific, inventive or industrial activity involving living organisms.
Growth and solidarity must benefit all the regions of the European Union, particularly the island regions which must be helped to overcome their handicaps.
The Presidency will also ensure that links with the outermost regions are consolidated and intensified.
The new terms of the Treaty of Amsterdam now have to be implemented to ensure that the Azores, Madeira, the Canary Islands and the French overseas departments benefit from the rights, advantages and specific Community policies due to their specific features and constraints.
The third focus of the French Presidency will be to bring Europe closer to the citizens.
This is now the legitimate concern of all successive presidencies leading the European Union.
Europe still seems far too remote in the eyes of many of our fellow countrymen, who find it hard to see what Europe gives them or can give them in their everyday life.
It is high time that the European Union took more notice of the matters of concern to the ordinary citizen.
Let us achieve a Europe of the people.
The adoption of a Charter of Fundamental Rights which is currently being drawn up with the active participation of Members of this House will make it possible to enshrine in a single text the values, principles and rights which are the basis of our Union: civil and political rights, economic and social rights.
It is crucial that the Convention responsible for framing the text completes its work in sufficiently good time in order to be able to deliver the charter by the end of this year.
We shall also be promoting this Europe of the people by building the Europe of mobility, of knowledge and of young people.
While respecting Member State authority in the field of education, we must also staunchly support individual exchanges, particularly at university level.
Looking forward to the European Council of Nice, the French Presidency will be surveying the obstacles to the mobility of research workers, students and teachers, and investigating ways to overcome them.
We must be ambitious and adopt a substantial increase in exchanges within the European Union as our goal.
It is the synergy between European laboratories and firms, and the strengthening of the many important centres of research and innovation in Europe, which is at stake here, not to mention a certain vision of dialogue between cultures and cultural diversity and, ultimately, European citizenship, the feeling of belonging to the same political and human unit.
In more practical terms, the French Presidency intends to achieve progress in initiatives likely to improve the daily life of Europeans, firstly in terms of public health and consumer protection.
The traumatism caused by the mad cow epidemic and by other similar threats is forcing us to set up an independent European food authority.
I know that I shall be able to count on the support of this House in this undertaking.
We must also achieve recognition for the precautionary principle at European and international level, and make progress in the labelling and trackability of genetically modified organisms.
Let us never forget that agriculture is the first of our common policies.
The French Presidency will be particularly attentive to the WTO in the context of enlargement negotiations and in considering the problems encountered by specific industries, such as pig farming and the fruit and vegetable and banana industries.
As for the environment, the main focus will be on the safety of maritime transportation and the transportation of dangerous substances and petroleum products.
The ecological disaster caused by the wreck of the Erika is all the more intolerable in that it was due to human negligence.
The French authorities are firmly resolved to make tangible progress in the coming months, on the basis of existing and forthcoming proposals from the Commission and from the authorities themselves to prevent our coastlines suffering a recurrence of this tragedy.
Apart from this, Europe will continue to be in the vanguard of the fight to protect our environment.
The environment must be ever better integrated into European policy.
We are familiar with some of the environmental risks connected with the globalisation of the economy, which may irreversibly compromise the living conditions of future generations.
Accordingly, the French Presidency is committed to arriving at a good agreement, as good as possible, next November, at the Hague conference on greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, and will ensure that the Kyoto Protocol is properly implemented.
(Applause)In the field of justice and home affairs, the French Presidency will ensure that the decisions taken in Tampere in October 1999 are followed up in an ambitious manner.
There must be progress in implementing a European asylum and immigration policy with regard to three specific points: the issue of long-term residence permits, the harmonisation of reception conditions, and the fight against illegal immigration and the associated 'industry' .
We all have the Dover tragedy in mind.
In accordance with the conclusions of the Feira European Council, the Presidency will draw up specific measures regarding sanctions against parties responsible for trafficking.
There will also be particular emphasis on combating drugs and the financial crime often associated with it.
In particular, Europe will have to contribute towards the adoption of measures to combat money laundering effectively in support of the action undertaken in the context of the G7 Okinawa Summit, in Japan.
I shall have the opportunity to stress this point.
Finally, we are resolved to make progress in achieving a European area of justice based on the mutual recognition of legal rulings and judgements.
Permit me, in concluding this chapter on the Europe of the citizens, to say a word or two about sport.
Now that the Euro 2000 football championship, which gave Europeans so much pleasure and so many thrills, is over,
(Applause)we must ensure that the European Union takes the specific nature of sport and its social role into more careful consideration.
There is a real problem which must be investigated and solved.
The French Presidency will make every effort to do so.
(Applause)The fourth and final focus of our presidency: a Europe with a strong international role.
In terms of the common foreign and security policy, the French Presidency will make a point of affirming the European identity, with the support of the High Representative and the Commission.
One of its priorities will be to consolidate the Europe of defence and security which has experienced spectacular progress in recent months.
This legislation must be put into practice and developed.
In the operational arena, we are to hold the Conference on the commitment of capabilities, in order to give the Helsinki objectives due credibility.
We would also like to see the interim bodies in place in Brussels since 1 March fulfilling their given role in the transition to the final phase.
In particular the interim Political and Security Committee, intended to replace the Political Committee, should gradually become the mainspring of the CFSP, supporting and with the support of Mr Javier Solana.
Finally, the arms industries must confirm the ambitious European defence policies by their harmonisation and their cooperation programmes.
The results of recent months have been very positive in this respect, in terms of helicopters, missiles and the future transport aircraft.
In all these areas, the French Presidency will spare no effort to ensure that Europe provides itself with ample resources for its foreign policy, in a spirit of friendship and cooperation, of course, with its allies.
Geographically speaking, in addition to the summits scheduled with its major partners - the United States and Canada, Russia and Ukraine - three main priorities are discernible in the field of the CFSP:
the Balkans, and the continuation of the stabilisation process which has commenced, in both the military and the economic sector.
The European Union must provide the countries in this region with a clear European perspective in order to persuade them to undertake reform and to cooperate at regional level.
This is the purpose of the summit the Feira European Council proposed should be held between the European Union and the counties of the Western Balkans;
the Mediterranean, with the fourth meeting of ministers in Barcelona and, circumstances permitting, the first Euro-Mediterranean Summit to be organised in Marseilles.
This will offer an opportunity to give new impetus to the Barcelona process by means of adopting a peace and stability charter and by strengthening economic and cultural links between the two shores of the sea we share.
Then there is Asia, with the third Asia-Europe summit (ASEM) and the bilateral summits between Europe and China and Europe and Japan.
Here too the French Presidency wishes to develop fully the relations it considers essential in order to construct the balanced multipolar world of the future.
The French Presidency is also keen to ensure that the new convention between the European Union and the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries is implemented efficiently.
Europe must be strong and open to the world.
It must therefore play its role fully and consistently and show solidarity, in order to enable a new round of global and balanced negotiations to be launched within the World Trade Organisation.
As you can see, Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the route map that France has set itself for its Presidency of the European Union is both ambitious and very specific.
In the first place, we must ensure that the institutions of the European Union are operating properly at this time when the Union is set to radically change its appearance.
Tomorrow, the number of Member States will have more than doubled and we must find procedures to enable decisions to be taken and Europe to make progress while strengthening its efficiency and legitimacy.
This is precisely what is at issue.
The European Union will only retain its dynamism and its strength if we are able to ensure that it is appreciated by the very people it serves, i.e. the citizens of Europe.
The European Parliament also shares these concerns.
By working hand in hand, with mutual trust, on each of these matters, together we shall succeed in taking Europe through the phases that are essential for the future.
It is my conviction that, in six months' time, when I come back to this Chamber to review our Presidency, Europe will not be quite the same.
We shall have consolidated the edifice by making it more welcoming both for those that already reside in it and those that wish to enter.
(Applause)
Madam President of the European Parliament, Mr President of the French Republic, ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to stand here before you at the start of this new Presidency.
It is always a very exciting moment when the torch is handed over in the race to achieve Europe' s goals, and the fact that we are in the year 2000 makes today even more special.
Europe has already taken great strides towards its goal of economic regeneration during this first half of the year thanks to the Lisbon and Feira European Councils.
Progress has also been made towards an extraordinary enlargement of the Union - enlargement which you have described, Mr Chirac, as a 'fine and necessary project' - and towards strengthening its institutions in preparation for enlargement.
I would like to welcome your incoming Presidency, Mr Chirac, and say a few words on a couple of issues you raised in your speech.
Firstly, I would like to say that I support one hundred percent your commitment to developing Europe' s social agenda.
When I presented the Commission' s strategic objectives for 2000-2005 in February, I announced that one of our major objectives would be to develop a new economic and social agenda for Europe.
Less than five months on, I am extremely encouraged by the progress which has already been made in the implementation of the economic aspects of that agenda.
The social aspects of Europe' s development are the other side of the same coin, and that is where we will focus our efforts during these next six months.
The Presidency will, in particular, have to tackle a whole range of major issues in relation to which the Commission has already tabled proposals.
Just a few days ago, the Commission adopted a social policy agenda outlining what needs to be done over the next two or three years to ensure that the conclusions of the Lisbon and Feira European Councils are translated into practical actions.
I feel that this document strikes a good balance between the political directions agreed at Lisbon and Feira and our duties and powers under the Treaty.
It should therefore meet with consensus at the Nice Council.
Indeed, it is important for the Union to avoid creating inequalities in our society, all the more so in that we now have the right economic conditions to reduce these inequalities.
The Commission therefore supports the Presidency in focusing on these issues.
The anti-racism directive was recently adopted in a record time of only six months, and we now look forward to seeing the French Presidency take up the other aspects of this extremely important anti-discrimination package with the same drive.
Indeed, the primary function of any anti-discrimination programme must be to secure equal opportunities for men and women, and we must also do everything in our power to put an end to that most detestable form of slavery, the trafficking of women and children for sexual exploitation.
One of the forms of inequality still present in European society is inequality of educational opportunities.
At Lisbon, an action plan was adopted which now needs to be implemented, and I know that the Presidency will be taking strong measures to ensure that all our young people develop the abilities they need for integration into a knowledge-based economy.
It is also our duty to advance this knowledge and increase the mobility of students, teachers and researchers in both quantitative and qualitative terms, as was proposed, at last, at Feira.
I am glad that this subject has been raised, for it is an issue of major importance, the furthest-reaching implications of which have not yet been fully examined.
Another source of inequality is the poverty trap in which too many European citizens find themselves.
At Lisbon, the European Council committed the Member States to making great efforts to eradicate poverty, and a High Level Group on social protection is working with the Commission on this ambitious strategy.
It is truly scandalous that extreme poverty still exists within our societies.
At the Nice Council we should be aiming to achieve a consensus of positions on social exclusion, and the Commission has already put forward proposals on the matter.
The Feira European Council also gave strong support to the Commission' s proposals in the area of food safety and committed the Member States to making progress on setting up an independent food safety authority as soon as the European Parliament has delivered its opinion.
I am confident that this opinion will be given by the first October part-session at the latest.
Once we have put forward our proposal, I look forward to seeing the plans for the authority move swiftly ahead under the French Presidency.
We owe this to our citizens, who will not tolerate it if we drag our feet on matters of food safety, but we must also have a common approach to this issue if we are to maintain our internal market.
We have all learnt from the recent problems and I feel that everyone is now ready to shoulder their responsibilities.
The European public is extremely concerned about environmental issues, and I stand alongside the French Presidency in the intention Mr Chirac has expressed to make the protection and improvement of the environment one of our key priorities.
Important decisions on climate change will have to be taken in November at the 6th session of the UN World Conference on Climate Change in The Hague.
At this conference, which will be one of the most important to take place since Kyoto, the Union will have to confirm its leadership role: we must fulfil the commitments we made at Kyoto and maintain the pressure on our partners to fulfil theirs.
The impact of our transport and energy policies on the environment, and, in particular, climate change, will be a key theme in two documents the Commission intends to submit to Parliament and the Council this autumn.
The first is a Green Paper on the common transport policy and the second is a strategic document on different energy sources and the security of energy supply.
These are issues of considerable concern to the European citizens, and they expect us to take effective action, especially as the situation now stands.
The citizens are also extremely concerned about oil pollution disasters on their coastlines, and if we want to avoid repetition of these disasters the Council and the European Parliament must act swiftly and adopt a package of measures on maritime safety, as we have already proposed.
Another important issue which is of concern to the citizens is the use of genetically modified organisms and biotechnology.
We must ensure adequate protection of human health and the environment while at the same time allowing society to benefit from the development of modern biotechnology.
We therefore urgently need to adopt the new framework legislation on the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms.
This series of provisions strengthens and improves the existing framework, and it is important that we achieve a balanced response that inspires both public and market confidence.
We therefore have a common, ambitious programme for the next six months and it seems to me that the various lines of action can all be traced back to a strong desire for a better quality of life.
At all levels of society, the citizens are calling throughout Europe for an improvement in social, ethical and environmental quality.
We must heed this call.
This is why I want to end by emphasising the need for a constructive relationship with our new neighbours.
One of the major challenges facing the European Union is the need to stabilise our continent, and promoting stability in the regions on our borders must clearly be a central part of that strategy.
We therefore fully support your proposal to organise a political summit between the European Union and the most democratically advanced Balkan countries.It should be noted that this framework directive is primarily aimed at conserving, protecting and improving the quality of the environment, as well as promoting the careful and rational use of natural resources.
It sets out the basic principles for a sustainable water policy in the European Union based on the principles enshrined in the Treaty, for example those relating to precautionary, preventative and corrective action by according priority to the source of the threats to the environment, as well as the polluter-pays principle.
It must be noted that this project should also apply to both surface and ground water with the aim of preventing any further deterioration, promoting the sustainable use of water based on the long-term protection of available water resources and helping to mitigate the effects of floods and droughts.
The project is designed to ensure that these water sources are maintained in good condition through a series of measures that Member States are to implement according to a specific timetable.
On the other hand, it follows that all initiatives of this type must automatically be subject to both a socio-economic and environmental assessment.
Thank you for your response, Minister.
However, given that you were able to elaborate on the matter, you no doubt have extra information.
When you referred to the studies that have been carried out, I became worried because the reason I am raising this matter is precisely due to the fact that French and Spanish citizens have alerted our attention to it and are asking for more information.
Their concern arises because this has already been the subject of a debate in Parliament that was rejected, specifically in the framework of the directive on water.
However, as you are aware, all directives contain exceptions, and this project for the transportation of water could very well come under this exception.
I am therefore seeking your assurance that until impact studies have been carried out and the members of Parliament have been informed, this project will not be the covered by an exception.
I set the project within a global and general framework and stressed that at this stage neither the French nor Spanish authorities are involved.
It goes without saying that as soon as I have further information I shall inform Mrs Isler Béguin.
With regard to her other comments, I should again like to reiterate my final remarks when I said that we must ensure that all initiatives of this type are subject to a socio-economic and environmental assessment as a matter of course.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, there have been fears expressed repeatedly in connection with the reading of the framework directive on water, that it could be possible later on in the EU to transport water from one Member State to another against the wishes of the first country.
Does the President-in-Office see such a threat as likely, and is there a need to protect Member States against it?
To be honest I have nothing further to add to my previous responses.
Question No 3 by (H-0525/00):
Subject: Digital radio Does the Council agree that a political endorsement of digital radio, similar to that given to mobile telephone technology and digital television, could help to enhance confidence in the future of radio?
.
(FR) I can simply say in response to Mr Perry' s question that owing to the absence of an initiative from the Commission, which should not be long in coming, the Council has still to determine its position on this matter.
Mr President, I am disappointed with that response.
The European Parliament held a hearing just a few weeks ago with representatives from the Minister's country as well as from my own.
The point was made very strongly there by representatives of the radio industry that digital radio is one sector of media communication that is not developing as quickly and as effectively as it might do, and the feeling was that political backing was lacking.
I would like to think that the Council, were they to receive a proposal from the Commission, would behave emphatically in support of digital radio.
A problem has also arisen that various elements of the digital radio spectrum are now being allocated across Europe often quite freely, at no charge at all.
Yet that same spectrum would, of course, be very profitable if were used for telephone communications.
I wonder if can we be assured that the Council of Ministers will look very carefully at this and be sure that it does not pose any threat to the development of digital radio in Europe.
I should like to remind you that digital audiobroadcasting has existed since 1989 and the main problem that still remains to be solved relates to the fact that the receivers are still too large.
One of the key issues that the Council - which is keeping an open approach to all of this - must look into in due course concerns the definition of particular principles that are designed to enhance the legibility and effectiveness of this area of electronic communications.
The issue of convergence between telecommunications, the media and information technology was raised at the end of 1999 during a Council meeting and again on 2 May 2000 during a public debate.
On this occasion the Council highlighted the following points, namely that the regulation should be based on clearly defined political objectives, stimulate economic growth and competitiveness and ensure general interest objectives.
The regulation should also aim at technological neutrality, with the rules that govern communication services being as far as possible independent of the technology implemented to provide these services.
On 2 May 2000, the Council stressed the importance of striking a balance between legal security, chiefly guaranteed by the binding provisions, and the ability to react speedily to technological and market developments, using flexible measures.
In other words, I repeat, the Council continues to approach the issue openly.
Question No 4 by (H-0531/00):
Subject: EU-China WTO Agreement Is the Council aware that China has ordered state-run television, newspapers, and billboard owners to stop running Sprite commercials featuring the young pop-star, Sherry Chang Huei-mei, who sang at the inauguration of President Chen Shui-bain?
Is the Council also aware that China has recently warned Hong Kong and PRC business organisations not to trade with Taiwanese firms whom the PRC deems to be pro-independence?
In view of the fact that we have recently signed an agreement with China on their admission to the WTO, how will the Council respond to the use of this type of political blackmail, which is contrary to the principles of free trade?
.
(FR) For a long time now the Council has been committed to improving the human rights situation in China, including civil and political rights, which have been adversely affected by the issues Mr Cushnahan mentioned in his question.
The key element in this commitment is the dialogue that the European Union has established with China in relation to human rights.
In spite of some progress achieved in improving the legal system with regard to economic and social rights, little progress has been achieved on the ground, particularly in the area of civil and political rights.
As a result, the Council is deeply concerned about the persistent and widespread restrictions imposed on fundamental freedoms, for example in relation to the freedom of assembly, expression and association.
It has been agreed that the European Union would continue to publicly express its concerns on the human rights situation in China and raise such matters in meetings with China at all levels.
In addition, the Council has agreed that the European Union will adopt a firm stance with regard to the motion for a resolution on human rights in China, presented by the United States at the 56th session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission.
Should the motion for a resolution be put to the vote, the Council has agreed that the Member States that are part of this commission would vote in favour of it.
Lastly, the motion for a resolution was not put to the vote following the adoption of a motion of non-intervention, on China' s initiative.
The Council also agreed that the position it would adopt during the next meeting of the Human Rights Commission would be based on the outcome of dialogue with China on the issue of human rights.
With regard to the process leading to China' s admission to the WTO, the Council is of the opinion that it is not the appropriate forum for tackling issues relating to human rights and, also believes that an increase in trade transactions would support European Union efforts with a view to guaranteeing respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law, values which form the very foundation of Europe.
Mr President, first of all let me congratulate Mr Moscovici on his country winning Euro 2000.
It is very good to welcome a former colleague into a new elevated office but let me remind you Mr Moscovici, of the frustration which we experienced as parliamentarians trying to question the Council.
I hope that the next time that you come back to this chamber you will not respond in the same curt fashion that you did to Mr Newton Dunn, if the presidency wants to work with Parliament.
As to your answer, I disagree with its contents.
I believe the response of the EU in Geneva was appalling.
It was cowardice to the highest degree that we failed to support the US initiative.
Had we taken the much stronger position, then we would not be experiencing the arrogance that we see from China.
I hope, the next time this issue comes back to the UN, that Member States will put principle above trading interests.
This is an issue where, in the WTO, China uses trade as a tool of political blackmail, and we should have used the EU/China WTO negotiations for leverage in the same way.
I would like to seek an assurance from you, given what you did say, that in future Member States will take a strong stance in their discussions with China where the abuse of human rights are concerned and will not be blackmailed by any economic threats by China in this regard.
I should like to thank you, Mr Cushnahan, for your personal words of encouragement and for your congratulations following France' s success at Euro 2000 last Sunday.
With regard to your other points, I shall endeavour, during the course of these questions, to express the views of the Council.
I should also like to remind you that the presidency has the mandate to do this on the basis of the positions adopted by the Council.
Minister, I cannot congratulate you on this success, since I must remain completely neutral, as you will appreciate.
Furthermore, I am from a country which suffered an unexpected defeat, like other Members present.
Question No 5 by Ioannis Souladakis (H-0536/00):
Subject: Improvement in the export capacities of the countries of South-Eastern Europe
The Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe is a political choice made by the European Union to which it has given a very high priority.
Within the context of this policy for south-eastern Europe it is evident that the area' s socio-economic reconstruction will play an extremely important part.
In view of this, what specific action does the Council intend to take, in the form of economic parameters for the implementation of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe, in order to improve the export capacities of the countries in the region as regards the European Union market, and to strengthen their afflicted economies?
I am well aware, Mr President, that we made few friends during Euro 2000.
The European Union supports the idea that the deepening of international trade should, in the long term, replace the dependence on foreign aid and that trade integration should constitute one of the main facets of greater integration in the longer term for the countries of south-eastern Europe in the Euro-Atlantic structures.
The stabilisation and association process is a key feature of European Union policy and, as you will be aware, it is designed to help the countries in question rebuild their economies by restoring and improving their infrastructures as well as redirecting their old war economies and planned economies towards a more market based one.
As a result of the decisions made at the Lisbon European Council, which provided that stabilisation and association agreements with the Balkan countries should be preceded by the non-symmetrical liberalisation of trade, the Commission is set to put forward a specific proposal extending the existing trade preferences through the abolition of tariff ceilings that exist for some industrial products and the improvement of the access of agricultural products to the markets.
The Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe is generally designed to help the countries of the region attain stability and economic prosperity.
In order to achieve this, a South-East regional group was set up together with a working group on economic reconstruction that also encompasses trade relations.
The importance of liberalising and facilitating trade between the countries of the region, and also between these countries and the European Union, was highlighted, by both donors and recipients, at the regional conference on Pact funding held in Brussels at the end of March this year.
In all areas covered by the Stability Pact, and therefore also in the economic and trade areas, reciprocal commitments between donors and recipients remain the key to the Stability Pact' s success.
The commitment expressed by the countries of the region to implement reforms and generate the right climate for sustainable economic progress lies at the very heart of the Pact.
Thank you for your reply; however, I have the following comments to make: I was debating the Budget 2001 in Parliament before you and the problem again arose of where to find the money to finance the Stability Pact.
In this sense, my question meant exactly that, given that we are dealing with economies which, because of the economic system in place, used to function along different trading, or rather bartering lines.
The question which I am basically asking is what can be done to ensure that products from these regions reach the markets of the Member States of the European Union?
That is the question.
In other words, what policies will strengthen production in these regions without the European Union's having to pay out money which, due in part to internal problems, it is having trouble finding anyway.
That is the nub of the problem.
My question is: exactly what steps can the European Union take in order to create these networks, which did not previously exist, so that these people can sell their products?
It is precisely, Mr Souladakis, the aim of the Stability Pact and the Association Agreements, which, as I have reminded you, include provisions in both economic and trade areas.
It is in fact our duty, once again, to agree to non-symmetrical liberalisation to offset the backwardness of these countries.
However, I can assure you that both the Council Presidency as well as the European Council Presidency consider the future of this region a priority, which is why the French President has proposed a summit of the western Balkans during our presidency, perhaps in Zagreb.
Question No 6 by (H-0539/00):
Subject: Lifting of sanctions against Iraq UN resolution 687, of 1991, indicates that sanctions against Iraq will be lifted if it agrees to renounce the weapons of mass destruction which it is alleged to possess.
Since that time, despite thorough searches by thousands of observers, no such weapons have been found, nor has any capability to manufacture them been discovered, and official reports are wholly reassuring.
However, the embargo against Iraq is still being applied, with dramatically harmful consequences for the Iraqi population.
One very typical example is the huge increase in infant mortality, which over the last ten years has been recorded at 1.5 million child deaths due to lack of medicine, food etc.
The 'oil for food' programme cannot constitute an alibi for the crime which is still being committed, since only a small part of the value of what Iraq is allowed to export returns as food and medicines, while the rest is retained for 'compensation' or remains frozen in Western banks, with Iraq unable to use it.
Is the Council looking into lifting the embargo, whose only victims are the people of Iraq, and in particular its small children?
The European Union fully implements all United Nations Security Council resolutions, including those concerning Iraq.
Resolution 1284, adopted on 17 December 1999, is aimed at recommencing UN inspections and, at the same time, improve the so-called "oil for food" programme" , and finally lifting the sanctions against Iraq.
The European Union urges the Iraqi Government to cooperate fully with the UN and its supporting bodies.
The Council notes that since 1998 no checks have been carried out to see whether Iraq is in fact complying with the wholly relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular Resolution 687.
As a result, the embargo imposed on Iraq remains in force.
We are well aware, it is true, of the serious and even worrying humanitarian situation that has arisen as a result of the embargo, particularly for the Iraqi children.
The Iraqi Government is chiefly responsible for this.
However, as the panel of experts presided by Ambassador Amorim noted in April 1999, the Iraqi population would not have suffered such privations had the measures taken in 1991 by the Security Council not had to have been extended.
The international community and the Iraqi Government should do their utmost to ensure that the "oil for food" programme works to the full advantage of the Iraqi people.
This is why the Council welcomes the creation of a United Nations working party that is responsible for making general recommendations on the way in which UN sanctions can be made more effective, for example by better targeting them, and on the ways in which needless human suffering can be avoided.
The Council noted that the United Nations Security Council, in its Resolution 1302, invited the UN Secretary General to appoint independent experts to draw up an in-depth study on the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
I asked the question because there is a certain sensitivity in France to this issue.
I have listened to the President-in-office's formal reply; however, we all know full well that the situation in Iraq is connected with the arbitrary policy imposed by the United States.
Take, for example, the air embargo, which has not been ratified by a single UN Security Council.
We also all know full well that, when Mr Ekeus, the United Nations representative, reported to the United Nations in 1997 after 6900 visits and inspections, he said that there was no reason to suspect that Iraq was harbouring nuclear or chemical weapons.
I should like to ask the French Presidency if, taking account of all this and taking account of the fact that a large slice of Iraq's oil revenues is blocked in a bank, and a French bank at that, in New York, it plans to take any initiatives during the French presidency in order to put an end to this dictatorial regime imposed by the United States at a massive cost to the people and children of Iraq.
You are right to highlight the fact that perhaps France is particularly sensitive to this issue.
However, whether or not this is true, it is not renowned for its indifference to the sufferings of the Iraqi people.
You will undoubtedly be aware that my country is a permanent member of the UN Security Council and, I repeat, hopes that all of these resolutions will be observed while at the same time seeking to examine all possible solutions, starting with the rigorous application of the "oil for food" resolution" .
This is the difficult path we must now take.
Mr President, I welcomed the Minister's reply but I would like him to give an assurance to this House that he and the Council will not lose sight in their consideration of this problem of the 604 Kuwaiti citizens who disappeared as a result of the illegal occupation of Kuwait by Iraq and that they will keep pressing the Iraqi authorities for an explanation of the fate of these people.
I should simply like to confirm our intention to examine the matter fully.
Mr President, I have submitted a similar question, Question No 20.
Unfortunately, however, the Council services informed me today that they had not had time to translate my question because it had only been submitted within three days of the deadline.
I consider that unacceptable, it is not my responsibility.
I should like to add to the debate by pointing out, as I stated in my question, that last month alone, i.e. in May, 8000 people died due to a lack of drugs.
We have doubled infant mortality due to the lack of drugs.
According to the statistics, the number of people who have lost their life in Iraq since 1990, as a result of the sanctions, now totals 1 309 153.
Genocide is being practised against the Iraqi people on the pretext of sanctions against the regime of Saddam Hussein, who is still in power, on the grounds that he has nuclear weapons, which have not been found.
My question to the Council is this: does it accept that this genocide, which has been going on for a decade, cannot continue, will it ask for the embargo against the Iraqi people to be lifted and does it intend to take measures, even unilateral measures, to protect the people of Iraq?
Firstly, I think that - although I am new to this role - there are in fact rules governing this particular exercise which require Parliament to translate the questions raised to enable the Council to answer them as precisely as possible.
Secondly, I should simply like to state that no one is sanctioning Mr Saddam Hussein' s regime through these resolutions and I think that the term 'genocide' - used here, if I am not mistaken, in relation to those that have imposed sanctions -cannot be justified.
This is neither France' s nor the Council' s position.
This is not the time to hold a debate on relations between the Council and Parliament with regard to questions, since that would take up time allotted to Question Time.
However, I must say that there are 6 questions which unfortunately, although they arrived correctly in some languages, and owing to a bank holiday in Luxembourg, I believe, did not reach the Council in all languages.
The Council has decided not to answer them.
In any event, this debate can be held in the Conference of Presidents, which deals with these relations and any incidents which may occur.
Question No 7 by Esko Olavi Seppänen (H-0542/00):
Subject: Non-allied status of certain EU Member States
At the Feira European Council discussions are being held on the EU' s defence dimension, and the matter is also up for discussion at the IGC.
Some EU Member States do not belong to the NATO military alliance.
What is the Council' s view of the position of these Member States in any future EU defence cooperation and will those Member States which belong to the alliance respect - as the Portuguese Presidency has proposed - the other Member States' desire to remain outside any alliance?
There is no problem between Parliament and the Commission.
The fact is, we received an explanation of the correct procedure, and it is in fact standard practice that we have the questions translated so as to be able to answer them properly and not have to improvise, since this would impair the quality of the answers.
To come back to the question raised, Article 17 of the Treaty on European Union lays down that Union policy under this article does not impact on the specific nature of the security and defence policy of some Member States, including non-allied Member States.
Similarly, the policy observes the obligations of the North Atlantic Treaty with regard to those Member States who consider that their common defence is provided within the framework of NATO, and it is compatible with the common security and defence policy established within this framework.
After Amsterdam, the European Union undertook a process aimed at enabling it to take all of the measures needed to play a role in the areas of conflict prevention and crisis management, measures that are defined in the Treaty on European Union and known as the Petersburg tasks, without prejudice to the position of the Member States as regards their membership or non-membership of NATO or the WEU.
This was reiterated in the presidency' s report that was approved by the Helsinki European Council.
Mr President, at the meeting at Feira it was decided to increase flexibility.
My interpretation of this is that flexibility will also be introduced in second pillar matters, in a foreign and security policy.
Is yours the same interpretation?
At the same time I have been following the French President' s ideas on how the countries of the European Union should develop at their own pace and on how there should possibly be a hard and solid core of pioneer states.
Do you consider that such a hard core - as the former President of the Commission, Jacques Delors, calls it - could include a country that is militarily non-aligned?
The question posed in this way is extremely complex and since it relates to the IGC overall, I suggest that I give you a more detailed response at a future meeting.
I simply wanted to stress that at Feira we expressed a desire to see the framework encompass non-allied countries and those countries that are not members of NATO and, if it is indeed this type of flexibility to which you refer, it will undoubtedly be implemented.
We shall, besides, have further opportunities to discuss the development of European defence and the intensified cooperation in this field.
Question No 8 by (H-0545/00):
Subject: Priorities of the French Presidency as regards the advancement of women What specific measures will the French Presidency be putting forward as its priorities for the advancement of women in Europe?
Mrs Nicole Péry, my colleague and Secretary of State for Women' s Rights, will outline next week the French presidency' s programme in this area to your committee responsible.
My intention here is to simply give a few brief details.
The Council, under the French Presidency intends to deal with several matters relating to sexual equality.
Firstly, the Commission has just sent the Council a communication entitled 'Towards a Community framework strategy for sexual equality' , also a proposal for a Council decision on a support programme for the community strategy on sexual equality, a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and Council modifying Directive 67/207/EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards - and this is crucial - access to jobs, training and vocational training and working conditions.
The French presidency, I stress, has already timetabled the presentation of these Commission texts.
As regards the proposal for a decision relating to a programme on the basis of Article 13 of the Treaty and the fact that the programme is due to start on 1 January 2001, the aim of the presidency is to adopt it during the 'employment and social welfare' council on 28 November.
With regard to the proposal for a directive, the French Presidency shall endeavour to make as much progress as possible.
Apart from these legislative texts, the Council, as in previous years, shall also to consider the implementation of the Beijing action plan by the Member States.
What is more, the French Presidency will organise two events in relation to this: a ministerial conference on 27 October in Paris that will focus on three issues - women and decision-making, reconciling family life and professional life and mainstreaming - as well as a symposium on equality in the workplace on 24 November in Paris that will centre on discrimination in recruitment and the difficulties of returning to work.
You therefore have my assurance that the French Presidency will grant the issue of sexual equality particular attention.
Mr President, I am very grateful to the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Moscovici, for his very promising reply which, furthermore, puts into practice something which Mr Chirac, President of the French Republic, said this morning, when he stated that the French Presidency had ambitious and specific aims.
You have demonstrated this in your reply.
Mr Chirac also told us that one of the most interesting aspects to be dealt with by the French Presidency would be the reconciliation of family life and working life.
In this regard I would like to ask how we will avoid this necessary concept being misused to relegate women further and also what role men will play in the reconciliation of family life and working life.
It is not something I claim to want, especially as the male gender is completely varied, and we are not all the same.
No, I think that it would be best to discuss the matter further with Mrs Péry, and simply say that, from a more philosophical point of view, the idea of reconciling family and professional life is certainly not to disadvantage women or return to a more traditional model, but on the contrary to move towards our common aim of achieving true sexual equality.
We need measures to achieve this and, I do not doubt that the contribution of men to family life forms part of this.
Question No 9 by (H-0552/00):
Subject: Council's views on the Pelinka case in Austria On 1 May 1999, Professor Anton Pelinka commented on the Italian television channel RAI on previous statements made by the Freedom Party's Jörg Haider in connection with national socialism.
On 11 May 2000, a court in Vienna (Landesgericht für Strafsachen) found Professor Pelinka guilty of slandering Jörg Haider during the broadcast and ordered him to pay a fine of ATS 60 000.
Mr Haider was represented by his lawyer, Dieter Böhmdorfer, who is now Austria's Justice Minister.
Are Professor Pelinka's remarks not completely within the bounds of acceptability in a democracy?
The question is whether the Austrian court is guilty of serious encroachment on freedom of expression in general and academic freedom in particular, given that Austria is a member of the Council of Europe and of the EU, the founding Treaty of which lays down, in Article 6(2), that the Union shall, as general principles, respect fundamental rights, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
What view does the Council take of a Member State's Justice Minister having actively pursued a prosecution which blatantly ignores the above Convention and Treaty?
My response to that will be extremely brief.
Of course the Council has been informed of this specific, undoubtedly difficult situation.
However, and you will understand this, it is not within the Council' s remit to comment on legal decisions.
Neither is it able to pass judgement on the way a legal institution is run in one of the Member States.
Mr President, I would thank the French presidency for its succinct answer.
I nonetheless have two follow-up questions, because this is a very serious case of a very dubious character from a democratic point of view.
Fourteen Member States are planning to ask experts from the Council of Europe to investigate certain states of affairs in Austria.
My first question concerns whether the French presidency considers that this request for an investigation should also apply to the Pelinka case, which would be only reasonable.
My second question concerns Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty, concerning fundamental rights.
I wonder whether the French presidency believes there is cause for examining this case on the basis of Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty.
.
(FR) In response to this point, I should simply like to remind those present that a few days ago the Portuguese Presidency, that acted in a very balanced fashion, took measures not on the Council' s behalf but on behalf of the 14, measures that we endorse and that we shall apply both in our assessment of the Austrian situation and to the continued imposition of sanctions.
We shall stick to these measures without adding further ones and of course without taking anything away from them, until we have proof that a significant assessment has been carried out on both the situation and political leanings of the FPÖ, the Austrian Freedom Party.
Mr President, Austria has very strict laws prohibiting fascism, national socialism and the resurgence thereof, and there has been a succession of convictions over the past few years.
Does the President-in-Office of the Council know of any similar, or better, legislation in other States?
Will the Council continue to ignore the fact that the sanctions against Austria decided on by the 14 Heads of Government are in violation of the European Treaties?
Will it persist in its refusal to take a stance on the matter, thereby remaining in breach of the Treaties?
Are bilateral decisions not to be dealt with by the Council in future?
I believe I have already answered the questions relating to the maintenance of sanctions and the assessment of the situation.
As regards the other points, I am not in a position to comment in detail on the judicial or legal situation in Austria, but I know that there are other countries which appear to have a far more enviable political situation.
And here I am not talking as President-in-Office of the Council but as a government minister.
The second supplementary question will be put by Mr Ford, and I must remind you that he is the author of the next question, Question No 10, which is not going to be answered as Question No 10, since it is one of the six questions that did not reach the Council in all languages.
Mr President, I should like to express my concern that nobody in the French presidency can read any of the European languages apart from French.
Also on this point, will the presidency confirm that under the Treaty it is the Fourteen - minus the country concerned - which would make a recommendation to suspend Austria from membership, should that be necessary?
I am not arguing that it is necessary, but should it be necessary, could we not expect a view from the presidency over whether this particular case actually causes it some concern?
Is it not right and proper that the same person should not be judge, jury and executioner and that the person making the accusation should not also be the minister of justice at the same time?
Would one not criticise this kind of situation in, let us say, Zimbabwe or some other part of the world, if it arose there?
(inaudible) on the French Presidency' s ability to understand languages other than French.
We are not all uneducated and illiterate.
There are so-called rules of transmission between Parliament and the Council, which have prevented these questions from arriving today.
I sincerely hope that, with or without translation, things will be sorted out for future part-sessions.
These are short-term teething troubles.
With regard to the other points you raised, as you have understood, the French presidency intends to observe the measures that have already been decided on by the Fourteen.
And when I say 'Fourteen' I mean that it is not exactly a Council matter, rather a matter between the 14 Member States themselves.
What is more, I repeat, these measures are of a strictly bilateral nature and do not impact on the fact that Austria is a member of the European Union, with access to all of its institutions and participating in all of its bodies and, throughout our Presidency, will be treated as such.
In other words, it will genuinely be treated as a major player within the European Union.
Mr President, I asked the President-in-Office to answer my question whether Article 7 of the Treaties actually asks the Fourteen to take action in respect of a country whose human rights record is called into question.
He seems to imply that this is a matter for the Presidency-in-Office and not for fourteen sets of bilateral relations.
.
(FR) I think there is some ambiguity surrounding this issue.
No one is saying that Austria has been expelled from the European Union, something I stressed earlier.
At the same time, these measures were adopted by 14 Member States on a political basis, and we are, of course, continuing to act on a political basis while once again fully respecting Austria' s rights as a member of the European Union.
This is one of the questions which will not be answered by the Council, since it did not reach the Council on time in all languages.
Parliament will consider this issue, but today we are not going to discuss it further, if the Members agree.
Question No 11 by Maj Britt Theorin (H-0554/00):
Subject: International Criminal Court
The Commission, and particularly the Commissioner for humanitarian aid, played an important role in the setting-up of the new, permanent International Criminal Court (ICC) in June 1998.
The adoption of the Rome Statute - on which the ICC is founded - was an important step in breaking the tendency towards the systematic use of rape as a strategy of war.
The Statute is the first international accord to stipulate that rape, sexual slavery and forced pregnancy may be treated as crimes against humanity and war crimes.
However, to become a reality, the Rome Statute must be ratified by 60 States.
Although all the EU Member States have signed the Statute, only Italy, unfortunately, has ratified it.
What initiatives does the Council intend to take to ensure that the other Member States also ratify the Statute?
.
(FR) In order to obtain a precise answer to this question, Mrs Theorin should refer to oral question H-0217/00 raised by Mr Cushnahan during the part-session in March, in which the Council stated that, since these Statutes were adopted in Rome on 17 July 1998, it strongly urged Member States to ratify them as they lay the foundations for the International Criminal Court.
Let us not forget that such ratification, as a legal principle, is, nonetheless, something that relates to the exclusive competence of the sovereign Member States.
Mr President, it is good news that France and Belgium have just recently ratified the treaty concerning the International Criminal Court, but I am nonetheless concerned about developments.
It is now two years since the Treaty arising out of the Rome Conference was signed, and only a fifth of the States required have ratified the creation of a permanent International Criminal Court.
At this rate, it is doubtful whether we shall meet our December deadline.
I certainly think the EU ought to be leading the way in creating an international legal system and, when the national legal systems do not function, the international community must be ready to take action against the worst offenders.
That applies especially to attacks on women and girls and to the deficiencies we know existed in devising and implementing the war crimes tribunals in connection with Rwanda and Yugoslavia in the 1990s.
These clearly show that present systems are inadequate for combating crimes such as forced pregnancy, sexual slavery and systematic rape.
If the ICC is to become a reality and to operate effectively, broad international support is required.
I must nonetheless ask the Council if it is planning to take special initiatives to encourage ratification, also by non-EU States.
Russia and the United States are important in this connection.
Once again, the Council is of the opinion that the successful conclusion of the conference on the creation of an International Criminal Court would be a significant historical achievement in terms of making the world a safer and more just place.
How can we even consider adopting a harder line at the same time, given that we cannot encroach on the sovereignty of States as regards the ratification of Treaties?
I should also like to point out that France, for example, has also ratified this Treaty, which it strongly supports and a few months ago I accompanied the French President on a visit to The Hague during which we paid a visit to the International Criminal Court for the former Yugoslavia.
This demonstrates to what extent we are committed to this matter, however our only weapon is our ability to urge them to cooperate.
Question No 12 by (H-0556/00):
Subject: Role of the diamond trade in African wars It is a known fact that the violence in both Sierra Leone and the Great Lakes region is linked to the monopolies on local mineral deposits and the struggles to gain control of those monopolies.
Some Member States, for example the United Kingdom, are already planning to impose an embargo on Sierra Leonean diamonds because there is ample evidence that the trade in precious stones has been and is still being used to finance the RUF guerrillas.
Is the Council considering the possibility of influencing the trade in diamonds from Sierra Leone and the Great Lakes region in a way that might prove conducive to peace in those areas?
If so, could it say what steps it is taking or will take in the immediate future to achieve that end?
The Council has voiced its concerns on several occasions in relation to the illegal diamond trade that is fuelling conflicts in several countries in Africa, for example in Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Sierra Leone.
On 13 June, the Council warned the government of Liberia that it was not acting responsibly with regard to the situation in Sierra Leone, particularly in relation to the illegal trade in diamonds.
The European Union will take this into account in its policy, especially within the framework of the Lomé Convention.
Let me specify, however, that the Council has not yet discussed the initiatives put by the United Kingdom to the United Nations Security Council, nor has it established contact with the largest diamond importers with a view to preventing the illegal trade in diamonds.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I truly regret your reply.
I believe that the problem relating to the trafficking in diamonds, which has cost, and is costing, many lives, deserves much more decisive and firm attention from the Council.
I clearly cannot blame you for this, since you have just taken over the Presidency, but I would ask you to adopt much more energetic and forceful decisions.
The European Union is committed to promoting peace and stability, not only in Europe, but throughout the world.
If diamonds are not controlled it is clear that peace and stability in Africa cannot be promoted.
In the case of Sierra Leone, Great Britain had supported the embargo, and France as well, to a certain extent.
The Council could promote a generalised embargo of all diamonds originating in Africa and, above all, the control of certificates.
We know these measures would be difficult to implement but, in any event, any advance in this respect would save human lives and contribute to the pacification of truly dramatic conflicts in Africa.
Yes, I was simply outlining the stage the Council' s work has reached, which does not mean to say that we are not giving the matter our fullest attention and will not keep you regularly informed.
I was merely giving you a progress report.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Question No 13 is one of six questions which the Council will not reply to today because of procedural problems.
As the author is not present, Question No 14 lapses.
Question No 15 by Mr Medina Ortega will not be replied to because its subject appears in the agenda of the present part-session.
Question No 16 by (H-0565/00):
Subject: Violations of Cypriot airspace by Turkish fighter-planes Cyprus, a country which is due to join the EU within the next few years, is continuously subjected to Turkish aggression.
Apart from the fact that the Turkish army has occupied 37% of Cypriot territory for 26 consecutive years, Turkey - a candidate for EU membership - disputes the island's status as an independent state on an almost daily basis.
The latest incidents have been the subject of complaints to UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan on mass violations of Cypriot airspace and the Nicosia F.I.R. by a total of 78 Turkish fighter-planes on 27 and 30 April, and on 1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 17, 18, 19 and 26 May 2000.
The complaints were lodged through the most official channel by means of a letter from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations, Ambassador Zackheos, to Mr Annan on 5 June.
What is the Council's official position on violations of the national sovereignty of an independent Member State of the UN and a candidate for EU membership, and to what extent are the tactics pursued by Turkey consistent with conduct befitting a modern European State?
Mr Marinos has drawn the Council' s attention to the violations of Cypriot airspace by Turkish fighter planes.
The Council values the principle of sovereignty highly, and in this case can only reiterate its commitment to Resolution 353 of 20 July 1974 of the United Nations Security Council as well as Resolution 3212 of the United Nations General Assembly of 1 November 1974 which requested all States to respect the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus.
The Council of course expects all applicant countries to observe European values and establish good neighbourly relations with their neighbours.
With regard to Cyprus, the process for resolving the Cypriot problem was launched under the auspices of the United Nations.
The Council, which supports the efforts of the United Nations Secretary General, expects Turkey, and other countries, to contribute to the success of these negotiations in order to achieve a just and lasting resolution to the Cypriot question.
I thank the Minister although, unfortunately, I do not consider his answer satisfactory.
The Council refers constantly to the Cyprus problem, but what we are talking about here is the occupation of 40% of the territory of an independent Member State of the UN and candidate for accession to the European Union, which is being left to the mercy of a powerful occupying force.
Encouraged by tolerance and compliance on the part of Europe and the United States, Turkey engaged the other day in a new act of aggressive provocation which could well have been the cause of war between two equally powerful countries.
The Turkish occupying forces occupied another 200 metres of Cypriot soil and set up a roadblock next to the last British base, cutting off 10 Greek Cypriots who are now hostages.
My question to the Council is this: does it intend to tolerate and again fail to react decisively to this aggression on Turkey's part?
Does it still not realise that Turkey has nothing but contempt for international law and is exposing the credibility of the UN, provoking the European Union and putting the Greek Government in a difficult position?
I would remind you that Greece lifted its veto against Turkish candidacy on the basis of promises by the other 14 Member States that Turkey would change its tune.
Perhaps Turkey feels that its compliance is something akin to the Munich Agreement and that is why it is advancing?
I had understood the question perfectly.
I simply wished to reiterate my previous answer while stressing that we could not claim that Turkey was being provoked in any way to adopt an aggressive position.
Minister, I understand your unwillingness to give a clear, spontaneous reaction to Turkey's intolerable conduct in Cyprus.
Your predecessors were equally unwilling to condemn Turkey's conduct in Cyprus outright and, I fear, your successors will take the same approach, now that the American-, but not just the American-inspired formula of two sets of rules for and two attitudes towards Turkey has been adopted, together with the convenient method of taking refuge in pretexts such as the supposedly clear prospect of settling the Cyprus question, which has lasted 26 years now, and the supposedly concomitant need to appease the puppet of Ankara, Mr Denktash.
Nonetheless, allow me to risk another question, in the hope this time of receiving a satisfactory answer.
Is the French Presidency ready and willing to stop acting like Pontius Pilate and to make it unconditionally clear to Turkey, on behalf of the European Union, that, first: Cyprus will become a full member of the European Union, irrespective of whether or not the Cyprus problem is solved first, given that no such solution will be possible due to Turkey's intransigence and, secondly: that Turkey will forever remain a candidate and only a candidate country if it continues to violate the fundamental principles of international law and the European ideal?
Question No 17 by (H-0569/00):
Subject: Milosevic Over the last few days, a number of media have carried reports that one Member State of the European Union is currently acting as a mediator in an effort to find a 'way out' from the serious situation in Serbia.
Those media allege that, together with other members of the international community, that Member State is working on a scenario whereby Mr Milosevic and his family would be granted exile and protection, i.e. immunity from prosecution by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, in exchange for his giving up power.
Does not the Council feel that such a scenario, if it ever became reality, would constitute a complete U­turn in the policy pursued hitherto by the European Union against persons indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia?
Does it not also feel that a U-turn of this nature would have serious consequences for the credibility of the future International Criminal Court?
The indiscreet remarks to which Mr Dupuis refers, that were published by some sections of the international press and concerned confidential negotiations between some governments with the aim of guaranteeing President Milosevic and his family exile and protection, have been officially denied by all of the governments concerned.
The European Union' s policy that aims to guarantee full and unconditional support to the International Criminal Court for crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia, and all initiatives undertaken to apprehend all persons accused of these crimes and subject them to international justice, remains - I assure you -absolutely and wholly unchanged.
) Minister, I am completely satisfied with your answer and I note your voice is failing you somewhat owing to the length of this session.
I should like to thank you for your positive start and hope that the rest of the presidency continues well.
I wish you every success.
We also thank the Minister for being present, and we naturally hope that his cold will clear up.
I am also suffering.
These summer colds need a lot of attention.
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed.
Questions Nos 18, 21 and 24 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes Questions to the Council.
(The sitting was suspended at 7.45 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.).
Draft supplementary and amending budgets (SAB) for 2000
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports:
(A5-0183/2000) by Mr Bourlanges on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on draft supplementary and amending budget 1/2000 to the budget of the European Communities for the financial year 2000;
(A5-0192/2000) by Mr Virrankoski on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on draft supplementary and amending budget 2/2000 to the budget of the European Communities for the financial year 2000.
As Mr Bourlanges is not yet here, I should like to give Mr Virrankoski the floor for five minutes.
Mr President, draft supplementary and amending budget no.
2/2000 contains appropriations for the Council and for Parliament.
The Council' s budget is EUR 6.635 million.
This is going towards the needs of a common foreign and security and defence policy.
EUR 5.877 million are estimated to be required for renting, renovating and furnishing a new building.
This building will be for the needs of the staff required to implement the policy.
EU military staff will be posted there, for example, including military experts who have been transferred from Member States.
They may be around 45 at first, but that number may later grow to 60 or even 90.
Their pay will amount to EUR 758 000 by the end of the year.
Under the old gentleman' s agreement, neither institution - neither the Council nor Parliament - has become involved in the other' s draft budget.
The draft supplementary and amending budget for the European Parliament contains an appropriation of EUR 15 million for an additional prepayment for office space in Brussels.
This will reduce annual interest by EUR 2.2 million over a ten-year period.
This will leave a margin in the financial perspectives of EUR 69.1 million.
The Committee on Budgets transferred EUR 38 million of unused funds this year by means of a C6/2000 to fund this office space, the Spinelli building.
As the President has also been able to transfer funds for this purpose, altogether at this stage we can use around EUR 58 million for accelerated payments, which will lessen annual payments over the ten-year period by around EUR 8 to 9 million for Parliament, which is a great relief.
It is only reasonable that the European Parliament should pay for its office space ahead of time.
In that way interest payments are saved and, at the same time, we have a little room for manoeuvre in the budget for the years to come.
We shall need this, as, with eastward enlargement, Parliament' s other expenses will increase.
Parliament' s share of Category 5 expenses, or administrative expenses, in supplementary and amending budget no.
2/2000 will now rise to 20.41%, which is just over the 20% ceiling that Parliament itself set.
Originally, when the budget was being drafted, the share of administrative expenses was to remain below 20%.
As it is very likely that a considerable portion of the appropriations set aside for members' regulations, for example, (which amount to EUR 60 million), will remain unspent, and as more than half the year has now gone by, this ceiling may be reviewed at the end of the year.
On the other hand we must realise that Parliament is saving money, as the investment it is making is a most prudent one.
The Council' s budget is interesting, as there are appropriations in it for the first time for a common security and defence policy.
Structures are being created for the Council for the defence dimension to be tied more tightly to the work of the EU, in accordance with the conclusions of the Helsinki Summit.
This will be an extremely difficult issue for the small, non-aligned countries, such as Finland, for example.
The scars left behind in Kosovo, after the crisis management operation, are frightening.
How justified is humanitarian military action, and what are its limits?
A big problem will be future budget technology.
Article 28 of the Treaty is unclear, particularly regarding a common security, defence and military policy.
Administrative expenditure is part of the EU budget, but the Council has discretionary powers with regard to operational expenses.
What then is to be the practice in future, and how much of this expenditure will we try to place under Category 4.
External Action - which is already now overburdened?
In future talks, the classification of expenditure must be made clearer and executed more effectively, to comply with Parliament' s wishes.
Before I give Mr Bourlanges the floor for five minutes, I should like to point out that we have an extremely long agenda today and I should therefore like to ask you to keep to the speaking time where possible, otherwise we shall be here until midnight.
And no-one wants that.
Mr President, I shall endeavour to act on your good advice.
The supplementary and amending budget presented here should not pose any major problems for the simple reason that, if adopted - and it is good to see that Parliament has an opportunity to introduce several elements and budgetary choices that suit it and are to its liking, generally speaking, it is a draft that the Council will consider positive as well.
In fact, as far as this draft budget is concerned, the Council is the outright winner and legitimately so; not by scoring a victory against us, rather it is a winner all round.
This is because this budget is essentially designed to enable the Council to recover the surplus balances from last year, which amount to EUR 3.2 billion.
It includes a lower contribution in terms of the British rebate and a greater yield in own resources, for example customs duties, all of which is deducted from the costs it has to bear.
The draft presented here can therefore be considered positively by both the Council and Parliament.
This is firstly because during the trialogue, we all agreed that the budget presented should not be limited to merely returning the balances to the Member States, but should also include expenditure and constitute a genuine supplementary and amending budget.
For Parliament this represents a limited victory but a significant one nonetheless.
In the second place, we have made several decisions that can be viewed in a positive light.
First, we have introduced a special contribution for orphan drugs of up to EUR 1 million.
Thanks to the legal basis that now exists we are able to fund these orphan drugs.
This is considered a priority by the committee responsible, the Committee on Budgets and Parliament itself.
Second - and this is the second major contribution to the issue - we have introduced extra resources, which total some EUR 11 million.
Five million are to go to the High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and six million to the United Nations interim mission in Kosovo to fund the interim civil administrations.
Once again, the legal bases exist to make these possible.
We have the resources, the needs are there, Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina are top priorities and we have chosen to finance them, but the question is how.
This is to be achieved using commitment appropriations from the ECIP appropriations that no longer serve a purpose and, though they exist as appropriations, the absence of legal basis means that they cannot be used.
It is therefore expenditure that has been secured by a sacrifice that barely costs us anything.
The third significant element relates to the financing of the special aid for Montenegro.
You will be aware that we were all against this aid being financed with resources from other foreign programmes, in particular the MEDA programme.
We therefore decided to fund it using the margin which totals 21 million in this heading.
We need 20 million.
Budgetary history works in our favour in this case and by using almost this entire margin, this initiative can be financed without any reduction or transfer from other appropriations, which is highly satisfactory.
Now - and I shall end on this point - the main question that remains to be answered is whether or not the Council will support us from a procedural point of view.
We have had a first reading in the Council, this is our first reading, and we should very much like to conclude matters on the basis of this first reading.
In other words, we hope that the Council' s second reading that takes place on 20 July will take up our first reading, if not we shall have to proceed to a second reading.
I do not believe that it would be in the Council' s interest - and it is a pity that they are not present this evening - to do this.
What is more, I should like to stress another important point in that if we proceed to a second reading, in order to adhere to the strict timetables set, we should have to attend a session in August in order to vote on this SAB at second reading, which is obviously out of the question.
It has always been the rule in Parliament and the other institutions that August is excluded from the timetables set.
I am sure that the Council will adhere to that rule as it is in their interests, our interests and both of our interests to agree on both the procedure to adopt as well as the substance of the budget.
Mr President, Commissioner, fellow members, it may only be July, but today, the European Union and the European Parliament come to the Member States bearing gifts in the form of a supplementary budget refunding EUR 3.2 billion to their original owners.
In short, we are not handing out gifts; we are returning the money to its original owners, i.e. the Member States and, at the end of the day, the taxpayers.
This shows that we are handling funds properly and the rapporteur, my friend Jean-Louis Bourlanges, has just set the facts of the matter out clearly for us.
I should like to extend my warmest thanks to both him and Mr Virrankoski for the supplementary budget, which applies mainly to Parliament and the Council.
We are spending funds economically, that is our main job.
We are handling funds properly, and that too is our main job.
This was a topic which we were able to focus on this morning.
Allow me to make one comment to the Council.
I hope now the building is finally ready that Mr Solana will at last be able to move in with his work and his top secret documents.
We really do have more important things to worry about than how to hide papers from unwanted visitors.
That was why I voted passionately in favour of this transfer of funds, so that these technical problems can be solved once and for all and nothing more can stand in the way of a successful European security and defence policy.
As far as Parliament is concerned, we have used our supplementary budget to reduce interest payments still further.
This gives us room for manoeuvre within the margin which we set for ourselves in category 5 and ensures that we can use the money reasonably and sustainably for parliamentary work and not for interest payments as part of our building policy, which is why the PPE will, of course, be voting in favour of both the Bourlanges and Virrankoski reports.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I have nothing much to add in principle to what has already been said.
We too shall, of course, be voting in favour of the two reports.
What I have to say refers to supplementary and amending budget 1 which, as Mr Ferber has just said, brings Christmas in July for the Council.
The Council has the enviable task of being able to claw back and budget EUR 3.2 billion.
If only we could attract the same intensive and intense attention and discussion when we discuss the fact that we are looking for 200 million in order to balance the budget next year and finance a task which has a huge effect on Europe, i.e. Kosovo or the Balkans as a whole.
The figure under discussion at present is 3.2 billion, i.e. sixteen times that amount, and it will rightly be refunded, on that I have no doubt.
The figure of 200 million will then probably be discussed elsewhere.
We had this problem last year and we shall no doubt face a similar problem again this year.
In terms of order of size, it may perhaps be a little more, but the principle is the same and it is a problem we have to solve.
My request to the Council is: bear this in mind, including for the forthcoming negotiations.
It would be wonderful of course if we did not have to give back all the money which we are now refunding, if there were an agreement between the Council and Parliament whereby we could retain some of the money for contingencies.
That would, of course, enable us to change the whole modus operandi between us in the future.
I admit it is a highly unusual proposal, but we should consider the possibility of a reserve for contingencies.
I think that would help to defuse individual budget debates.
I should like to address another two parts of the supplementary budget.
The first is that, thanks to the excellent proposal by our rapporteur Mr Bourlanges, we have indeed managed to provide 20 million for Montenegro, where we have agreed to urgent procedure.
However, we must find this 20 million by squeezing the margin dry.
We cannot use the 3.2 billion; instead we must squeeze the margin dry.
We do not need to be told, as the English say, to put our money where our mouth is, i.e. where it is needed; on the contrary, we are giving the money back and then looking around for spare change in order to perform our duties.
I should like to ask the Council to be a little more circumspect in its announcements and promises in the future unless, at the same time, it intends to tell us what we should cross out elsewhere.
I can only ask the Council in the present procedure - relating to supplementary budget 1 - not to cause any more problems by withholding its approval.
It really would be most welcome for the forthcoming budgetary procedure if the Council could be accommodating here and vote with us.
That would be a good sign and could shape the forthcoming budget debates.
My request to the Council is: please proceed as I suggest; we shall be more than happy to acknowledge such a procedure.
Mr President, the rapporteur has already explained the SAB is asking to approve two separate sums of money.
I hope that these sums have been arrived at after taking good account of the principles of budgetary prudence and value for money.
The political decision to approve the building for Mr Solana and the 45 military personnel had already been taken by the fifteen Member States at Helsinki.
I would like to raise three issues about this.
Firstly, it is not clear why the military personnel in the building should be counted as administrative expenditure.
They would more appropriately come under the heading of operational expenditure.
Secondly, I understand there is a gentlemen's agreement according to which the European Parliament and the Council agreed not to interfere with each other's budget.
I believe this has been pushed to its limit.
The Council's interpretation of the gentlemen's agreement is certainly imaginative.
The agreement applies to buildings and Council staff but not necessarily to seconded military personnel, whose salary comes from their own Member State.
However their overheads would be paid for by the EU in the future with no real monitoring or accountability role by any institution.
Thirdly, I am not satisfied with the use of the SAB as an instrument for this because these extra needs were foreseen prior to the conclusion of the budgetary process last year and should have been incorporated in this year's budget.
In accordance with the spirit of the gentlemen's agreement, I will not comment on the need for 45 military personnel in the building.
That will surely be as safe as Fort Knox.
The point I wish to raise here is that Council must apply the same sort of budgetary rigour to its administrative expenditure as it expects of other institutions.
And I would like some reassurance in the future that this expenditure will be spent in the most efficient and economic way possible.
On Parliament's request for the extra 15 million for the additional advance payment for the new building in Brussels, although it can be identified as a prudent step which will allow considerable savings in the future, I am concerned about the messages that this may convey.
I believe it is crucial for Parliament to introduce activity-based budgeting as a matter of utmost urgency.
I had in fact forgotten to mention the fourth amendment, which, as it does not refer to expenditure, may appear less relevant, but it would be wrong to assume this.
I simply wanted to say that one of Parliament' s amendments included the creation, in B5-671N, of a line for financing a 'Rapid Reaction Facility' which is designed - pursuant to the provisions of the Interinstitutional Agreement on budgetary discipline - to make it possible, thanks to a token entry, to allocate sufficient resources when the regulation is finally adopted.
The Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy considers this a priority and I regret not mentioning it earlier.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, here we are, at the beginning of the second half of the year 2000, debating the first two proposed amendments to the current budget.
The first proposed amending budget relates to the Commission's budget.
The second relates to the Council's and Parliament's budget, in both cases on the question of building policy.
While the extra 15 million granted by Parliament is to be used to pay off the buildings early, thereby saving interest in the future, the extra Council expenditure will give rise to further expenditure in the future because other buildings will be rented in Brussels to house sectors such as the security policy.
As the Commissioner responsible for budgets, I naturally take a more kindly view of expenditure which saves money in the future - that is meant as a little dig at the Council, which is not yet here - although the Council's concerns are also well founded.
If new tasks are to be adopted, then they need to be given staffing and administrative support.
I only hope that the Council also grants the Commission the same courtesy and does not use one sauce for the goose and one for the gander.
Supplementary and amending budget 1 contains important amendments on the income side - as has been stressed - and on the expenditure side of the Budget 2000.
On the income side, the refund of the surplus EUR 3.2 billion from 1999, as already mentioned.
A number of other important corrections have also been made, meaning that contributions for the year 2000 can now be finalised.
On the expenditure side, the following amendments have been made: provision has been made in the budget for the planned Repatriation Fund for non-military intervention in crisis areas, as already mentioned by the rapporteur.
The funding for the UNMIK high representative in Kosovo and Bosnia has been amended and EUR 11 million will now be provided.
For Montenegro, additional aid of EUR 20 million is to be provided.
I should like to thank the rapporteurs and to tell the rapporteur, Mr Bourlanges, that the Commission has accepted all Parliament's proposed amendments, even where, for example in the case of Montenegro, the remaining margin is extremely tight, but that means we must be economical and that is what we intend to be.
The Commission will do its best to ensure that the Council does not take this to a second reading, thereby postponing the resolution until September.
Perhaps the reduction in payments will be incentive enough for the Council to follow Parliament's example in coming to a rapid decision, for which I should like once again to thank the House.
Thank you, Commissioner.
You belong to the progressive school in the Commission, which understands that, in evening sittings, the popularity of the speaker rises in direct proportion to the brevity of his or her intervention.
Thank you.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.
Liberalisation of energy markets
The next item is the report (A5-0180/2000) by Mr Mombaur on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy on the Commission's second report to the on the state of liberalisation of the energy markets Council [COM(1990) 198 - COM(1999) 164 - COM(1999) 612 - COM(2000) 297 - C5-0163/2000 - 2000/2097(COS)].
Mr President, the gas and electricity market is, without doubt, essential both to Europe's competitiveness and to environmental protection.
We have drafted a report in response to four Commission documents, the basic aim of which is to make one overall market out of fifteen individual markets.
As rapporteur for the committee, I should like to draw the House's attention to a number of points, Mr President, but perhaps you will allow me to stop for a moment because Madam Vice-president has just joined us.
I repeat, the basic aim of our report is to respond to four Commission documents and to make one overall gas and electricity market out of fifteen individual markets.
The committee has identified a number of points here, which I should like to list.
First, the Union citizens' right to freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services has so far only been partially implemented.
We advise that this implementation be accelerated.
Secondly, we welcome the fact that suppliers are forming new structures and we call on the Commission in its capacity as the competition authority, in collaboration with the national mergers and monopolies commissions, to ensure that new monopolies do not emerge, that new suppliers have free access to the grid, that exchanges are set up and that consumers can change their supplier.
Thirdly, we are concerned about security of supply and consider that great care should be taken to ensure that the Member States which so wish can impose so-called public-service obligations on the competitors involved.
The Treaty contains rules on transparency and clarity in this respect but it also allows the Member States to make their own decision here.
We want to ensure that this remains the case.
My fourth point concerns regulators.
Most, although not all Member States have introduced regulators.
We note that, in the countries in which regulators have been introduced, not only large consumers, but also medium-sized and small consumers can take better part in the market and the conditions for using the grid are clearer.
Perhaps we need to reconsider if the negotiated network access model is the right approach, because it makes life easy for large consumers but difficult for medium-sized consumers and may be an instrument which hampers the European market as a whole.
Fifthly, the grids are the central market place for the markets.
We therefore need free access, and that means that tariffs must give the market the right signal of non-discriminatory access for everyone and - and this is the purpose of the so-called Florence process - good cross-border tariffs must be set which allow cross-border trade.
A model has been worked out here whereby the costs of cross-border trade are paid into funds.
The money is paid in by the national grid operators and paid out to those providing through lines.
Commissioner, Madam Vice-president, I have two comments to make on this.
First, we feel that the costs calculated by the grid operators appear to have been plucked out of thin air.
We need to examine these costings closely in order to ensure that they are not completely out of line.
Secondly, the costs included in the tariffs must be sure to give the market the right incentive, i.e. they must cover all losses and encourage investment.
That is an important point in this process.
Sixthly: not all cross-border services have the necessary capacity.
This needs to be calculated and, if necessary, rectified or allocated in accordance with the markets, perhaps by auction.
Then there are two more points which I should like to address.
We hope to discuss with the Commission in committee exactly how imports of gas and electricity from the Central and Eastern European countries are to be dealt with, because we do not want to damage our own gas and electricity market in Europe by accepting different safety standards or the wrong competition terms.
Finally, in the case of electricity, transmission system operators have formed an association and it was with the help of this association that results were achieved in Florence.
We call on the Commission to use its influence and to take its own action to form a similar association for gas transmission system operators so that results similar to those achieved in Florence can be achieved in Madrid in the parallel process for the gas sector.
Energy, and electrical energy in particular, is of enormous importance to economic activity and social well-being, with a volume of business of some EUR 150 billion per year.
Since the first directive on its liberalisation was adopted in 1996, and the second in 1998, there has been a significant fall in prices, especially in the countries in which those directives have been most strictly applied.
I agree with the Commission, and with the rapporteur, on the need for liberalisation to be speeded up, so that the Community can fully benefit from a dynamic and competitive market.
Nevertheless, despite the fact that the current regulations lay down the essential principles on the conditions, methods and pace of liberalisation, there are certain extremely important aspects which must be dealt with by means of additional measures and specific solutions.
I am talking about the management of congestion, the cross-boundary aspects and the existing bottlenecks in the European transport networks, which hinder the balanced distribution of the benefits of these measures, which may facilitate the creation of a single market at Community level.
On the other hand, there is still the practice of discriminatory prices for transfer between the Member States and the monopolies which own the networks, which hinders the genuine liberalisation of the sector.
I believe that these practices, as well as the possible substitution of the well-known national monopolies by a European oligopoly, should be combated relentlessly by the services which come under the responsibility of the Commission.
Although this issue is of concern to us and deserves much consideration, I would like to end by supporting the balanced report of the rapporteur and highlighting the need to realise the expectations of our citizens as soon as possible.
Mr President, in his report Mr Mombaur has certainly given a comprehensive coverage of the implications of the liberalization of these markets.
Energy, of course, is not just any good or service.
It is very basic and very essential and has to be treated differently from normal goods.
The two directives were very carefully calculated to ensure that there would not be huge and sudden job losses - approximately 250,000 jobs have been lost in this sector, with more to come - and secondly to allow those Member States which had invested heavily in, for example, nuclear energy to do some strategic planning and not leave them with too much in the way of stranded costs.
For that reason they were not full speed ahead directives.
Nevertheless they should have been implemented on time by every Member State and they were not.
Those which delayed were wrong, especially those which at the same time took advantage of the opening of markets elsewhere and we have evidence that this also applies to countries outside the European Union.
I have said that the job losses were very considerable.
There has also been a great deal of upheaval and restructuring and some evidence of the formation of new monopolies, something which must be combated.
There has been a diminution in the amount of research and development and that is a shame.
There is a lack of harmonization to date and Mr Mombaur is quite right to call for harmonization.
I am fairly sceptical about allowing the regulators to do that through the Florence work.
The question of public service obligations is mentioned several times in the report.
The Socialist Group has put forward an amendment asking for a framework directive ensuring that in sectors like energy services of general interest are protected.
I hope that will be supported.
Although there are difficulties with the two directives and liberalization, it is part of creating Europe and lower prices do benefit people.
However there are environmental implications which we have not taken very seriously.
The Lisbon Council asked the Commission to look at the possible need for an acceleration.
I do not agree, however, with preaching to Member States and telling them what they should be doing.
It is up to them to decide.
I am very anxious that renewable energy is supported in a liberalised market.
That is not easy to do and it is something the Parliament holds dear.
I am very concerned about the threat to combined heat and power in the gas directive.
That needs to be rectified very quickly.
Mr President, Commissioner, I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur for the great care he has taken over this report.
Two major factors can be identified with regard to the liberalisation process of the energy market.
First of all, the liberalisation process does not proceed at the same pace in all the Member States and secondly, there is also a difference in timing within the respective Member States.
Moreover, it is also worth emphasising that the way energy markets are opened up depends greatly on the geographic location of the Member State in question.
For the reasons set out above, it would be preferable to adopt a pragmatic rather than a theoretical approach.
The pragmatic approach is also the way forward if we want to achieve Member-State-specific liberalisation, for, in our opinion, we should not speed up the directive' s implementation but rather carry it out gradually.
Against this background, it is important for the amendment tabled by our group to be approved within the Commission.
This aims to force Member States to set up independent regulatory bodies that will be authorised to encourage full competition.
The same amendment also aims to promote the interests of the consumers within the liberalised energy market by guaranteeing universal service provision.
Finally, I would like to emphasise that our proposal on laying down a detailed schedule, in the course of which clearly defined goals would need to be accomplished, is important if we are eventually to achieve gradual, yet full, liberalisation of the energy market.
Acceptance of this proposal within the plenary will put a stop to unfair competition which is currently affecting the electricity market and which is caused by liberalisation being applied in different ways within the Member States.
Mr President, monopolies are not acceptable, whether state or otherwise, and we must be careful with the single market not to create new private monopolies in the energy sector.
I would also like to emphasise that the concept of public service and of the public good must go hand-in-hand with liberalization.
I am referring to social and environmental concerns which this Parliament has always supported but which are not yet sufficiently articulated in the energy sector with reference to the single market.
It is particularly regrettable that liberalization has gone hand-in-hand with a negative impact on energy saving.
This is something that we all pay a great deal of lip service to but we are in practice regressing, we are going backwards on energy-saving.
We must meet our Kyoto commitments: we have international treaties and obligations under them and it is time that we took this more seriously.
I welcome proposals for network access for renewable energies.
Subsidies for traditional forms of energies have been intense and are partly responsible for limited progress on renewables.
It would be very regrettable if Japan, for example, were to surpass us in the new technologies which we have developed and researched over many years.
This is currently something that we should be concerned about.
If we support network access for renewables in Europe, we should not find ourselves in this position.
Liberalization should apply to all energy sectors, particularly the nuclear sector where there are huge subsidies from some states.
Yet the Commission is not tackling this head on.
Perhaps it is afraid.
I have discussed this with Commissioner Monti.
He is a powerful Commissioner and even he is unwilling to tackle some of the Member States head on in this regard.
But it is a level playing field, fair is fair, and the nuclear sectors cannot be subsidised.
Finally on the Florence process, we must involve the Parliament and we must have some democratic involvement in this process.
We cannot just let it remain outside Parliamentary control although it has been useful in some respects.
Mr President, this report again demonstrates that liberalisation, the free market and competition are currently seen as the universal panacea to nearly every economic and other problem.
Yes, I am aware of the few positive developments in European energy policy.
Without doubt, electricity prices have fallen.
However, the fact that the prices of some other forms of energy have spiralled is passed over in modest silence.
Such facts do not fit in with liberalisation mania.
On balance, I feel that a number of very serious problems and misdirected developments in EU energy policy have not been addressed.
First, I would like a discussion on the current, completely non-liberal practice already referred to of massively subsidising nuclear and fossil-fuel energy in their many and varied forms.
Secondly, the EU directive on the internal electricity market must be supplemented by an EU-wide supply directive which promotes an ecological and decentralised energy economy.
Thirdly, a radical rethink of the EU's promotion policy is also needed so as to promote energy savings from renewable sources of energy and regionalised energy policies, rather than the construction of high-voltage lines for a centralised energy economy.
Fourthly, I should like to warn against subverting local energy operations by liberalising right across the EU, as we are doing at present.
Economic aspects and the democratic strength and power of local energy authorities to act, socially and otherwise, are at stake here and must not be sacrificed to liberalisation at any price.
Mr President, I would like to convey my congratulations to the rapporteur for this report.
It is a very balanced piece of work covering quite a wide range of views.
We should point to progress made so far in liberalising the electricity and the gas markets, in particular opening up electricity to more than 60% of the market so far, while also remembering that we need to keep up the pressure for more progress.
It is hard to over-estimate the importance of this process to the competitiveness of our European economies in the widest sense.
I know that in the short term it may be difficult to prove that but I am quite sure that in the long term this is a vital part of making our economies competitive in the wider world.
I also believe that it is very important for us to distinguish between the processes of market efficiency that liberalization implies and other policy objectives that we may wish to achieve, such as the question of universal supply, such as the aims to reduce CO2 and it is very important to keep those two distinct and separate.
I have to say that I share the regret of some colleagues that some countries have been rather backward in implementing these measures and it is ironic that at least one of those countries is that which seeks to accelerate the pace of integration in Europe.
St Augustine 'make me more liberalised but not quite yet'.
I would like to recognise that the fears of the pessimists that liberalization would lead to cuts in security of supply have been confounded.
Private sector provision has delivered the goods.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Mombaur' s report deals with the energy markets and, as everyone has understood, advocates speeding up the liberalisation of these markets.
At this hour in the day and stage in the debate, I think it preferable and far more useful to get straight to the point with what I have to say.
Personally, when I think in terms of 'energy' I think of security of supply in the long term, the guarantee of public service missions and the contribution to sustainable and environmentally friendly development.
If I can, in addition, think in terms of competitiveness, then I certainly take the opportunity to do so, though, I have to admit, it is not my highest priority.
That is why ladies and gentlemen, I do not agree with the rapporteur' s conclusions, or the vision and proposals put forward by Commissioner Bolkestein in 'Frontier-Free Europe' .
Those who are not in favour of accelerating the liberalisation of public utilities are not old fashioned.
Those who defend public service do not use fear as an argument to defend their values, and those who are in favour of a universal service are not nostalgic, nervous nationalists, but Europeans.
Mr Mombaur, unlike you, I do not have blind and absolute confidence in market mechanisms.
I do not favour price reduction over security.
I defend employment first and foremost and what is more, I never lose sight of the fact that public services constitute a unifying element and an element of the European social model that is so dear to your friend Mr Jacques Chirac.
They are of course, also a prerequisite for balanced regional planning whose failure or inexistence would cost far more than the savings you hope to achieve.
I would therefore have liked your report to have taken account of the Treaty provisions relating to general interest services and to have included proposals for measures designed to guarantee citizens' access to public services in energy.
This is because, and this is something I should like to stress, public service in energy is a factor in social cohesion, the fight against exclusion, balanced regional development, respect for the environment, security and lastly a prerequisite for national and European independence.
Rapporteur, I cannot deny that you have worked hard on this and even congratulate you on your efforts, but I cannot subscribe to the ideology that underpins your proposals.
I hope that the amendments tabled by Mr Harlem Desir and other Members that also share my concerns will be adopted because I personally am not in a position to vote in favour of your report as it stands.
I would also like to join in congratulating the rapporteur on an excellent job well done and make two points which have been mentioned by others before.
Firstly, the value of strong regulatory authorities.
It is quite clear from the experience in the fifteen still separate markets that strong regulatory bodies help market access for smaller players, protect the interests of consumers and force the pace of large monopoly-providers which might otherwise feel free to take a more leisurely pace.
Secondly, the value of a timetable.
It was a pity that the Lisbon conclusions did not call for a timetable.
Experience in other areas such as telecom shows that Member States respond better to this incentive and I hope that the Commission will elaborate a specific timetable for liberalization in the months to come.
Mr President, the report on the Commission' s second report to the Council and the European Parliament on progress in liberalising energy markets only takes account of two aspects, namely competition and the deepening of the internal energy market.
In order to justify this strategy of the full liberalisation of the electricity and gas markets, the report sings the praises of the supposed positive effects of competition, namely, reduced production costs, increased job opportunities and even goes as far as to praise its positive macroeconomic effects on the job market.
By what mechanism does he hope this will be achieved, or rather by what mysterious means?
In fact, the liberalisation that has been carried out to date or is in progress has not generated employment and, in some public utilities, personnel levels have even dropped as a result.
According to the trade unions in the ETUC, 300 000 jobs have already been lost and a further 200 000 are threatened.
Everywhere you look employees rights are under threat.
I take issue with another assertion made in the report concerning the reduction in energy prices.
Who will benefit from this and how exactly?
It is commonly known that tariff reductions all too often only benefit large industrial users.
As far as ordinary users are concerned, gas and electricity have become goods that one can either afford or not.
Will users in the not too distant future be asked to pay for their electricity in advance, as is the case in Great Britain, and be forced to go without when their card runs out?
Energy is a basic need.
Access to it must therefore be considered a fundamental right.
In our view, only genuine public and democratic regulation would make it possible to rationalise both the production and use of energy while ensuring respect for the environment and basic equalisation.
This would constitute the first step towards a European public service that met the needs of today' s users and employees.
However, such concerns seem far removed from this report, which is why I cannot vote in favour of it as it stands.
Mr President, I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur, Peter Mombaur, and congratulating him on his skilled reporting.
And having heard the contributions made today by the honourable members, we really can say that the liberalisation of the energy markets has progressed faster and more efficiently than we expected in the last parliamentary term.
That is the first thing.
Mr Caudron, it is no longer possible to reverse this and that is how it should be.
Secondly, the energy liberalisation sceptics have been impressively routed.
The prices of gas and electricity have sunk as the result of competition, Mrs Vachetta, including to consumers.
You insist on portraying the large undertakings as the winners here, but you are completely wrong, that is rubbish.
Security of supply to consumers and to the economy has been maintained and the competitiveness of jobs has improved considerably, not deteriorated.
It has improved thanks to international competition.
We still have a whole series of problems to solve.
Too little headway has been made liberalising the markets in individual Member States but we assume that the French presidency will make further progress here.
Secondly, liberalisation must be controlled by the competition authorities and we have a European institution that can and does do that; otherwise private monopolies will replace state monopolies.
Mr Mombaur pointed that out just now.
Thirdly, we need the strict division between energy generation and grid management.
Even the problem of charges and access conditions are, in my view, better solved by a regulatory authority than in voluntary agreements between major associations.
Fourthly, regulated grid access with set prices, following the telecommunications example, is the best way of ensuring that small and medium-sized companies and smaller works departments receive equal treatment.
Both mergers and state aid must be controlled and approved in the future.
Professor Monti has announced this.
I think that this is right in principle, but I think that his deadline of five years is too soon and I think that we need to extend the deadline to ten years, so that European industry has time to develop fully and invest with good prospects in this important future market.
Mr President, it has emerged in the course of this discussion that, for some people, liberalisation is a goal in itself.
I do not think that it, in fact, is.
There must be some purpose to liberalisation, be it lower prices, security of supplies, increased competitiveness or sustainable technological development.
Proceeding from that point of view and inspired, in fact, by the EU directives, we in Denmark have begun a complete liberalisation of the electricity sector.
This entails major upheavals which are causing concern among employees.
When you talk with them about liberalisation, they say, 'We are happy to have liberalisation, but it should be the same for everyone in Europe.'
That is just the problem with this issue.
We have obtained liberalisation in 15 different markets and15 different countries, but we have not in that way obtained complete liberalisation.
It may perhaps be concluded that what we have obtained is liberalisation for liberalisation' s sake.
Employees in the sector shake their heads, and ordinary consumers do not obtain the intended benefits of liberalisation.
It is therefore right to continue with the liberalisation that is under way and implement complete liberalisation.
Of course we should have liberalisation, but it should be on equal terms.
At the same time, it is important to remember that liberalisation ought not to be carried out in isolation.
In future work on liberalising the energy market, we shall make sure that energy policy as a whole is involved.
There is a wide range of considerations to be taken into account.
I am thinking here of consumers, the environment, competitiveness, renewable energy sources and the employees.
There are a good many more agendas we need to engage with, and not only that of complete liberalisation.
Mr President, I would like to thank my colleague, Mr Mombaur, for an excellent report.
The liberalisation of the energy markets is the only real way to safeguard consumers' rights and the credible viability of the Internal Market.
The Commission must take care that the energy market is opened up in a genuine sense and in a spirit of fair play.
Various apparent barriers to competition, such as the bottlenecks created by the power grid operators, must be straightened out without delay.
In addition, the largest European "energy players" must fall into line.
For example, France, whose energy sector is among the most progressive, stubbornly protects its own markets.
What does such a competitive country have to fear in conditions of free competition?
The liberalisation of energy markets also means that the Commission will have to approach various forms of energy on an equal footing.
I cannot help wondering about the statements made by the energy Commissioner, Mrs de Palacio, which suggested that free-flowing water would not be on the list of renewable energy sources.
The Commission must reconsider its position.
Hydroelectric power in the Nordic countries is an environmentally friendly and natural energy source that can often be produced at a competitive price, as is the case at present, thanks to a good water supply.
Hydroelectric energy can currently compete at a price that would even rival imported energy from Eastern Europe and Russia, so there is no call to label future imports of electric power from the east to the Nordic countries, at least, as dumping.
Protectionism among the big energy players in Central Europe is the main reason why cheap hydroelectric power is only getting to the Central European markets with difficulty.
Certification systems will guarantee that consumer choice is in direct relation to the pricing of electricity.
Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on an excellent report.
The liberalisation of energy markets is an essential factor in the development of the economy.
The objective of improving competition and lowering prices for all consumer groups, including the end consumer, must be pursued assiduously.
The opening up of the market will lead to reorganisation on a European scale with common rules for all the countries.
I hope that the Commission will submit comprehensive proposals to overcome the existing barriers to intraCommunity trade and ad hoc measures to deal with the Member States which do not apply the directives.
We need to speed up the process of liberalisation in the energy and gas sectors by harmonising the Member States' energy policies.
To support the liberalisation process it will be necessary to introduce a benchmarking process, as we have done in other sectors, with the publishing of a Commission half-yearly report on the final price of European Union gas and electricity.
This will allow us to assess the impact of liberalising the energy markets on the consumer directly.
Guidelines will also have to be drawn up for harmonising the price observation criteria and processing the data gathered so as to ensure that maximum care is taken in comparing the situations of the different Member States.
I would support the rapporteur in stressing that competition does not prevent Member States from imposing public service obligations in the general interest on operators.
Moreover, I would remind you that liberalisation does not just mean privatisation, where a company continues, in practice, to be managed in the same way as before: liberalisation must mean opening up, interchange and competitiveness.
I do not consider that liberalisation will have negative implications for employment, for the lower cost of energy will allow companies more room for development and create a greater number of jobs than are lost with the end of the monopolies.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Mombaur' s report on the state of liberalisation of the energy, electricity and gas markets has the merit of summarising the various Commission communications on the issue.
It also highlights some of the key facts in this matter, two of which I shall mention here.
First, the Treaties provide for the creation of an internal market in the energy sector, which must be accomplished.
Second, the achievement of this aim undoubtedly involves opening up the markets to competition, the process of liberalisation and division into separate activities relating to energy transmission, production and distribution.
As the French Presidency gets underway, it must be noted - and as a French MEP this is not something I am terribly proud of - that France has taken a long time to transpose several European directives into its national law.
In fact, it appears that France comes bottom of the class as far as this matter is concerned.
The European directive on electricity was therefore adopted rather late by my country and only in its most basic form.
More generally speaking, I, like the rapporteur, deplore the fact that there are other countries that wish to implement the directive only in its most basic form.
And yet, as has already been mentioned -and I too should like to reiterate the point - full liberalisation, as carried out by other States in the area of electricity, has produced considerable benefits for the user: need we be reminded of the 25-33% price reduction in the United Kingdom or the almost 35% drop in Germany?
This is why I believe that we should support the Commission in its undertakings and, as Mr Mombaur' s report suggests, set a specific binding timetable for carrying out the full liberalisation of the energy markets in the applicant countries and of course, first and foremost in the Member States.
The ambition shown by the latest presidency of the Union for the advancement of Europe cannot simply stop at the defence of acquired or past situations.
The completion of the internal market cannot be restricted to the European Union alone, which is why it cannot be put off indefinitely.
Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Mombaur on his report, which I believe broadly coincides with the Commission' s position.
Secondly, I would like to thank all the speakers, although I do not agree with everything that has been said.
In any event, I would like to point out that I agree with Mr Mombaur when he says that the liberalisation of the electrical sector has led to a drop in prices, improvements for customers, for homes and also for large industry, which means job creation, increased competitivity of the European electrical industry, development and work, although it is true that some jobs have been lost in the electrical industry.
However, the benefits have outweighed the problems encountered.
It should also be pointed out that the Lisbon and Feira Summits have reiterated the need to move ahead with liberalisations.
As regards what some have said, it is true that there is no timetable.
This does not mean that there is not a strong will to move forward.
In any event, the progress made so far - which is very considerable - still seems to me to be insufficient.
We must not create fifteen separate liberalised markets, but one single European liberalised market.
To this end, there are still issues to be dealt with, such as the level of openness of the market, the separation of the operators of transmission networks from the production systems, the guarantee of non-discriminatory access in the application of prices.
In this context, I would like to thank Mr Mombaur for his resolution' s support for the importance of the separation of producers and operators of transmission networks.
Furthermore, the efforts of the Florence Forum are invaluable and we must continue along that route.
If they turn out to be insufficient, they will be supplemented with Commission initiatives.
In that respect, there is a will to seek an establishment of tariffs which will lead to an increase in exchanges and clear access to the network.
I must also point out that the Florence Forum - with regard to electricity - must be supplemented by the Madrid Forum on gas.
Both of these reflect an original institutional approach, since representatives of Parliament participate in them.
There is a physical aspect, the capacity for interconnection, which must also be developed and which currently lead to limitations in the development of this single market, both in the electrical sector and in the gas sector.
If we are to continue to make progress with liberalisation, we cannot forget one key element: the public service role of electricity - and gas as well, although on a different level.
This means that the supply must be guaranteed - as some of you have said - and there must be an adequate service for all citizens.
This aspect will be included in the initiatives which I propose to present to the Council and Parliament at the end of this year, so that they may be ready in the Spring, for the European Council, in order to provide more impetus for liberalisation in the areas I have mentioned.
I also wish to say that the aspects relating to safety standards must also be developed soon and I am going to propose to Parliament and the Council that we hold a debate, not on the nuclear sector, nor on the coal or renewable energy sector, but on the guarantees of the European Union' s energy supply as a whole, when we will be able to consider the different sources of energy and the problems relating to each of them, because nothing is free, everything has its price, its pros and cons.
We need to hold a reasoned debate on the possibilities available to us, in terms of sources and the guarantees of supply, in the light of the Kyoto commitments.
I consider water to be a form of renewable energy, of course.
Hydro-electricity is a form of renewable energy.
The problem is that the hydro-electrical industry as a whole is not taken into account when it comes to subsidies, which are another issue.
We believe that we have to support renewable energy sources as much as possible.
This is an extremely important European technology, with industrial possibilities beyond our European borders, which we must continue to support.
The Directive excludes hydroelectricity from the consideration of subsidies, which means that it is not sustainable.
We must continue to include it within the broad consideration of renewable energy resources.
Mr President, I do not have time to expand further.
I would like to thank Mr Mombaur once again for his magnificent report and point out that we are going to present proposals in order to continue the progress in the field of liberalisation.
We are going to deal with the social aspects of the electricity sector and its public service element.
The assessment is frankly positive and we must continue to make progress in accordance with what the Council has told us, at both the Lisbon and the Feira Summits.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Community railway undertakings
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports:
(A5-0173/2000) Recommendation for second reading by Mr Jarzembowski, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 91/440/EEC on the development of the Community's railways [5386/1/2000 - C5-0178/2000 - 1998/0265(COD)];
(A5-0171/2000) Recommendation for second reading by Mr Swoboda on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism on:
I. the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 95/18/EC on the licensing of railway undertakings [5387/1/2000 - C5-0176/2000 - 1998/0266(COD)];
II. the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive relating to the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity, the levying of charges for the use of the railway infrastructure and safety certification [5388/1/2000 - C5-0177/2000 - 1998/0267(COD)].
Before I set the signal for the railwaymen to green and because we have another new team here, I should like to make a brief comment.
We still have a long debate ahead of us.
I beg you to keep to the speaking times.
As the two chief railwaymen starting the debate have unlimited speaking time, I leave it to their discretion to keep their speeches short.
Mr President, Madam Vice-President, ladies and gentlemen, the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism proposes that plenary at last gradually but properly liberalise the railway market, with liberalisation to be completed by the year 2010.
Only then will we achieve our common goal of shifting more freight from the roads on to the railways and, hence, of sustainable mobility within the European Union.
First I must thank the Commission, especially the Vice-President, Mrs Palacio, and the Finnish Presidency, without whom there would have been no common positions in the Council in December 1999.
We are most grateful for that.
But Parliament will defend the view in the codecision procedure that the positions taken do not go far enough in order to safeguard the long-term future of the railways.
The Council wants to move one small step at a time.
We take the view that it is high time, eight years after the completion of the single market, to set signals and regulate conclusively so that the liberalisation of the railway sector can be completed by 2010.
This also fits in with what was said at the Lisbon Summit, where the Heads of State and Government pressed for further liberalisation of the transport sector.
So what are our most important proposed amendments?
First, we agree with the Council that, if the railway networks are to be used efficiently, only cross-border freight traffic need be liberalised for a special trans-European rail freight network.
But we take the view that five years is long enough to show railways and their employees that they have nothing to fear from the liberalisation of the networks.
We feel that railway undertakings should have access to the entire network of the fifteen Member States in five years' time, for both international and national freight traffic, and by 2010 for international and national passenger traffic.
This gradual liberalisation plan would give us a real common network in the European Union by 2010.
In order to ensure that railway undertakings in all Member States also have real access to local networks in other Member States, we feel that there must be a strict, compulsory division between the management of individual networks and the provision of transport services by individual national railway undertakings.
Experience over the past 40 years shows that, if infrastructure and operations are not separated, the national railway undertaking always reserves the best lines for itself, thereby denying other railway undertakings effective, non-discriminatory access.
We take the view that, if there is to be even greater use of the networks, legal entities other than railway undertakings, such as shippers and forwarding agents, should have the right to apply for and be granted licences to use lines throughout the Community.
Liberalising the right to apply to use lines in all fifteen Member States by 2005 will do two things: first, it will take account of the role of shippers and forwarding agents, who need no encouragement to use the railways and, secondly, it will represent a further step towards the completion of the single market in the railway sector in that the railways' exclusive right to use the infrastructure will be somewhat mitigated.
Another factor is the question of track charges.
We take the view that track charges should be increased in the medium and long term in order to move towards the objective of covering costs.
Only if the user pays, i.e. the railway undertakings also bear the cost of operating and maintaining the network, will it be possible to fund network operation and maintenance.
Finally, the Committee on Transport voted by a large majority to abolish the derogations for Ireland, Greece, Luxembourg and Great Britain with respect to Northern Ireland.
We feel that, first, legislation should be the same in all parts of the Union and, secondly, even in geographically remote areas, which we of course all value, the principles of accuracy and clarity of costs and open access to the network should apply.
Allow me to close by stressing once again that we can use our vote in Parliament tomorrow to give a signal.
If we adopt the recommendation by the Committee on Transport by a large majority, we will have a real chance of reaching a compromise with the Council during the conciliation procedure which is acceptable to both the Council and Parliament, which goes beyond the common positions and which enables a real move to be made towards liberalising the railway sector, because we all want to strengthen the railways.
We want to shift more freight from the roads to the railways, which is why we need a clear compromise with the Council.
And we shall only get it if we adopt a clear stance here in Parliament.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, one could be forgiven for thinking that the three reports under discussion today are in fact technical reports.
But oh what emotions I witnessed when I reported on them in my group today, which is a good thing because a hugely important question is in fact at stake here: the question of how to ensure that the European railways gain in weight again in the future, not in the material sense, but as far as their importance is concerned, because what many people forget when they are busy opposing reforms is that, with the state the railways have got into, they are carrying less and less.
Trains are still chugging round Europe, but there is less and less freight in their wagons and that is a state of affairs which we cannot tolerate.
That is why I, why we all think, that a European railway sector needs to be developed and the Council resolution, the Council consensus, is really a minimum consensus; it does not satisfy us, even if we perhaps differ in our views on many aspects, such as how much further than the Council we should go.
Of course, we have a lot of lost ground to make up, because in the past we have only had national railways.
We talk about globalisation.
All today's private-sector undertakings operate transnationally; only the railways seem not to have heard of this.
So we need to liberalise and open up the markets and of course everyone has differing ideas as to how this should be done.
Some think that the market is the invisible hand, the almost divine principle which should guide and control everything, while others think we should be very circumspect in liberalising the market and should only liberalise it where absolutely necessary.
I think that our position, and my position, is that there is a middle way which will allow us to move forward, but it must be clearly defined; we must be clear as to how we are going to bring about the liberalisation of the market, whereby the railways must, of course, be given a chance to adapt to the new conditions one step at a time.
For us, competition is a way of increasing services, i.e. we need to get more traffic on to the railways, especially freight traffic, which is the real sore point, if we are to prevent railway services from shrinking yet further.
So it is a gradual process, but a clearer and faster process than that planned by the Council.
First, the overwhelming majority of us takes the view that there should be a competition authority, a regulator as it were, in every country.
That would give all railway undertakings, all interested parties, shipping agents, whoever, one authority in each country to which they can take recourse if clarity and transparency of competition are violated.
It also means that there can be no derogations.
We are building up a European railway, not one system for one country and a different system for another, which is why these derogations have to go.
That does not mean that everything will be prescribed down to the last detail, it just means that the freedom which we are granting needs to be granted to all countries equally, not more for some and less for others.
Secondly, we have differing views on the compulsory separation of infrastructures.
We think that it must also be possible to trade fairly with integrated undertakings, provided of course that the balance sheet and certain basic conditions are kept separate.
Our, or my proposal is that the Commission should present a report in a few years' time and report to Parliament on whether or not the principles of free, transparent competition have been contradicted and then we can take another decision.
We take the view that liberalisation should apply first and foremost to freight traffic, both transnational and, in the end, national freight traffic.
As far as passenger traffic is concerned, we feel that it is important and that it suffices, at least for the time being, to state clearly that cross-border passenger traffic will also need to be liberalised.
As to whether passenger traffic between Stuttgart and Munich should be liberalised: this is a matter which, in my view, should be decided by the German government or the regional government in Bavaria and not necessarily at European level.
We feel that the individual Member States should be given room to manoeuvre and take decisions here.
The pricing system is an important issue.
How much should be charged for the capacity allocated?
There are two schools of thought here.
The first feels that only marginal costs should be charged, i.e. the costs incurred in running one more train.
The second school feels that the complete costs of providing the route, tracks etc. should be covered.
We feel that charging marginal costs make sense in the short term, in order to ensure that there is competition and that the railways can start running trains again.
But in the long term, we will need some sort of complete cost-covering method, similar to the principle applied to the roads.
Otherwise we shall never manage to get more freight back on to the railways because this is precisely the problem faced by certain railways, including the German railways, to quote just one example: when the complete cost-covering method is used in the present situation, many companies refuse to use the railways' services because they are simply too expensive.
Which is why we need a gradual transition and similar conditions for both roads and railways.
I should like to mention one last point.
One criticism heard time and again is: has the whole idea of public-sector services gone to the dogs?
Is everything to be run on market principles, on private-sector principles?
We have therefore reinstated an original clause on public-sector services, and I am grateful for the support it has received because, unfortunately, the European Commission has not yet submitted any general proposals as to how public-sector services are to be dealt with.
It will still be possible for a country to say that public-sector services must take priority at certain times and this priority can therefore be stipulated.
I am sure that tomorrow's vote will set a conciliation procedure in motion.
That does not present any particular problem.
We, the two rapporteurs, and all the groups in the House are willing to reach a compromise.
But the Council must also show willing.
We have shown willing and, if the Council shows willing, we will be able to reach a compromise.
I should like to close by thanking all those who worked with me, both in my group and in other groups here in Parliament, for all the effort which they invested in this, and of course the Commission, and I hope that tomorrow two or three very good reports will come out of this.
Mr President, Madam Vice-President of the Commission, I should like to start by congratulating the two rapporteurs, Mr Jarzembowski, who has taken over from Mr Pavlos Sarlis, our former fellow Member of the European Parliament who acted as rapporteur for the first reading, and Mr Swoboda, for their reports.
Allow me to say that they both explained the technical aspects of their reports extremely well.
As Chairman of the Committee on Transport, I should like to highlight two conclusions which I think we need to draw from this debate.
The first conclusion concerns the liberalisation of the railways.
This is something we have been hearing about for years, just as we have heard a great deal about the single market in the European Union for years.
The time has come for action rather than words, on both counts.
We need to accept that there will be no complete single market unless transport is fully liberalised and I think that liberalising the railways will be a decisive step in this direction and will make a decisive contribution towards the revival of the declining means of transport which we call the railways.
The second message concerns the Council.
The Council needs to take serious account of Parliament's views.
Of course, we reached a compromise in Helsinki with Mrs de Palacio's help.
This compromise is welcome but it is not enough; we need to go further and account needs to be taken of Parliament's position if we are to do so.
The Council is wrong to believe that the discussion ended in Helsinki last December with the compromise at Council level.
Parliament is here, it has its views, it supports them clearly and will, we believe, support them during tomorrow's vote which, I think, will confirm what was decided at the committee meeting during which the reports were adopted by a large majority.
Mr President, for the railways the status quo is really not an option.
They either have to change or die.
Railways in Europe are in terminal decline, not least in the rail freight sector.
New freight goes by road in Europe, not by rail.
That must change, and I believe it will.
That is why I broadly support the Council position which represents a small but important step towards railway liberalisation.
The alternative to this modest step is no step at all.
That is why tonight, regretfully I cannot agree with the tactics suggested by Mr Jarzembowski because it is a recipe for going nowhere at all, very quickly.
We have to take into account national differences and indeed, social and employment concerns.
Broadly, the Council position has struck the right balance on the charging, licensing, access and separation issues.
They have struck a right balance between both extremes and I would advocate - to use Mr Swoboda's term - that "third way" should be applied to the railways in Europe.
Labour MEPs have two particular concerns which I know are shared by many other Members: one is the issue of derogations.
We believe that Greece, Ireland and Northern Ireland should have a limited derogation of five years because of their unique geographical and geopolitical circumstances.
Secondly, we hope that the deletion of Article 12, led by the Liberals in committee, which could deprive citizens and consumers of network benefits and deprive disabled people of access, can be reinserted into the text.
Those basic safeguards must be restored.
The prize for us tonight is that for the first time in history we can achieve liberalisation of the international freight network.
That is an achievable goal.
Let us not throw it away.
Mr President, I believe that the rapporteurs have done sterling work and the fruits of their labour, which we submitted under their guidance to the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, are a coherent whole with a clearly defined objective.
Mr Swoboda referred to this a moment ago: a vigorous railway sector within an internal market, which can be effective for the entire Union.
The objective also sends a clear message to the Council, namely that Parliament wants to go further than the Commission.
I do not really share Mr Watts' view.
In my opinion, we need to go further than the Council stated in its common position.
We must now set the scene for full liberalisation in the medium term, and the step we are now taking is the first step in this process.
This step is also the step currently proposed by the Council.
We must also take the next steps, namely implement full liberalisation with regard to the transport of goods by 2005 and take the same step for the transport of passengers nationally and internationally in the longer term, this time by 2010, a deadline which is ten years away.
There are a number of points which are vital in this context, and I hope that a sufficient number of MEPs will be able to support those opinions tomorrow.
First of all, it is vital that infrastructure and the provision of services be divided.
After all, no one can be on both sides of the fence at the same time.
Secondly, who can apply for a licence?
Not only railway undertakings, others too should be able to do this.
I cannot see why, Mr Swoboda, this should be postponed until 2010.
In my opinion, we should be able to bring this date forward to 2005.
I should now like to comment on Article 12, which, I believe, is redundant, and a European licence should be subject to European requirements.
That is not to say that consumers, railway workers' social rights or safety are deemed immaterial.
In fact, safety should come first.
European requirements should apply because a European railway system requires regulations at European level rather than additional regulations at national level, because the latter would enable Member States to carry out certain activities which they no longer have to do within a European market.
If we pursue this line of attack, railway undertakings will need to put their customers and passengers first, rather than act out of self-interest.
I would like to add a brief, technical comment.
Amendment No 23 has been declared inadmissible by the services.
I would dispute this on the basis of Rule 80, paragraph 2 (b), and Rule 80, paragraph 3, of our Rules of Procedure.
I would invite the services to reconsider their view, because my amendment is also related to Amendment No 24 regarding Article 12, which was declared admissible.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I have to admit that within my group there are two arguments being disputed in relation to the Community railways.
Though we unanimously agree to finally and genuinely develop rail transport and, though we unanimously agree to make every effort to facilitate the transfer from road to rail, some think that that this will be achieved most speedily via liberalisation whereas others, including myself, believe that the maximum number of guarantees should be created before liberalisation goes ahead, particularly with regard to passenger transport.
In my view, the present state of the railways in the various Member States does not make it viable to open them up to competition.
They are all in need of considerable modernisation in order to offer identical conditions of competition.
The reason for this is that in order to achieve genuine and equitable competition, the right conditions need to be created, they are not simply acquired and excesses must be avoided.
Companies, particularly public companies, need to be granted enough time to modernise their networks before opening them up to competition.
With regard to the guarantees, be they in relation to the harmonisation of working conditions or vital safety regulations, they are also something that cannot simply be acquired.
The disaster in Great Britain is still fresh in our minds and continues to warrant examination of rail safety requirements.
The compromise reached on 10 December by the Transport Council marked a step in the right direction.
Let us therefore go ahead and set up the rail transport network.
It is not a matter of going too far, too fast in terms of passenger transport, what we firstly need to achieve is a rail network that offers the public the chance to get around without causing pollution.
Mr President, rail transport is very important in terms of citizens' mobility, the development of trade within Europe and in terms of the environment and regional planning.
The European Parliament has already paved the way for the liberalisation of international freight transport at its first reading, by granting authorised applicants track access rights.
This rail package was the subject of a Council compromise in December.
The Council suggests that the choice of authorised applicants should be left to Member States' discretion, that the freight rail networks be opened up using a specific network called the "Trans-European Rail Freight Network" and, lastly, that the division into separate entities only take place progressively.
I note, without any satisfaction, that the Council' s position also takes account of the various national situations and grants each State the right to determine their own choices and for example, to pursue cooperation commitments.
However, we are faced with an ultraliberal proposition at this second reading.
The amendments tabled sanction the overall fragmentation of the rail system, which would mark the end of subsidiarity for the authorised applicants in 5 years' time and mean that the separation of entities would not be achieved progressively.
It would also mean the complete opening up of international and national freight transport and, by 2010, of passenger transport.
Just a few moments ago we were speaking about electricity and on Thursday we shall address the issue of the single European sky.
Throughout the public sector the same refrain is heard: liberalise, it' s magic!
In my view, rail transport would be left with an enormous bill.
Rail companies would be forced into the role of service provider, which would create unfair competition.
While the service providers benefit from the largest part of the commercial margin and are free to choose the most profitable sectors, the rail companies on the other hand are left to bear the high equipment and personnel costs.
In opposition to the argument advanced regarding the increase in traffic, this system might cause the isolation and disastrous creaming off of the more profitable sectors.
This same dogma is aimed solely at gaining profits through liberalisation, and users and employees do not get a say.
No proper preliminary study was undertaken and what is more, I think that we should take time to study the impact of the decisions taken by the Council.
It would also be useful to compare - in relation to the freight paths - the private and the public sector.
If the proposals from this second reading are adopted, they would be considered as a real provocation by all involved in the sector.
I can neither endorse them, nor the amendments tabled by the Socialist Group that suggest a need for further opening up on the path to liberalisation.
Mr President, Commissioner, the Council' s common positions within the framework of the railway package are not so much unexpected as they are disappointing in part.
If these plans go ahead as they are, then it looks as if the next couple of years will see little in the way of improvements within the Union' s railway industry.
I would therefore like to make some observations with regard to the railway sector' s critical state.
First of all, the speed at which the EU-wide railway sector is making headway is far too slow, both in terms of transport of people and goods.
This is why it is necessary for measures to apply to the two sectors and the entire Union.
History has taught us that excessive interference by governments has hampered the necessary flexibility.
The continued protection of certain segments of the market - both geographically and sectorally - is not an option either, because this would not break the downward trend.
In addition, some improvements are needed within the sector itself as well.
A number of railway undertakings are still fostering close links with their national governments, due to historic factors.
A division of tasks is necessary in order to prevent the unfair treatment of different economic operators.
It is therefore important to keep the management of the infrastructure and the execution of transport services strictly separate, and this division should not just exist on paper.
Finally, this sector would also benefit from transparency and decisiveness.
We should avoid building complex structures around tasks emanating from regulations within the sector.
The fewer bodies involved, the better.
In my view, the European Monitoring System, therefore, adds little in the way of value and, if anything, threatens to obscure the view.
Mr President, let there be no doubt about it: I endorse most comments made by the rapporteurs and would, as such, like to thank them for the sound work they have carried out.
Mr President, I understand the ideal contained in this report to complete the internal market in the railway sector, thereby allowing freight transport by rail to compete successfully with freight transportation by road.
This is necessary for the long-term survival of the European railway sector and all Member States would be in agreement with this goal.
It is our task to reach agreement on how best to achieve this, bearing in mind the difficulties involved for some Member States.
I speak for my own country of Ireland.
Both the Republic and the North of Ireland seek to continue the derogation agreed in December 1999, because of geographic and geopolitical reasons.
It is a small country isolated from the European mainland.
It cannot be accessed by rail operators elsewhere in the European Union.
I have seen at first hand the continual bombings of the north-south railway lines over the past 30 years due to the Troubles.
Only now is there a chance for them to develop and prosper.
Implementation at this time of this rail liberalisation package will involve the setting up of a complex administrative structure without enjoying the subsequent benefits that other Member States would.
I am sure that the Irish government has agreed to the broad principle of the separation of infrastructure and operation and has pledged to pursue the restructuring of Irish railways to achieve this goal.
I ask that the present derogation be maintained to allow time to implement these changes remembering that, should an EU-rail operator wish to enter the Irish rail market, the derogation would immediately cease.
Finally, it is my personal hope that while I support this derogation, I hope that it would in no way hinder the much-needed upgrading and extension of the Irish rail system.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the European transport situation can be summed up using several pertinent figures.
Between 1990 and 1997 the volume of transport of goods increased by 21% whilst over the same period the proportion of freight transported by rail dropped by 7%.
During the same period, passenger transport increased by 15% and rail transport by only 3%.
In terms of both freight and passenger transport European integration has been a considerable factor of mobility, but the roads have been the major beneficiaries of this particularly, but not exclusively, due to the fact that they have been frontier free since the beginning of the 1990s.
European railways therefore need to open up urgently and without fear.
Their future lies largely in their own hands, however, it is also our job to give them every opportunity to achieve their aims.
Railway workers must rise to the challenge of opening up international networks to trains from all countries in the European Union.
The decision taken by the fifteen Ministers for Transport in December 1999 to set plans in motion for the creation of a Trans-European Freight Network that represents 94% of the international freight transport came as a direct response to this challenge.
It is entirely logical to adapt national rail legislation to this new system that lays down rules governing access, pricing policy and standard and consistent management practices within the European Union.
The Swoboda report contains commendable proposals regarding the need to adapt legislation to the various national situations.
On the other hand, it is wholly unacceptable and, what is more, contradicts Parliament' s first reading, for us to take advantage of this second reading - as the Jarzembowski report suggests - to announce measures to open up all networks to competition and others designed for the widespread privatisation of such networks at national and local level, as that stems from a dogma, an untested belief in the superiority of a market model that has clearly demonstrated its limitations in the United Kingdom.
Several moments ago, I stated that the future of rail transport also depended on us, and I should also like to point out the fact that the dogmatic approach that we appear to have adopted in this matter threatens its very success.
Everyone here is aware that rail integration in Europe cannot be reduced to a theological debate on the comparative merits of controlled liberalisation and uncontrolled privatisation.
Railways, which only receive 25% of the investment allocated to transport infrastructure in Europe, as opposed to the 65% allocated to roads, are in need of substantial investment in order to enhance interoperability, reduce bottlenecks, extend networks and integrated transport systems, etc.
The United Kingdom has demonstrated to what extent privatisation can represent a step backwards.
This is why we believe that our work should not threaten the delicate balance of the Council' s common position.
Mr President, the proportion of freight transported by rail within the EU has almost halved over the last thirty years.
It is vital, if we are to have a truly sustainable transport policy that this process is reversed.
I congratulate Mr Swoboda and Mr Jarzembowski on their excellent reports which, if adopted, will make a major contribution to railway development.
I share some of Mr Watts' concern, however, about Amendment No 1 in relation to the licensing of railway undertakings and the proposed deletion of the replacement Article 12.
In any liberalisation process it is very important to ensure that certain standards are maintained, for example those relating to the safety of both workers and consumers.
At the same time we need to prevent artificial barriers being put in the way of the opening up of markets.
Fulfilling both of these objectives requires a delicate balance to be struck.
I doubt both whether Amendment No 1 serves its intended legal purpose and whether it could have the effects that Mr Watts fears.
I believe it could send out the wrong signals.
Instead I seek support for Amendments Nos 23 and 24 which, taken together, should have the effect of securing the second of the two objectives without detracting from the first.
- (PT) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I could conceivably agree to the Europeanisation of railway transport that has been put forward in the directives we are now considering and, consequently, the liberalisation of the rail sector.
I could also give my support to the legal separation of the management of railway infrastructures from the provision of transport services.
In order to do so, however, I would have to see guarantees on certain fundamental issues, which are the criteria for the quality and efficiency of the enormously important political and economic measure that should result from these directives.
We are all aware that many European countries were not able to take part in the industrial revolution of the 19th Century at the right time, precisely because they lacked adequate rail connections.
Some of them are still waiting today for their railways to be modernised and, more specifically, for access to the European High Speed Network.
The liberalisation of this sector must under no circumstances be an obstacle to this access.
Rail networks must therefore continue to provide a guaranteed public service in all Europe' s regions, particularly the more remote ones.
Furthermore, liberalisation must not lead to necessary lines being closed, to unemployment or to safety standards and the quality of service falling.
Recent events have given us grounds to think that these are possible consequences, which must be prevented at all costs.
We therefore harbour grave reservations about supporting these directives.
Mr President, the rapporteur who drafted a report on the development of the Community' s railways has adopted the guiding principle that for the time being, the railway industry has largely lost the competitive battle to road transport and aviation but that despite this, it is preferable to hold on to the railway industry and strengthen it.
I could not agree more.
But this is about the only issue on which I see eye to eye with him.
I believe Mr Jarzembowski is quite mistaken.
What he wants to achieve requires a complete change of tack and what he proposes will lead to further regression.
His proposals are in line with views held at the end of the twentieth century.
In all areas, we are witnessing a neo-liberal attack on public services, Community undertakings and employers' organisations.
This attack is mainly aimed at postal services, rail and the energy sector, companies which have the potential to demonstrate that we can organise our economy in a more democratic, environmentally-friendly and less profit-oriented manner.
Unfortunately, these companies have for years been neglected by their owners, the democratically elected community which belongs to us all, and have been treated as private companies.
The rapporteur considers the rail industry as an irritating state monopoly with difficult and demanding trade unions in tow.
He wants to break this monopoly as quickly and radically as possible.
Instead of focusing his attention on stepping up cooperation between the existing railway companies and enhancing the democratic say over these companies, so that benefits of the rail industry can be better enjoyed on a European scale and liabilities can be eliminated more effectively, he puts all his hope in competition and liberalisation.
In his opinion, the form of organisation by means of which road transport and aviation have largely triumphed over rail, should also be applied to rail itself.
We have now gained some experience in liberalisation thanks to the English and Dutch models.
The English variant carved up the national railway industry into regional companies, some of which ended up in the hands of large foreign concerns.
In other regions, they remained a monopoly.
That country now invests less in innovation than any other country.
Trains are shorter and overloaded, and the safety of railways has declined.
According to the Dutch version, competitors can obtain licences for lines on which they want to compete with the existing railway company.
This company was established in 1939 and is an amalgamation of old private railway companies which operated inefficiently.
Following a propaganda war between a newcomer and the existing company, operating different rates and using different trains, this newcomer was first taken over by a large French water company and subsequently ceased all activity.
It is evident that it is only profitable to operate lines over which you have complete control.
This reality renders the proposals made by Jarzembowski unviable.
Mr President, ten years ago, Mr Cornelissen found himself in exactly the same debate.
If I were to read out his text, nobody would bat an eyelid.
The train is at a standstill, and to stand still is to regress.
Who in their right mind would take a train that moved backwards?
Thanks to the internal market and e-commerce, the flows of traffic and commodities within the European Union have increased by 70% over the past ten years.
To accommodate this increase, we need all the types of transport we can think of, ranging from internal waterways, air, roads and trains, all of which should be just in time and clean.
So far, trains have not contributed in any way.
In percentage terms, the train has lost a considerable share in the transport market and it is difficult to detect any movement within European rail.
At the same time, the train has proved the European Union right, namely that more competition keeps you on your toes and on the ball.
Due to a lack of competition as a result of excessive protectionist behaviour on the part of the Member States, the train has been relegated to the second division in this century too.
But from now on, the railways need to take down the barriers that are obstructing the cross-border transport of goods, by using each other' s infrastructure.
They need to make their equipment considerably more hard-wearing because they are hopelessly lagging behind road transport in this respect.
In the next phase, the following points will be particularly important, in my opinion.
Honest, non-discriminatory access should be granted to the infrastructure.
Transport companies should be separated from the management of the infrastructure.
It is vital for these components not to be controlled by one and the same body.
Safety takes absolute priority and cannot be monitored by the transport companies themselves.
A second key element is the opening up of the railway infrastructure or, in other words, a liberalisation of the market, which is different from privatisation.
This is vital if we want to breathe new life into the transport of goods.
In this way, new operators are attracted who bring with them new insights and a new management culture.
Liberalisation, as mentioned in the common position, is a good start but is not enough.
Only when railway networks open up once and for all will railway undertakings and their employees have a chance.
Liberalisation should, however, work both ways.
Nobody should have to tolerate competitors on their infrastructure that refuse or are unable to grant the same access at home.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, without doubt, the European railways need reviving and that is precisely what the legislative package under discussion is attempting to do.
The congestion on the roads, the threat from which to transport and environmental safety increases daily, is so bad that we must now strengthen the railways.
The common positions approved here by the Council obviously promote the required revival by dealing fairly and transparently with all railway undertakings, by defining a logical framework for distributing infrastructure capacity and user charges, by separating railway infrastructure management from the provision of transport services and by discussing how, to what extent and at what speed this separation should apply.
Of course we are on the right track and of course we understand the problems facing certain Member States in directly, or almost directly adopting all the new measures proposed.
First, the huge disparities between the networks in the various countries and, more importantly, the geographical situations of certain Member States or regions make it very hard for them to change the system quickly and, secondly, forcing the change, as it were, on these Member States would not result in any significant benefit either to the countries in question or the Community as a whole.
We believe that a dogmatic, absolutist approach is risky and is unfair because, as we know full well, it does not apply in all sectors.
Sometimes, the apparently contradictory, oxymoronic Ancient Greek proverb "more haste, less speed" is more efficient.
Finally, I must in all honesty congratulate our two rapporteurs on their sterling work and ask for their understanding where special, objectively-identified circumstances exist.
In this particular case, this applies to my country, Greece, which has shown that it is making quantum leaps, but only where they are really needed.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, our trans-European routes, our roads and motorways, are being clogged up daily by millions of lorries, buses and cars, which leads to wasted time, wasteful energy consumption and significant environmental damage, amongst other things.
For all of these reasons the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance always defends the railway as an alternative means of transport - currently underexploited - which wastes fewer resources, and is cleaner and more respectful of the natural environment.
Therefore, when amending and implementing the Community legislation on the liberalisation of the railway sector, we wish to argue not only that the railway should not be penalised in relation to other means of transport, but that there should actually be positive discrimination in its favour, so that we can counteract the delay we have caused in terms of investing in it.
With regard to the taxes on the use of the infrastructures, which in the end will be paid by the users, we suggest that, in the short to medium term, these only reflect the marginal costs generated by the rail traffic itself and not those involving the recuperation of investment and maintenance, which should be covered by state budgets, as in the case of roads and motorways.
That is the only way we will manage to make the railway a competitive means of transport which is used on a grand scale.
Mr President, Commissioner, fellow members, when you receive a lot of letters from people you do not know, it may be for one of two reasons.
Either you are very famous or your correspondents feel very strongly about the matter on which they write.
Members of the European Parliament are not very famous.
It must therefore be the matter at issue which has triggered the correspondence.
We have all received a lot of letters, documents and requests for interviews over the last few days, nearly all from representatives of national railways and nearly all warning us, unisono against the compulsory separation of management and infrastructure called for in the proposals by the rapporteur Georg Jarzembowski.
Mr Swoboda has also addressed this issue, although his argument was that we need to liberalise, but only one step at a time.
Georg Jarzembowski submits that our systems in the past, with quasi-monopolistic national carriers, have not allowed optimum use to be made of the system.
Who can argue with that?
The figures speak for themselves.
Our present railway system is a far cry from what we desperately need in Europe, namely an efficient system which is also an acceptable system.
Every example in related sectors confirms the argument.
One step at a time gets you nowhere.
Telecommunications traffic has demonstrated that, the electricity sector and numerous other sectors besides have demonstrated that.
And we expect the same to happen with the railways.
The main purpose of the railways is to serve their users and hence to serve a more efficient, improved European transport system.
That is what we want, that is what we need and that is what we shall vote for.
Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members, the overall objective of the railway package under discussion here today is fast liberalisation of the European railways.
As you know, we in the PPE are calling for this in all areas needed to complete the single market, wherever healthy competition can replace hand-me-down monopolies.
Only comprehensive liberalisation will allow the necessary progress to be made so that the railway, as a carrier, has the qualitative and quantitative capacity to provide services and integrate with other carriers.
The Commission texts on developing railway undertakings, on licensing railway undertakings and on allocating railway infrastructure capacity are a step in the right direction in this respect.
My fellow member, Georg Jarzembowski, has earned my unstinting support for his efforts to bring about a self-contained railway package and would like to thank him for his work and his excellent report.
What is important to me in all this is that, when management and infrastructure are separated, investments in the infrastructure are examined closely and duly compensated.
Liberalisation will only be accepted if it results in real advantages and consumers need not fear for their safety.
From this point of view, we must be sure to keep a firm hold on strict conditions when licensing railway undertakings.
As far as the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity is concerned, we must ensure that there is non-discriminatory access.
I do not deny that flexible regulations governing access to the grid have caused a number of problems in the energy sector.
But I still think it is the best market economy approach and that also applies to the railways.
We should not just talk about a common Europe, we should have the courage of our convictions and do something about it.
Mr President, and those fellow Members who are still awake, I would like to thank Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Swoboda for their lucid reports, with reference to which we can at last try to revive the railways by opening them up to competition.
It is fashionable these days to talk about the railways; it is politically correct.
It often feels as if Parliament is a chamber where there is just one permitted truth.
We all dash along in the same direction, like a flock of sheep, trying to convince one another that the railways will solve Europe' s transport problems.
It is hard for us politicians to admit the facts.
I have nothing at all against the railways; on the contrary, I greatly enjoy sitting in the buffet car, having a beer and admiring the landscape as it flits past.
To be able to make reasonable decisions we have to identify the real importance of the railways for the economy and examine just how big a part the various modes of transport play.
By far the biggest is road transport.
The share of rail transport, measured in tons per kilometre, has fallen to below 15%, but even this way of measuring the figures gives too rosy a picture of the situation.
From the economic point of view, transporting fifty computers a thousand kilometres is quite a different matter from transporting a hundred tons of grit ten kilometres, although the tonnage per kilometre is the same in both cases.
It is also quite a different matter to transport raw textiles weighing tons as compared to an enormous load of silk neckties - I had one for myself, by the way.
For this reason, any comparison must be made on the basis of the value of the consignments, and, if it is calculated this way, the share the railways have is just - surprise, surprise - 3%.
I am not mathematically gifted, but I see a dramatic difference in favour of road transport, whose share is more than 95%.
It is like comparing a fly with an ox, but it is not any wonder, because it is impossible to ignore the ease of transport, flexibility and door-to-door delivery service we associate with transportation by road.
At present the real role of the railways in Europe' s economy is, unfortunately, marginal, although they receive a good deal of assistance from the taxpayer.
But it is just because of this that we have to do all we can to revive rail transportation and support its gradual opening up to competition.
We expect a constructive contribution from France when we set the clocks of European railway stations to the new millennium.
Mr President, before going into the details of the various issues relating to the package of railway infrastructures, I would like to offer my heartfelt congratulations to the two rapporteurs, Mr Swoboda and Mr Jarzembowski, on the magnificent work they have done.
I am delighted that Parliament is standing firmly by its convictions in this area, especially with regard to the full realisation of a railway transport market.
Because what we are talking about, ladies and gentlemen, is not simply achieving fifteen juxtaposed national railway systems, but carrying out integration by means of a joint shared network throughout the length and breadth of Europe which will specifically allow the railway to function better.
As has already been pointed out by the two rapporteurs - and also Mr Rack when he referred to the number of letters that he had received from different voters - although this involves some very technical issues, at the end of the day it is to a large extent a political issue.
In this respect, it inspires passionate sentiments, as has been pointed out and as we have just heard a moment ago.
I would like to say that what is clear to most of us is that things cannot continue as they are: with closed public systems, which are national, confined within national borders, which are leading to a situation where the railway, day after day, is losing its share of the market in goods transport and in the transportation of persons as well, with the exception of a very specific form of transport, that is, high speed trains and suburban trains.
In this respect, we must make a change, we must propose solutions which will improve the quality of the service, because that is the important thing for consumers and users.
We believe that, if our first aim is to create a situation where a train can reasonably travel from Hamburg to Lisbon, the first thing we have to do is to see to it that that train can belong to a German company, a French company, a Spanish company, a Portuguese company etc.
These may be public or private, nobody is questioning that, but it is obvious that, if we integrate the network, this automatically leads to an opening up of our market.
So let us forget dogma, examples of which I have heard here tonight.
Ladies and gentlemen, I wish to tell the two rapporteurs that I like their amendments very much.
However, having said this, I will not be able to accept many of them, although I would have loved to have done so.
I am going to tell you why, because I am one of those people who believe that the perfect is the enemy of the good, and that it is better to make progress than to reach an impasse.
To accept the amendments of both Mr Jarzembowski and Mr Swoboda, the vast majority of which correspond much more to the Commission' s initial proposal and to my own opinions on the whole, would mean disregarding a compromise which was reached with great difficulty in the Council, as you know, after long arguments, after long periods of impasse and stalemate on this issue, which kept us talking into the early hours of the morning.
I would therefore like to say that there is a margin, because Parliament is not being ignored - Parliament must participate in the creation of these directives - but there exists a fundamental compromise with the Council which I, of course, cannot disregard and you must understand this.
That would be counterproductive in terms of what both you and I want to see, which is the promotion of improvements in the railways.
I would like to say that next year I am prepared to present an additional step, a different initiative, which may be accepted or rejected, both by the Council or by Parliament, when the time comes, and modified in its various fields, and which will also deal with certain aspects, at least with regard to the transportation of persons or, possibly, the transport of goods internally within the different countries, but which will be separate from the current package, on which we have reached a fundamental compromise - I insist - with the Council.
Before thanking the two rapporteurs on their work once again, which I know has been very complex - I fully appreciate this - but which I believe has been very important, and before commenting on all the amendments one by one, I would ask the rapporteurs and Parliament as a whole for a degree of flexibility, so that in the end we may achieve a conciliation - since I fear that we will have to go to conciliation, the way things are going - which will allow us to move forward with this package which has a key role to play in the future of the railway.
Turning specifically to each of the reports, after these general comments, and perhaps in order to clarify and not to prolong this debate any further, I would like to refer to amendments relating to the Directive amending Directive 91/440/EEC, whose rapporteur is Mr Jarzembowski.
We could accept Amendments Nos 3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 17, 20, 21 and 24.
On the other hand, I must reject - although I insist that I agree fully with many of them, but cannot accept them - Amendments Nos 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, 15, 16, 18, 19, 22, 23, 25, 26 and 27.
Amendments Nos 6, 8, 9 and 11, which propose the separation of the operators of infrastructures from the providers of services, clarify the text enormously.
I also consider it important to remove Article 6(4), which I believe could be a source of misunderstandings and, therefore, I particularly support Amendment No 8 and the corresponding corrections to the wording.
As for the directives which are the subject of Mr Swoboda' s report, with regard to Directive 95/18/EC, we cannot accept Amendment No 1, since Article 12 serves as a reminder that, as well as European legislation, there are national rules which must be respected - there is an element of national regulation which in no way disappears as a result of this regulation - and, nevertheless, we do accept Amendment No 24.
With regard to Directive 95/19/EC, there are key questions such as, for example - and Mr Swoboda and Mr Ortuondo have mentioned this - the issue of the establishment of tariffs on marginal costs or on total costs, in one case seeing it as a transitional period, in another, as a key element.
I would like to say that, although I would perhaps have preferred other proposals, the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 4, 6, 8, 12, 13, 15, 16, 19 and 20; but we cannot accept Amendments Nos 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 14, 17, 21, 22 and 23.
Mr President, I would once again like to thank the two rapporteurs for their work and ask for flexibility, from them and from Parliament, so that in the end we may achieve a result, which must also be supplemented by the other directive, which involves the interoperability of the systems themselves, which would be a great step forward.
There are perhaps some who want more, and others who want a little less, but I am sure that reality will prove us right.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Recognition of professional qualifications
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0174/00) by Mr Wieland, on behalf of the Committee for Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the general system for the recognition of professional qualifications.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, fellow members, this report deals with a very complex issue.
One of the proposed amendments relates to considerations which, basically, deal prosaically with a matter of general concern to the House - if the large majority in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is anything to go by -, namely the fact that the public seeking legal advice in the European Union is still not being provided with comprehensive legal texts as and when they are needed; and not just the public seeking legal advice, the specialist public or trained legal practitioners.
One proposed amendment therefore calls in particular for the Commission to promptly provide suitably worded texts reflecting the latest developments in the legal world.
What we are talking about here is, as it were, a ceterum censeo, which needs to be the subject of debate here in the House for all directives.
Secondly, it is an issue which needs to be taken out of brackets, as it were.
A derogation for Italian pharmacists has been extended although, contrary to the common position, the Committee on Legal Affairs proposes that a cut-off date be attached to the derogation.
Anyone who began studying before October 1990 will be protected under this directive but must expect to complete their studies within a reasonable period of time.
In addition to these general rules, we have also proposed amendments to the directives which apply to doctors.
Doctors are a sensitive issue, human health is a very sensitive issue.
If I have a car accident, I can quantify and repair the damage.
I know of no-one from my law practice who, having received compensation for physical injury, would not gladly give the money back in return for restored health, which is why this issue requires special attention.
The Committee on Legal Affairs therefore sets great store by the following conclusion: first, that specialists should also keep up with general practice while training as specialists.
Differential diagnostics continue to change, which is why specialist training must also include general practice.
Secondly: we are calling, by a large majority, for specialist training to be increased from at least two to at least three years in order to take account of a broad trend within the European Union.
It is time for improvements here.
Thirdly: the Committee on Legal Affairs is calling for greater focus on continuing training.
We know and admit that this subject was not quite so urgent at first reading but there are now problems here for procedural reasons.
An exception is made when Parliament is re-elected between the first and second readings.
That applies here, which is why the Committee on Legal Affairs has introduced the concept of continuing training as one of the mainstays of this House and as one of the mainstays of the European Union.
We believe that lifelong learning is not just the stuff of soap-box speeches; it should be standard and patients should be able to expect their doctors to complete further training, which is why Amendments Nos 1 to 11 are broadly supported by the committee and will surely be broadly supported by the House tomorrow.
I should like to address one more point.
Two other amendments have been proposed concerning Irish architects.
The PPE-DE group - my group - intends to withdraw its amendment here.
I would recommend that the House also reject the amendment along these lines proposed by the UEN.
This is a national problem and must be solved at national level; it cannot, in any case, be solved at European level.
If we introduce regulations here then others who are even less entitled to do so will surely table similar requests.
The single market is one of the great achievements of the European Community.
To have turned the distinct and fragmented markets of the Member States into a single European market is an extraordinary and revolutionary change.
While it is true that the process has not yet been completed, it has been set on an irrevocable course.
The mechanics needed to achieve this change are very extensive, as can be seen from even the most cursory examination of Lord Cockfield's 1992 programme, one of the most revolutionary, yet on the face of it unexciting programmes of the post-war world.
Within that framework there is clearly a choice of instruments for putting the single market in place which can be described as the choice between harmonization and mutual recognition.
Of these, harmonization is more seductive for the gung-ho politician who wants to be seen doing something, one of the scourges of the contemporary world.
In my view systems of mutual recognition are more attractive.
They are after all more subtle and sophisticated.
The insensitive imposition of harmonization has caused untold political damage to the European political enterprise and had the single market been based more on mutual recognition and less on harmonization Europe's political condition would be much less febrile than it is today.
One of the great difficulties in establishing a network of mutual recognition is the complexity of the procedures required to put it into place and to ensure the ongoing compatibility and appropriateness of the mutual recognition network.
This requires ongoing monitoring and we very much welcome the revision of the series of directives which are the subject of this debate this evening.
As the rapporteur, Mr Wieland, has pointed out in his excellent report, this directive is primarily about procedures as they relate to the recognition of diplomas.
Finally, if I might conclude on a parochial note, as a United Kingdom MEP, we especially welcome the extension of the minimum length for specific training in general medical practice for doctors from two to three years.
Secondly, we welcome the stipulation that Member States are to examine the qualifications already recognised in one Member State which have been obtained in a third country.
Finally, and more generally, I would like to reiterate the rapporteur's general conclusion that this is all far too difficult and complicated for anyone other than an expert or a lawyer and every effort must be made to simplify the law and make it more user-friendly so that the single market is understood by all our citizens.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, anyone who takes Europe seriously wants to provide a good future for young people in the European Union.
This includes, most importantly, ensuring that young people can develop their skills and talent in any place of their choice in any country in the Union, irrespective of where they are from and where they trained.
Anyone who has learned something at one end of the Union should be able to pursue his or her career in a country in the middle or at the other end of the Union.
The European Parliament takes this aspect of the future of young people very seriously, which is why we keep pressing to have equivalent qualifications recognised in all Member States.
We want to ensure that there are no bureaucratic hurdles to hamper citizens' rights of freedom of movement and freedom of establishment.
But we also want to guarantee high training standards; high standards guarantee progress and are in the interests of all our citizens.
Thanks to the excellent work by the rapporteur, Mr Wieland, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has had no trouble highlighting a few important points in the directive before us today.
I hope that plenary shares its views and will vote in favour by a large majority.
The Group of the Party of European Socialists will, in all events, be voting in favour of all, I repeat all the amendments proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs.
It is most important both to me personally and to my group that the need for lifelong learning has been highlighted, thereby ensuring that doctors, who are the focus of this directive, have a high standard of future-orientated professional qualifications.
The need for professional qualifications acquired in individual Member States to be seen as equivalent also cut clear across the political divide.
That is as important for patients and, in the final analysis, for all citizens, as it is for the medical profession itself.
For this reason alone, it is important for the Council to follow the European Parliament's lead and not to take refuge in the conciliation procedure, which may allow it to gain time, but not recognition.
Thank you for listening.
Mr President, my task is also on behalf of my group, to welcome Amendments Nos 1 to 11 and the spirit in which they were moved by my friend, Mr Wieland.
These are important points although they are not controversial among us.
We welcome in particular the extension of training for general practitioners to three years, together with the amendment originally moved by Mrs Gebhardt for lifelong learning for general practitioners.
This is extremely important.
The medical associations have been pressing us upon this point and I fully agree with them.
It is also important as a purely linguistic matter to make sure that gleichwertig is translated as "equivalent" and its equivalent words in other European languages.
I conclude by taking up the point that nothing is more important than that the laws of the European Union should be understandable to its citizens.
Without that our Community and our Union lack the clarity of purpose which will make them not merely acceptable to, but embraced by, the citizens.
Therefore all projects of consolidation of law that tend to making the law more readily understood by the citizen and its purposes more lucid to her or him are projects to which we should give our greatest support.
I am very happy to support this report.
I once again congratulate my friend, Mr Wieland, on the spirit in which he moved it.
Mr President, after years of confusion, it is time to clarify the system for recognising professional qualifications and diplomas, precisely in order to provide the European citizens with clear, transparent, and, most importantly, universally accessible laws.
This is clearly a somewhat difficult undertaking for, apart from anything else, there are 14 directives in existence on the subject and each one has been amended several times.
Moreover, the failures and delays of the Member States in complying with European legislation have all too often been justified by its complexity or by the difficulty of gaining access to information at European level.
As the rapporteur points out, even lawyers have trouble.
However, at the end of the day, the only people to pay the price for this situation are the citizens, especially young people who may well have invested time and energy in the certainty of obtaining results and official recognition and feel betrayed by the institutions.
And the situation is all the more serious if we consider the unemployment levels in Europe.
I belong to the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport which, once again, has not been asked to speak on an issue which not only involves legal questions, but should also be subject to consensus in other respects.
The complexity which exists in Europe in relation to the recognition of qualifications gives rise to documents such as this, which, despite the efforts of Parliament and the Commission itself, is a real 'collage' .
This document is a 'collage' in the sense that, although it tries to remedy situations which are unjust, those people with most power, such as the doctors' 'lobby' , which has been very active, have managed to resolve their situation.
Many other people, however, have travelled, have acquired academic qualifications, have trained professionally and have still not had their qualifications recognised and therefore have no rights.
I believe, and in this respect I am sorry to disagree with Mr Wieland, despite the fact that he has done such good work, that this is a very simple problem when looked at from the point of view of Roman law and its notion of the right of individuals.
All individuals have the right for their studies to be recognised.
These days we are always talking about mobility.
We give grants so that people may have mobility, but then we do not recognise what has been studied with those grants.
We talk of the Europe of research and a Europe of knowledge and then we do not recognise, out of pure fear or pure vested interests, anything that people do outside of their own countries.
Therefore, I wish now to ask that we question this directive, so that the recognition of the medical qualifications may be extended to many other qualifications, because it seems to me to be truly unjust that this is not the case, and that a country is unable to pass on what it knows to another country.
The result is that a lot of knowledge is confined to certain areas, in certain universities and in certain companies.
If recognition were to be extended, Europe could enjoy the full right to the transfer of knowledge and that would be a real innovation.
Therefore, as representative of the Culture Committee in this case, I ask that this recognition be extended and that the road be opened to greater recognition of equivalence.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I generally welcome any measure or any directive to improve the mutual recognition of professional or academic qualifications.
Every member who, like me, lives in a border region, knows the problems encountered by citizens who work or wish to establish in a nearby Member State.
The EU Treaty clearly regulates the freedom of movement and the freedom to establish of people in the EU.
But the devil is in the detail.
We now realise that in fact every job description needs to be regulated.
But people no longer understand this.
Is this a citizens' Europe?
Is this a common market?
These are the questions.
The difficulties are clear from the number of current directives alone - there are "only" fourteen on today's subject.
We must reduce and harmonise the huge administrative costs, including within the Member States, which is why the Commission proposal to simplify the procedure is most welcome.
Individual job descriptions, training courses and pre-requisites vary enormously within the EU.