# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Decision on urgent procedure
Mr President, the Committee on Industry considers that this is an extremely important issue and should be dealt with as a matter of great urgency.
We all know the reasons why the situation affecting Montenegro is a complex one and we should not, for obvious reasons, delay this matter any further.
I therefore propose producing a simplified report so that we can vote on urgent procedure.
Mr Wynn, chairman of the Committee on Budgets, asked for an opinion, has the floor.
Mr President, we are in a strange situation because a decision was taken in the groups before the Committee on Budgets had decided on this issue of Montenegro.
Also, I have not had a chance to speak to my good friend Mr Westendorp.
I believe that the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy is sympathetic to the position of the Committee on Budgets, which I am about to state.
However, since I have not spoken to him directly, do not quote me on that - it is only second-hand information.
Firstly, I should like to make it clear that the Committee on Budgets supports any aid to Montenegro.
It has done so in the past and will do so in the future.
On this occasion there is no urgency for this to go through now.
The monies will not be made available until August for the first tranche and the second tranche will be paid at the end of the year.
We are of the opinion that the relevant committees need to study the details of this proposal.
Whichever the lead committee is - Foreign Affairs or Industry - we would merely give an opinion, but those committees and Parliament need to evaluate these proposals.
We should not be bounced into a decision because the Council deems it to be necessary.
As for budgets, our main concern is where the money is coming from.
It is great to make proposals but we feel this urgency should not be agreed upon until we know where the money is coming from.
We should leave it until next month.
The committees can debate it and we can vote on it at the June part-session.
Thank you Mr Wynn.
That is a very sensible opinion.
Mr Newton Dunn, vice-chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy has the floor to explain his committee' s opinion.
Mr President, we have not discussed it in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, but my personal view is that we should not accept urgency now.
Mr President, in my opinion, this proposal has been submitted under rather strange procedural circumstances.
Despite this, as speaker on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, I am of the opinion that the urgency is such that we need to take it extremely seriously.
Accordingly, regardless of the mistakes in the procedure, I have to say on behalf of my group that we would like to support this request for urgent procedure after all.
I also have a feeling that other groups in this House from the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy share the same view.
It might be helpful to verify this.
Mr President, I am in favour, although I take the view that it is not quite as urgent as the Council makes out.
However, it would be an insult to the people of Montenegro if we rejected this urgency today.
Montenegro is in great danger, especially from Belgrade, and I think we should send out this signal.
However, we should wait until the Commission finally tells us where it intends to find the money.
It cannot take it away from Bosnia.
It cannot take it away from Kosovo.
It needs to tell us where it intends to find the money and if we reach a decision on this today, we must carry out an evaluation half way through and say what has happened to the money and where the second tranche is to come from.
Mr President, firstly, I am against the urgency for the reasons expounded by the chairman of the Committee on Budgets.
There is, in fact, no urgency because the money would be released for August.
Secondly, if we look carefully, in the line which has been applied until now, there are still EUR 20 million which have not been used.
Therefore, there is no uncertainty and no urgency and we can study this issue again, calmly, at a later date.
(Parliament agreed to urgent procedure)
2001 Budget - Parliament' s estimates
The next item should be the presentation by the Commission of the preliminary draft budget for 2001.
Unfortunately, the Commissioner has not yet arrived, although she is on her way.
I therefore propose that we examine the next item on the agenda.
The next item is the report (A5-0121/2000) by Mr Ferber, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the estimates for the European Parliament' s income and expenditure for the financial year 2001.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it would truly have been a great honour to speak directly after the Commissioner' s presentation of the Commission budget 2001.
Instead, I have the honour of presenting Parliament' s budget before the Commissioner presents the larger budget to us.
As rapporteur for Parliament' s budget, I am in a position to submit a proposal to you which, in my view, has three main features.
First, and I set great store by this, the budget which we have prepared for you is a highly economical one.
Secondly, we have learned our lessons from the justified complaints of the Court of Auditors and the Committee on Budgetary Control, for which we are all to blame.
Thirdly, and this is a particular matter of concern to me, we have strengthened the European Parliament as the institution which represents the interests of the citizens of Europe.
What have we focused on in Parliament' s Budget 2001?
I should like to outline this briefly with reference to five main points.
First: in the area of buildings policy, and this is an extremely important point, we must draw the right conclusions from the objections raised by the Court of Auditors.
In other words, first, we must make the remaining payments in Brussels as quickly as possible - and we are putting the conditions in place for this - so that we can reduce costs - that is particularly important to the taxpayer - and, secondly, we must solve the problem of Strasbourg, of this building here, in a way which does not give cause for complaint.
Both are provided for by figures in the draft budget.
Secondly, we must also exercise extreme restraint in the area of staff policy in the coming year.
We cannot allow Parliament' s staff numbers to increase exorbitantly just because there is some financial room for manoeuvre.
And we must also solve the problem of promotion in the autumn in a way which is acceptable to all institutions.
Thirdly, we must prepare ourselves for the enlargement of the European Union and this applies to Parliament even more than to the other institutions.
However, this does not mean - and this is a particularly important point - that we will decide as early as next year on which new languages we can offer in our interpreting services and therefore which countries will be allowed to become members of the European Union in the first round and which will not.
That is the wrong way forward.
It is not the job of the budget to make such fundamental political decisions.
They need to be taken elsewhere; in other words, we do, of course, need to talk to language schools in the candidate countries and we must develop and build up programmes, but we must also, of course, be clear that we cannot anticipate decisions which need to be taken at a political level first.
I am pleased to see the Commissioner is now with us.
I have taken over your role insofar as we are discussing Parliament' s budget first and shall then move on to the Commission' s budget.
No I do not want your job, only you can do it, the role reversal does not stretch quite that far!
Fourthly, we must take account of the increase in the responsibility of the European Parliament since the Amsterdam Treaty entered into force.
The current Members of the European Parliament have more responsibility and more work in comparison with all their predecessors than ever before and naturally that also makes itself felt when it comes to preliminary work and technical equipment.
I should like to thank everyone who supported me in this matter of concern.
My fifth point is that this increased responsibility must also find expression with regard to groups in the European Parliament.
I want to see a political parliament fighting for just causes and that means widening the basis for group work; it also means - and I make no bones about the fact - limiting the official services of the European Parliament.
That is the only way of achieving a parliament with an enduring public profile.
I was pleased to note that the Bureau of the European Parliament is thinking along the same lines and that one of the vice-presidents from my group is preparing a report on the subject.
That is the right way forward.
I have taken note of the amendments to my report proposed by my fellow delegates with a great deal of interest.
I hope you will understand that I can support very few, because they no longer follow, in fact, they abandon the line which I presented in the Committee on Budgets and which was adopted by a majority in the committee.
We must prepare for enlargement, but we do not need to start recruiting interpreters from the candidate countries as early as next year.
Even the buildings policy must be considered with a view to enlargement, but I see no need to do so in the Budget 2001.
We need to be a bit more realistic in our approach to the important question of enlargement.
We moved into a new building in Brussels three years ago, we moved into a new building here in Strasbourg a year ago and if we tap the taxpayer on the shoulder again so soon after and say we need more buildings, more office space, he is only likely to agree to so much.
We need to take account of that in our calculations.
A budget with EUR 987 million is not very much in comparison to the budget of over EUR 90 billion which the Commissioner will propose shortly, but this is the taxpayers' money and we must take our decision as the trustees of that money.
The taxpayer expects us to take a prudent approach not only when we draw up the budget, but also when we implement and carry it out.
We shall have to discuss this again in September during the first reading of this budget, once all the documents from the budget discharge procedure have been submitted.
I should like today to thank the Bureau of the European Parliament, especially the vice-president responsible for budgetary questions, Gerhard Schmid, for their constructive cooperation, especially during the conciliation procedure between the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets.
My thanks also go to the corresponding departments of Parliament' s administration for their prompt and conscientious preliminary work, without which this set of figures could never have been drawn up.
However, I should also like to extend my special thanks to my colleagues in the Committee on Budgets for their fair cooperation.
Bringing divergent opinions together to a consensus, mostly with too little time to spare, is not always easy.
So my compliments to all my comrades-in-arms and finally, of course, a heartfelt thank-you to the secretarial staff of the Committee on Budgets for having prepared everything promptly and reliably in these difficult times.
I think I can present you with a budget which has earned Parliament' s confidence.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent work that he is doing for our House in terms of getting value for money out of our budget.
It is not right that we should be expecting the Commission to do a whole range of things in putting their House and their budget in order unless we also take the same kinds of rigorous steps.
The approach which has been taken is absolutely correct, not only in making sure that we do not simply give money away if we have a little spare in the budget, but also where we have asked the Secretary-General of Parliament to come forward with a number of reports: for example, in paragraph 6 of the resolution where we have asked the Secretary-General to look at and identify job needs in the same way as the Commission so that we can match job needs to the staff which we have available in the longer term.
That quite clearly is a way of long-term planning which is very sensible at this stage of Parliament's life.
There are three things which I would like to emphasise in particular in this Parliament Budget 2001.
The first is a plea from an individual parliamentarian that we should make sure that we have a date firmly fixed for the second network computer in our offices.
It is a matter of frustration for many of us that our staff can access the net with their computers, of course, Parliament's computers, but if we as parliamentarians bring in our own computers, we do not have a place to plug them in and work effectively.
It is important to have a date when this facility will be available to us.
Secondly, on a matter of communication, under paragraph 21 of this resolution, I would like to draw the House's attention to the fact that we have on many occasions in these debates called for all Commission and Parliament offices in the Member States to work together within a European House framework by 1 January 2000.
As we have now gone past that date and there are still one or two Member States, in particular my own, where Parliament and the Commission have different offices and where in terms of financing Parliament's office well over 70% of the expenditure goes on bricks and salaries, it does not leave much for communications.
The sooner we can make sure that the image of the European Union is reflected by one European House, the better it will be.
The last point refers to the question of the implications for enlargement.
I would like to support what our rapporteur has said that we cannot suddenly leap into beginning to authorise posts for preparing enlargement if a political decision has not yet been taken; all the more so, because in Parliament's estimates, as I have understood them, we have in front of us an assumption that we are going to have more languages as a result of enlargement.
Yet we have had no debate in this House to know how we are going to handle not a limited enlargement but an extensive enlargement following the Helsinki Summit late last year, with potentially 12 or 13 new countries, that is 27 - 28 countries with over 20 different languages.
How, Secretary-General, are we going to handle this if we do not have some thinking from the Administration as to where we are going to put them all?
Are we going to have rooms which we are going to have to adjust for over 20 languages so that in every room where there is a discussion in this Parliament every person has the right to use their own language?
We are aware that in the last Parliament a lot of work was done on this by Vice-President Cot.
His report was never released to Members.
We never saw it as a report on suggesting how the hub and spoke system should work - the relay system for interpretation - nor, indeed, did we really have any thinking about the freelancing possibilities with modern communications where we can dispatch a large amount of our translation material to people who are in the Member States, rather than recruiting a whole range of people to come and work in Luxembourg as fixed and permanent employees of Parliament.
Therefore, I strongly support the compromise which has been put forward by our rapporteur asking, by first reading, for the Secretary-General to come up with a strategy of how to handle the whole question of languages in Parliament and enlargement.
I suspect the Commission might wish to do that as well, because it is a problem which rightly, in this amendment, relates to interinstitutional matters.
I very much hope that the Socialist Group will change their mind, get their heads out of the sand and realise that this is the problem which we have to tackle and that it is better to do it now rather than later.
Mr President, let me also start by congratulating Mr Ferber on a comprehensive estimate of Parliament's revenue and expenditure.
I support the thrust of this report, which is in line with the policy of budgetary rigour, because the major challenges that this Chamber needs to address are greater accountability and transparency which will involve embracing institutional reform with vigour; secondly, the forthcoming enlargement of the Union and thirdly, a drive towards improving efficiency through effective budgetary control and better use of resources.
Our main priority has to be to explain to European citizens what we are doing, why we are doing it and how we are doing it.
We must win the confidence of the European taxpayer and we can only do this by improving accountability through simplifying - not mystifying - the work of Parliament, by reducing jargon, by improving the process of approving legislation and improving the legislative machinery and by making a clear connection between what we do here and how it benefits the individual.
We are going a long way towards achieving this transparency through the introduction of activity-based budgeting and the proposal we have in this report to put appropriations for political parties in separate budget lines will contribute significantly to achieving this.
These virtues are all the more important as we move towards the challenge facing the EU at the moment of enlargement.
We in the Socialist Group strongly believe that the European Parliament should be giving every encouragement to candidate countries in their preparation to joint the EU.
I have the impression that there are those in this House who appear to be frustrating this process of enlargement by placing unnecessary obstacles in the way and often using spurious arguments to limit the preparation for enlargement: for example, the rejection of the proposal to fill the 35 vacant posts in the language reserve between 2001 and 2002.
The reason given, and also outlined by my colleague Mr Elles, is that we believe that this will pre-empt discussions with accession states.
Do we seriously believe that this small step will influence all the institutions as to which countries are in the first tranche and which are in the second tranche?
Do we really believe that by committing less than half a per cent of Parliament's language budget the political decision will be made and taken out of our control?
I am somewhat confused and if I recall correctly, the rapporteur agreed previously and argued vigorously for setting up an interinstitutional recruitment agency in his last report.
What is the point of approving a joint operation whilst at the same time we are preventing any recruitment of people?
I strongly favour planning properly for enlargement because experience has shown that there is a long lead-in time for the training of interpreters and translators.
It is necessary if the admission of the new Member States into the Institution is to run smoothly from a language point of view.
Of course I agree that we should not at any stage prejudice political decisions which have to be taken at a later date.
On the other hand, we should avoid giving out discouraging messages to the applicant countries that are currently making great efforts to get themselves in shape to join the EU.
I reiterate that we should not pre-empt any political decisions to be taken on enlargement.
We need to plan and to be imaginative and to be creative as to how we prepare for enlargement because nothing will be more damaging to the EU if we make a bad job of enlargement.
What we also need to do is have a vigorous implementation of reform to prepare for enlargement.
Very recently the President of the European Court of Justice warned that it would be unable to cope with enlargement of the EU.
The average time that it takes for a case to be heard has risen from 17 months in 1988 to 23 months last year.
That is a very long wait.
What we need to do is to have reforms, not just in the areas of staffing and procedures, but we also need to have a new approach in terms of buildings policy.
It is vital that the preparations are made during the coming financial year to ensure that Parliament's buildings are able to accommodate new Member States of an enlarged EU.
It is also important for provision to be made to set up information offices in the countries which have applied to join the EU.
It is widely acknowledged that the systems that we have at the moment were set up for the EU when we only had 6 Members and they are creaking at the edges in terms of the Union of 15 Members.
How are they possibly going to be effective with 25 Members?
It is important that we plan and prepare.
I am a relatively new Member of Parliament and while I see a lot of good work going on in the committees, I am acutely aware that as a result of the new responsibilities in the Treaty of Amsterdam there is a need not just for individual support for Members but also scientific support for committees.
Since the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force Parliament's workload has increased very significantly and it is important that this is taken into account in this budget.
The Commission's Work Programme now incorporates a very large number of codecision procedures and these procedures have significantly increased our workload.
If we are to convince the people of the EU of the importance of the European Parliament's work and persuade them to take it more seriously, we need to improve our systems of working.
That is why I welcome the report's emphasis on the common statute for Members and assistants and I hope that we can adopt this as soon as possible.
I have been disappointed by some aspects of the report's focus.
It focuses too much on the minutiae of detail in sometimes preventing administrative changes in staffing and frustrating strategic vision.
I am concerned at the wisdom of putting 30% of the appropriation into the reserve for security services as the rapporteur proposes.
There is a contradiction in the rapporteur's argument.
He has always focused on outsourcing of Parliament's services.
Here we have an example of outsourcing that is not working.
Rather than reducing the budget we should be looking at how we improve security services, and the question we should be asking is: should we have our own security services or should we be retendering it rather than just reducing the budget?
I am also disappointed that the report ignores one of the biggest inefficiencies we have.
Members of the European Parliament are the only parliamentarians who have no say in the location of their seat.
A seat on three sites is the most incredible waste of time, money, travel and transport.
Surely, when we are looking at budgetary rigour we have the right to address this issue because until we do so the general public will be confused about what we are doing in so many places.
It also confuses the roles of the organisation.
Mr President, Mr Markus Ferber has produced an excellent report, on which I wish to congratulate him.
The Parliament Budget is essentially an administrative budget, since wage costs constitute the largest item of expenditure.
We are currently experiencing a significant period of change in administration, as we are aiming to introduce activity-based budgeting, to emphasise greater personal accountability and to improve the reallocation of resources.
This is why, last year, Parliament approved an appropriation of EUR 300 000 for this year' s budget for the investigation of the efficiency and improvement needs of parliamentary administration.
Mr President, this is why it is somewhat surprising that already at this early stage, i.e. before the investigation has even started, important decisions are being made on administrative development.
In the Budget, appropriations for wages are being increased by an enormous 12.2 %.
This increase is so huge that no other institution could even contemplate an increase of administrative costs of this magnitude.
Already, at this early stage, the intention is to spend this increase on the creation of 33 new posts and, apparently, 12 more will be created as a result of the amendment by the Bureau.
For the sake of comparison, I would like to refer to the 1995-1999 period, during which Parliament established a total of only 11 new official posts.
It is worthy of special mention that in this proposal, a new post is even being created for the Financial Control Department, despite the intention to abandon prior inspection altogether.
In addition, the Budget contains a significant number of new staff promotions.
Such being the case, I cannot agree with those who claim that a policy of budgetary discipline has been observed in the drafting of this Budget.
On the contrary, this Budget is uncommonly slack, and this will make it difficult to gain the approval of the general public.
Mr President, it is necessary in this context to address the issue of the policy of the European Parliament in its capacity as an employer.
Administrative reform, activity-based budgeting and downward delegation of accountability require consultation with the staff.
Reallocation of resources is necessary, and consequently also reform of staffing regulations.
Thus it would have been proper to save for the future such tools and opportunities for negotiation, with which these reforms are supposed to be furthered, and to refrain from granting new benefits before there has even been an opportunity to negotiate comparable administrative reforms with the staff.
Mr President, I too would like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur for his report and for facilitating open communication.
Mr Ferber' s report does not just contain political aspects but is in fact largely composed of administrative aspects.
I will start by quoting and commenting on a number of political statements.
My group wholeheartedly agrees with the line taken in the report that the Council and Parliament should draft a statute in the short term and should do this in joint cooperation.
They should compile a statute for the Members of the European Parliament, and, independently of that, a statute for the Member' s assistants.
We support this and hope that it can be brought to a conclusion during the course of this year.
The report also contains a political comment regarding the separate budget lines required for the parliamentary groups on the one hand and the European political parties on the other.
We must avoid hidden subsidies for European political parties at all costs.
We all know that it will be some time before a statute is drawn up for the European political parties and I welcome the fact that, in the meantime, the Secretary-General has been asked to establish transparency in the use of appropriations by the parliamentary groups and the political parties.
Quite apart from this, the report also covers many administrative aspects.
For example, we have been asked to pass judgement on the fact that the Directorate for Committees and Delegations must comprise five A posts, two B posts and one C post, and that one A post and two B posts must be added to the Directorate-General for Personnel.
It is not because I am new, I think, that I have great difficulty in passing judgement on this.
In my opinion, it is mainly up to a manager to take responsibility for the precise detail of personnel policy.
It is also very difficult for the groups if it is decided in the plenary how many additional posts are to be created within the political groups.
Surely, a great deal depends on the organisation of your group and maybe not every group wants to work in exactly the same way.
I think that we should really re-think the system.
I understand that during the reform of Parliament, consideration will also be given to allowing groups to take responsibility for their own affairs and I wholeheartedly support this.
I would also like to comment briefly on the support which has been requested for the parliamentarians.
We have agreed that a study will be carried out which will also be linked in with a study commissioned by Mr Rothley into what exactly it is that the parliamentarians need in the way of support for their work.
I struggle somewhat with the fact that we are running ahead of this study' s conclusions because we do not give our verdict on the Bureau' s conclusion in Mr Ferber' s report.
The Bureau concludes that expenses for assistants should be increased by 20%.
In failing to pass judgement on this, we are giving the impression that we have accepted it.
I am not against this increase, in principle.
What I do object to, however, is running ahead of the report and I am also opposed to it because I am sure that in September, it will transpire that we will need to prioritise various issues.
For example, the rent we pay for the buildings may increase.
We will need to decide whether we want to inject more funding into other institutions in preparation for enlargement.
We will no doubt return to these points of criticism in September when we will have the precise figures in front of us.
As such, it is not really a criticism but I do object to running ahead of a decision.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are discussing a report on the European Parliament, and I am astonished first of all not to see one of Mrs Stauner' s letters appended to this document because, as you know, she likes to get involved in our business even though her own activities are concerned with something completely different.
Perhaps this is due to the fact that the rapporteur is a member of her own group and, for once, she is therefore confining herself to making observations rather than sending a letter.
I find this rather strange, but perhaps she has not yet said her last word.
We shall see, in time.
What I want to say is quite simply this: the situation is nonetheless rather surprising.
On the one hand, we have engaged in a policy of rigour resulting in all our budgets and discharges being obstructed by a Parliament that is rigorous to the extent of obstructing discharge to the Commission, and even obstructing discharge to the European Parliament itself, out of fear of problems, lack of endorsement or money wasting attributable to the duties of officials who are required to shuttle back and forth between Luxembourg and Brussels, costing the taxpayer a fortune.
Yet on the other hand, in the Ferber report, Members of Parliament are awarding themselves fortunes.
We are awarding ourselves a second computer, claiming that one is not enough.
We are awarding ourselves a 20% pay rise from a zero-growth budget.
We are awarding ourselves a 20% increase to the budget heading for funding for our assistants because we are more than anything afraid that the rules will stipulate that this contract will have to be accompanied by a statute which would specifically require welfare contributions to be paid, and so, as insurance against the worst case scenario, we are increasing this line by 20%.
After checking up, I have not found a single budget item in the Community, whether in the field of humanitarian aid, research, or agricultural expenditure where there are plans for an increase.
Moreover, generally speaking, the objective is to reduce the budget.
But not in this case!
Within the European Parliament a second computer is being awarded, 20% additional expenses and, as the Court of Auditors was particularly tough on the political groups, a paragraph is included, which, I quote, "Underlines emphatically the increased workload and the particular responsibilities of the political groups."
This paragraph does Parliament no credit.
If we adopt an attitude, we cannot express any indignation at waste while at the same time putting forward a budget of this type.
On behalf of the radicals in this House, I must inform you that I shall be voting against Mr Ferber' s report.
Mr President, Commissioner, I am sorry that my good friend, Mr Dell'Alba, is not in agreement with the draft budget by Mr Ferber.
We are in agreement and we are very happy.
I believe that the rapporteur, in drawing up this draft budget for 2001, has been rigorous, has made optimum use of resources and has, at the same time, been imaginative and looked to the future.
We congratulate him wholeheartedly.
Ultimately, we are talking about a European Parliament for the 21st century, when we will have to face three fundamental challenges.
We will have to respond to the MEPs' new obligations, as laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam, incorporate new technologies into our work and react immediately to the huge administrative, organisational and political obligations presented by enlargement of the European Union.
These three challenges faced by the European Parliament should be set in a context of great budgetary rigour and complete transparency in the use of public funds.
We must consider - and the rapporteur has done this - what kind of Parliament we want in the future.
Do we want a more administrative and bureaucratic Parliament or do we want a more political one?
Do we want a European Parliament that is centralised or do we want one which is compatible with a European Union which is becoming increasingly federalised but at the same time more subject to subsidiarity and decentralisation?
I believe - and I agree with him on this - that the rapporteur wants a Parliament that treats the MEPs' political work, both in Strasbourg and in Brussels, as well as in their individual political constituencies, as a priority.
In this case it is necessary, as he says, for there to be new information points, new IT resources and new staff - if necessary - to help MEPs carry out their bureaucratic tasks.
I hope that in September new appropriations will be provided for these lines.
I am very glad that Mr Ferber has reacted to the report of the Court of Auditors on the funding of the political groups.
An independent budget line will allow us to present a clearer and more transparent public image until we finally have a statute for the European political parties.
Let us not forget that these parties are the cornerstone of European democracy and there must be no doubts as to whether they are being funded in the correct manner.
We fully agree with the rapporteur' s view concerning the linguistic staff necessary for enlargement.
We must initiate the preparatory administrative measures.
Six new countries - with at least five new languages - in 2004 means that we will have to make a great effort to adapt.
In order to fill these vacancies, we will need to know the exact order in which the candidate countries will join the Union, and that is something that cannot happen now or in this budget.
We therefore support all Mr Ferber' s amendments.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by expressly welcoming Mr Ferber' s report in its broadest outlines.
We have enjoyed extremely positive collaboration over recent weeks and months, cooperation marked by the fact that we expressed our opinions in no uncertain terms on the points where we diverged widely, but when you can reach a common line, then that is the path you should take.
The challenge which faces us has been described.
One can in fact do no more than repeat it.
In the wake of Amsterdam - and I say this now in anticipation of what is yet to come in relation to this Parliament - we must reconcile the powers which Parliament now has with its potential, because at present they do not stand in a very balanced ratio.
We must ensure that we can achieve equality in arms with the other legislative authority, namely the Council, both in respect of the scientific service and scientific research.
We cannot allow the potential of this democratic and directly-elected Parliament to lag behind what the Council can do.
If we take our work seriously, if we take ourselves seriously, we must operate under the same conditions so that we really can stand up for ourselves.
There is no point in the President of our Parliament just putting her mark at the bottom of the page.
That is not enough; it is the work beforehand which is crucial and it needs to be carried out seriously and it needs to be carried out well.
In this respect it is both right and important - and I expressly disagree with Mr Dell'Alba here - that we prepare ourselves properly.
Nor can there be any question of exorbitant cost increases now.
Mr Dell'Alba knows full well that, thanks to a clever buildings policy - let there be no mistake about that - we have been able to release considerable funds over recent years.
Having scrimped and saved this money ourselves, we then need to use it to good purpose.
To good purpose means improving the potential and capabilities of this Parliament.
We are still within the 20% margin which we set ourselves and we are keeping to it.
At no point do we go over Parliament' s 20% share of administrative costs.
I think that shows that our approach is very serious here and we do not want to promise any cloud cuckoo land.
Another challenge before us - admittedly we have been pushed into action here by official discussions in various quarters - is the need to bring some transparency into this Parliament.
We shall accept this responsibility and take up this challenge.
Not because we are afraid of being forced to do so.
No, we want the public to know that we have nothing to hide here.
We are endeavouring to create a serious basis for what we do here, i.e. financing for the groups, and we want a set of rules so that the European political parties and party organisations can raise funds.
You cannot call for this sort of development at European level without financing the basis commensurately, that is quite right.
The basis must be clearly visible so that our citizens know what money is going where.
We shall do everything we can to make progress on this point and to bring more transparency into the process, so that everyone can see what money is going where and can judge if it is appropriate or unsuitable and criticism can then be levied where criticism is needed.
And it is needed.
However, we must head off criticism on procedural grounds or because we have accommodated certain sums under various budget headings.
Transparency is needed here and, as we said last year during the budget debates, we have our work cut out here.
Allow me to comment now on the question of enlargement, because that is the only point on which we disagree with Mr Ferber and, above all, with our colleagues in the PPE group.
What worries me here is that Mr Stoiber' s visit to your group last week had a greater impact than we all feared.
My next comment is addressed to my honourable friend, Mr Pöttering: it was you who said at a European Union conference "onwards and upwards" , and that enlargement should be speeded up for political reasons, because we cannot afford to put it on the back burner.
But, when we are specifically called upon to move forwards, we should do so decisively.
I know that the issue of when and how enlargement should take place can be the stuff of first-rate political debate, a debate which could set the axe at the very roots and I call for extreme caution here.
As far as specific preparations are concerned, we need, for example, to make preparations for more buildings.
And if you do not start looking for buildings, for example in the candidate countries, until things are so far down the road, you will be faced with prices which make your hair turn grey.
So we need to get our act together and make preparations which allow for sound financial management.
As far as preparing for new languages is concerned, if you read the Cot report, called for by the honourable Member of your group, Mr Elles, you will see that we shall have an additional 460 language combinations in the future.
According to one estimate, this will mean another 500 translators and interpreters.
Do you expect us to believe that you are suddenly going to jump up like a jack in the box with a list of people who are highly specialised in Estonian, Latvian, Czech, in all these new languages which we shall have?
No, preparations need to be made now.
And in order to avoid falling into the trap, as Mr Ferber rightly explained, of taking administrative decisions which anticipate political developments, we must, of course, ensure during the course of the year that we have a precise discussion on the distribution of these posts between the various languages.
We shall support the release of the Cot report - that is one part of Mr Elles' motion.
We are in favour of discussing this during the course of the year, but we are expressly against saying as of now that we refuse to fill the 35 posts.
That would be frivolous and would send completely the wrong signal to the Member States and to the people who hope to become an integral part of the Union.
Mr President, allow me to begin by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Ferber, for the good work he has done.
There is a lot in this report which has been well thought-out and which it is very easy indeed to support.
I want to talk about an issue which, in the long term, will be very important for Parliament and for the EU as a whole and which many Members have already touched upon here today, namely the language question.
Rarely perhaps is the linguistic diversity of Europe seen so incredibly clearly as in a debate in this Chamber in which eleven different languages are being interpreted between.
Naturally, this is expensive and time-consuming.
Yet it has been assumed without question, throughout the history of the EU, that whoever is present here should be able, if at all possible, to speak their own language.
A good deal in the report under discussion is based on the assumption that the EU will be enlarged by six new Member States in 2004.
What is more, that may be an underestimate.
A few days ago, the Commission said it was its own objective to be able to welcome ten new Member States by the year 2005.
I am among those for whom the greatest challenge for the EU is an enlargement whose ultimate goal is the reunification of a Europe which has always been divided by artificial borders.
I nonetheless believe that it is more realistic to proceed on the basis of the somewhat lower figure quoted in the report by the Committee on Budgets.
Even that figure is awfully large, bearing in mind the number of new languages involved.
Proceeding on the basis that there will be "5+1 countries" in the first round of negotiations - a lot can obviously happen during the next few years, but these six countries nonetheless have a two-year head start in terms of the negotiations - this means that five new official languages will be added to the eleven we already have at present.
There is no question of these newly welcomed countries and their languages being treated any differently from the way in which the existing Member States are treated.
It must equally go without saying that Hungarian, Polish or Estonian Members of this Parliament should be able to speak their own languages, just as we existing Members are entitled to speak ours.
Nor can we put ourselves in a situation whereby a country with access to trained interpreters and translators can become a Member State of the EU, while another country which does not have professionals of these kinds cannot.
That is precisely why it is so important that the issue is highlighted right now.
That is what the rapporteur is doing, and I think it is excellent.
We must not, in a few years' time, find ourselves in a situation in which the issue has still not been resolved.
We should also be clear about the fact that things are happening very quickly right now.
We are dealing with countries which are developing very rapidly, which means that we too must act quickly in order to have settled the language question by the time these countries join the Union.
Mr President, I congratulate Mr Ferber on his report.
These types of reports are never easy and he has done a good job.
My only criticism is that Amendments Nos 4 and 5 should have been tabled in someone else's name for the PPE Group.
By saying that I am being consistent: I said the same to Mrs Müller in the Green Group when she did that.
I shall explain why shortly.
Parliament demands that the Commission and the other institutions are prudent with taxpayers' money, and we think the same should apply to the European Parliament.
As chairman of this committee, I have discovered that your loyalties are spread very wide.
I have a loyalty to the committee, and when the committee takes a decision I feel duty-bound to defend that decision.
I have a loyalty to the rapporteur, and that is why I have made the comments before because the rapporteur should reflect the opinions of the committee.
I also have a loyalty to my political group which has given me this speaking time.
This sometimes leaves me bereft of my own loyalties to myself and what I want to say.
I was somewhat sympathetic to what Mr Dell'Alba was saying because we have to be careful of criticising everybody else if, at the same time, we are giving the impression that we are ignoring that prudency and just doing what we want to do.
I am not saying that we have done that.
However, if that is the impression we are going to give, we have to be very careful and realise the consequences.
Having said that, the Ferber report has tried to balance the needs of Parliament coming into a new millennium - new needs, enlargement on the horizon - and to make it function effectively.
Not all the decisions will be taken when we vote this report through.
The first reading will be time when the final decisions are taken, and cognisance has been taken of that.
When they see a budget of EUR 965m, the newspapers will easily deduce that is over EUR 1.5m per Member.
The British newspapers will be full of GBP 1m per MEP - that is what they cost!
However, we are trying to reduce those costs, especially on buildings.
If people would look at what is being done with the buildings: we are trying to reduce the payments over the shortest possible time, thereby reducing the total burden on Parliament's budget.
One only has to look at paragraphs 15 to 18 to see how serious we are about the buildings policy.
The policy of ramassage has been a great success for this Parliament.
What we have done with the Belliard building may not be ideal but at least it is a step in the right direction, and it is now off our backs.
Finally, one of the great problems in our institution is that we have no statute for Members, assistants or political parties.
What is being proposed is to try to make some headway towards resolving those factors.
- (PT) Mr President, the proposals put forward in the report that we are now considering interpret - or should interpret - the will of the European Parliament to prepare itself to meet the challenges facing the European Union.
It has to be this way, as we have been through a tricky time, and there are permanent tensions and glaring contradictions.
It seems that we expect everything and, at the same time, we expect nothing at all from the European Union' s priorities, as we can see from the level of budgetary transposition - or lack thereof.
It is our ability to take advantage of something that could potentially transform tensions and to reduce the amount of contradictions which will make the difference between the stagnation and the consequent decline of the project and the dynamism that its implementation requires.
Have the competences of the European Parliament increased substantially with the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the consequent extension of the codecision procedure to further areas of policy, for example?
If that is the case, we would have to provide Members of the House with a greater ability to carry out their mandate, more and better information and we would have to ensure that the political groups are more accountable and that the staff of the European Parliament is more efficient.
Does enlargement require subtle changes in the membership and functioning of this Parliament?
If it does, then we need to prepare for them, anticipate the challenges and how to respond to them and not fall into a situation of 'wait and see' , which would leave us trailing in the wake of events that we can neither prevent nor influence.
This applies to the European Union as a whole.
We are at a turning point and, now that we have reached this point, nothing will be the same as it was before and things will not remain as they are now.
Now that economic and monetary union has been achieved, the euro cannot be a point of arrival but a starting point, which, in time, will bring about and require further changes.
Now that the process of enlargement has been launched, fundamental changes are required as well as renewed ambition.
The need to make the economic sphere correspond to the political sphere is becoming increasingly clear.
We are swinging between deepening and dilution, solidarity and selfishness, decisiveness and delay, coherence and contradiction and convergence and divergence.
By increasing the influence of core principles, amongst which I would highlight subsidiarity and social and economic cohesion, we will be able to launch and see through new initiatives.
I congratulate Mr Ferber on the care he has taken over this work.
Mr President, as other colleagues have said, dealing with Amsterdam and preparing for enlargement are major challenges for this institution.
As far as I am concerned - and we should be very clear about this - new challenges require new resources.
As the rapporteur has indicated, you start by looking at existing resources and see where staff and resources which are under-utilised or no longer appropriate can be transferred.
Once that has been done, in the new situation in which the European Parliament finds itself, there is no alternative but to expand our budget.
I hear what Mr Wynn, the chairman of the committee, has said about prudence.
Prudence is in danger of becoming a false goddess: if we put too much emphasis on prudence it will be at the expense of the efficiency and the effectiveness of this Institution.
There is a delicate balance to be struck, and I know that in his report the rapporteur has striven towards it.
I broadly welcome Mr Ferber's report.
However, there are three fronts to which Parliament needs to pay more attention between now and September.
The first, as other colleagues have mentioned, is the issue of languages.
I had the honour of sitting on Mr Cot's working group on multilingualism.
Frankly, if this institution wishes to continue to practise multilingualism - and perhaps that is a debate we should have - there is no alternative but to start recruiting now.
If we leave it any longer, once we start enlargement we will not be in a position to continue multilingualism.
The decision will be taken for us.
We were almost in that position with Finnish at the last enlargement.
As Members will notice, the Finnish interpreters do a good job speaking English and other languages because we could not recruit Finnish-speaking English interpreters.
We shall find ourselves in that position again come the next enlargement unless we take hard decisions now.
So I want Parliament to rethink the 35 language posts.
The second area where we still have much to do as an Institution is informatics.
We have come a long way, but there are further benefits to be obtained from informatics.
In particular the President of the Bureau is looking at how to reach a position where every Member has a portable computer with access to the European Parliament's computer system so that, no matter where they are in the world, they can get their own committee reports, agendas and so on.
That does not require a massive increase in investment but it does require new money - an increase in Parliament's resources.
Finally, again, something I have heard you, Mr President, talk about: the issue of legal advice.
The new Amsterdam situation means that when we pass amendments and resolutions in this Chamber we have to be more aware of the legal consequences as well as the political consequences of what we are deciding.
We need to enhance the legal advice we have as a Parliament to support us through the conciliation and other procedures.
Finally, I should like to make it clear that I am not asking Parliament to spend massive amounts of new money.
However, to spend one or two per cent more in order to ensure that we remain effective is worth it, and we should look at prudence in the context of the wider demands of this Parliament.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Ferber, I should like to make a point of congratulating you on your report.
Of course it is not the Commission' s job to evaluate individual proposals, but I would like to welcome the fact that Parliament is endeavouring to ensure that, in future, the buildings policy will reduce the burden on the budget from interest payments.
Of course, I also welcome, from the point of view of interinstitutional relations, that your proposal has remained, as it were, within category 5 of the agreement.
The agreement makes provision here for this joint estimate of personnel and administrative costs to be distributed between the institutions on the basis of a specific ratio and you have based your proposals on that distribution.
I think that again shows that many aspects of the financial perspectives facilitate work and planning, especially where firm agreements are concluded between the institutions.
Above all, however, what is important is that you have paid a great deal of attention in your report to the question of enlargement and staff policy in the translating and interpreting sector and, of course, the question of what measures are taken here is a highly political one.
More importantly, preparations do, of course, have to be made and you have pointed out - even though the question looks somewhat different from the point of view of the individual institutions - that it should be a matter of interinstitutional concern to address the subject and find a solution.
In this respect, congratulations once again on your report, especially on the fact that the report on the Budget 2001 looks beyond the Budget 2001.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.
Presentation by Commission of preliminary draft budget for 2001
The next item is the presentation by the Commission of the preliminary draft budget for 2001.
Commission.
(DE) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in February, the Commission debated the priorities for the European budget for next year and had the opportunity to discuss these priorities in detail with the European Parliament both here in plenary and, more importantly, in the Committee on Budgets and in the various trialogues between the Commission, the European Parliament and the Council which have taken place since.
The Commission has used this debate as the basis for its preliminary draft budget for 2001, which it now has pleasure in presenting to you, as adopted by the Commission.
As it is the first preliminary draft budget which I have presented, allow me to comment on the procedure and the timing.
I think it makes a great deal of sense to debate priorities intensively first, before getting down to specific numbers.
More importantly, I think it is most helpful to present the preliminary draft budget so early, thereby allowing time for intensive discussion.
Now to the budget proper: as with every national budget, most of the figures in the European budget for a given year are determined by contracts, by previous decisions in past years and by legal bases in past years.
This is particularly true of agricultural expenditure in the area of the organisation of the markets, the largest item in the budget, including in the Budget 2001, and of the Structural Funds and multiannual programmes, be they in research, youth measures or foreign policy.
Despite the fact that figures are determined by previous years, the Budget 2001 also sets clear political priorities and, following discussions over recent months, I think I can say that the priorities in the Commission' s preliminary draft budget tally to a large extent with Parliament' s priorities.
Take, for example, the priority under the second pillar of agricultural policy; the highest rate of increase in the Commission' s preliminary draft budget is for promoting the development of rural areas and I think that this in fact highlights that the Commission considers that we need to focus on the second pillar of agricultural policy.
Secondly, economic policy prioritises the need to develop and promote Europe as a knowledge-based society, which is why the Commission' s preliminary draft budget has set a very large plus against research and a new edition of the programme to promote small- and medium-sized enterprises and, more importantly, contains a proposal to combine them with the promotion of technology, which was also a matter of concern to the rapporteur, Mrs Haug.
Access to new technologies is not very well developed in small- and medium-sized enterprises.
Of course, with the economic structure which we would like to have and which is strongly supported by small- and medium-sized enterprises, and which we want to use to push Europe forward, it is necessary and it makes sense for Europe' s development in information and communications technologies to combine these two aspects.
The preliminary draft budget also contains a new focus on foreign policy.
We have already had the opportunity to debate this in great detail, especially assistance in the Balkans.
Another priority which I should like to mention is the need for budgetary rigour in the European budget and the Commission' s preliminary draft budget is in line with this objective.
So now a few figures on the overall budget.
Without agricultural expenditure, the preliminary draft budget makes provision for an increase in commitment appropriations, i.e. the financial commitments which can be entered into, of 1% in comparison with last year.
I think that this figure clearly illustrates that the preliminary draft budget is in keeping with the overall policy of budgetary rigour, and that the rate of increase in payments as a whole, without agricultural expenditure, is 3%.
I should point out that the average growth forecast for the budgets of the Member States is 3.1%.
I stress this because it will certainly play an important part during the debate with the Council.
However, we have included a considerable increase in agricultural expenditure in the preliminary draft budget, namely 7.6% or, in absolute terms, a total of EUR 3.12 billion.
This is mainly as a result of the resolutions passed by the Heads of State and Government at the Berlin Summit last year and these agreed financial perspectives form part of the interinstitutional agreement concluded last year between the Parliament, the Council and the Commission.
I should point out that this figure for agricultural policy actually makes provision for the draft budget for agricultural policy to remain under the ceiling decided in Berlin because the Commission proposal includes shifting EUR 300 million from the agricultural budget to foreign policy, yet still there is such a high rate of growth for agricultural policy.
To sum up, the preliminary draft figures as a whole make provision overall for a rate of increase of 3.9% in commitment appropriations and 5% in payments.
The rate of growth of payments is higher because we have a large backlog of payment commitments and the Commission currently takes the view that this should not get any bigger; on the contrary it should be reduced, which is precisely why the rate of growth for payments needs to be higher.
What does this mean for the European state quota?
By that I mean what proportion of the total gross national product of the European Community is absorbed by the European Union budget?
In other words, how high is the European state quota based on the strong growth in gross national product expected in the countries of the European Community next year?
There are very positive growth prospects here.
Is the change in the ratio of gross national product to budget from 1.11% in the year 2000 to 1.07% in the year 2001 a step backwards?
I highlight this - we also have extremely intensive debates in the Member States on state quotas, which are between 40 and 50% - in order to illustrate the fact that the European budget accounts for 1.07% of the total gross national product.
This clearly illustrates that the budget of the European Union is worth its weight in gold.
The European Union acquired a new remit following the war in Kosovo and the resolutions on the Stability Pact in the Balkans.
The Council stressed the importance of this remit once again in Lisbon.
Now we have to provide the funds and so the Commission has presented a proposal in its preliminary draft budget which reflects the importance of this remit.
EUR 815 million have been earmarked for aid to the western Balkans in 2001, following on from EUR 540 million this year.
This is the aid which has been earmarked in order to reconstruct the civil society, i.e. it does not, for example, include expenditure by Member States for KFOR troops.
Is expenditure of EUR 815 million for the entire region too high an estimate?
We have already discussed whether these countries are able to absorb this figure in the trialogue debate with the Council.
I think that, to an extent, this debate is somewhat cynical because requirements are, of course, extremely high.
But of course the political decision as to how much aid the budgetary authority wishes to provide from the European budget rests with the budgetary authority alone.
I should point out that the proposal for Serbia for the year 2001 makes provision for a fixed sum of 40 million.
The Commission has proposed that, if the political situation changes in Serbia, additional funds will be provided from the flexibility reserve.
But I should like to stress once again that the Commission has made provision for a very large sum for Serbia in its proposed amendment to the financial plan for the period up to 2006, and I think that we should send a signal to Serbia, to the political opposition in Serbia, that the European Union is prepared to come up with large sums of aid if and when political democracy becomes a reality.
This is the Commission' s first budget in the form of activity-based budgeting; in other words, all budget expenditure has been allocated to political areas.
Now we can see at a glance how much is being spent on which political areas.
I think that it is an important step in the direction of greater transparency and stronger public political debate to stop talking in categories, because apart from us here in this House and a handful of officials in the Member States and a few well-informed journalists, who knows what internal policies are, for example?
I think that ABB, i.e. this proposal, this new structure, will really make public political debate much easier.
What is the European Union spending its money on?
This is therefore a very important step, not a technical step, but an important political step.
I should briefly like to point out that the Commission proposal includes a proposal for a letter of amendment on the Budget 2000.
More importantly, it also includes a whole series of technical adjustments and, in particular, the consequences of the annual accounts for 1999 for the European Union budget.
The European Union budget for 1999 closed with a large surplus of EUR 3.2 billion.
In other words, EUR 3.2 billion will be refunded to the Member States.
These refunds will be offset against the contributions for this year.
Of course, all Member States will be included and the money will be refunded in the ratio to which the Member States finance the European Union budget.
There was some confusion in relation to Great Britain in the report.
I should point out that the refund was offset but a different figure was obtained because of the rate of the euro to the pound.
Great Britain' s contribution in euros appears to be higher than in the plan, but if the calculation is carried out in pounds, it appears to be different.
So we need to take a good look at the question of exchange rates in the European budget.
I have highlighted this balance in order to illustrate - and this very point was raised in your debate on the European Parliament budget - that the term budgetary rigour is certainly not a concept which is foreign to the European budget and it is being applied.
The next step is for the Council to examine the Commission' s preliminary draft budget and to draw up a draft budget for the year 2001.
Of course this will be followed by intensive debate.
I trust that the rest of the procedure will be marked by less harping on about principles and more joint endeavour to use the funds in the European budget efficiently and for the benefit and in support of the objectives of the European Union.
Mr President, Commissioner, thank you for your presentation.
I should like to pick up straight away on your closing words.
I do not think that we should harp on about principles during our discussion of the Budget 2001.
But I also think that this is a call directed at the Council rather than a call directed at us, notwithstanding what has been submitted to us parliamentarians so far from the preliminary draft budget for evaluation.
This leads me to say that, first and foremost, the Commission has taken account of the Council' s wish that it present as economical a budget as possible.
You, yourself, said just now that the Budget 2001 is only 1% higher than the Budget 2000 without agricultural expenditure and we all know that agricultural expenditure accounts for a huge part of our budget.
To then talk of rigorous financial management to us alone is, of course, completely misplaced, especially as we here in Parliament are in favour of economical financial management.
The debate and the budgets which we have voted in the past demonstrate this and that is the way it should stay.
Allow me to remind the House: agricultural expenditure for the organisation of the markets is to rise by 7.6%.
Expenditure on rural development - and you stressed that we of course set great store by rural development - is to rise by 10.1%.
On the face of it, these relative figures alone, i.e. the percentages, are highly satisfactory.
But we all know that market expenditure in the current budget is over eight times higher than expenditure on rural development and that market expenditure in the next budget will be over nine times higher than expenditure on rural development.
This may take account of the wishes of the Council and of Council' s decisions, but it does not take quite such good account of the wishes of Parliament.
It is through Category 3, which encompasses all our priorities - not only Category 3, Category 4 also of course - but it is mainly through internal policies that all citizens perceive the European Union.
When you see that the budget has been set at around EUR 6.13 billion and then you compare that with market expenditure, then you see that market expenditure is six times higher than the whole of Category 3.
Knowing that four-fifths of all expenditure is tied in with multiannual programmes, and that, of course, 80% of all these multiannual programmes are decided under the codecision procedure, then the 1.4% increase proposed by the Commission is purely and simply the effect of the increase in research expenditure.
Nevertheless, you want to increase this expenditure by 8% and research expenditure accounts for over 60% of Category 3.
I know that the Commission is endeavouring to take account in the budget of the priorities it has accepted, namely creating a knowledge-based society and improving the quality of life of our citizens.
So far so good.
We can support that.
But what about Parliament' s priorities?
We discussed our priorities well in advance both among ourselves and with the Commission, and we adopted our guidelines well in advance, including for Category 3.
You have just picked out a few points but when we see that education and youth policy are to rise by 1.2% then we must say - looking at the entire heading - that that is because next year is the European Year of Languages and the expenditure for it will rise by 275%.
That is perfectly normal and we have supported that.
If you look at the Culture and Audiovisual Media heading, there is a 2.7% increase.
I would have expected it to be higher.
Information and communications have risen by 4%.
But what about social dialogue and employment - down 4.7%.
What about energy policy, which we have fought for tooth and nail time and again?
You have cut it by 8.2% and you have cut environmental policy by a hefty 28.2%.
To my mind, the preliminary draft budget, as it now stands, takes no account of Parliament' s priorities.
Mrs Schreyer, what I personally hold dear to my heart, namely innovation and supporting small and medium-sized enterprises - yes, you have put a figure in the budget for this, but you have cut what we still had in the last budget by nearly 70%.
We urgently need to discuss this so that the budget also clearly sets out our priorities.
I have just this to say about Category 4: I think it is asking for trouble to support Serbia with such a small amount in 2001 and, at the same time, to say that once Serbia has democratised we can again use our flexibility instrument.
And one last comment which cuts across both Categories 3 and 4: what about the timetable on the legal framework for the offices for technical and administrative support or transformation promised by you and Commissioner Kinnock?
You wrote to us last December saying that a proposal would be submitted in the middle of April.
We are all dying to see it.
It is now the middle of May and we hope that it will make an appearance shortly because it is also important for our budgetary procedure.
Thank you, Mrs Haug.
Remember that you will have many months ahead to discuss this matter and to speak at length.
Furthermore, this is simply a dream on the part of the Commission.
The serious discussion will begin in July with the Council' s draft.
Mr President, Mrs Haug attended the Detlev Samland school of speaking to the clock and just carried straight on, as Detlev always used to.
Though we are talking about a PDB for the year 2001, it is somewhat difficult not to link it to the revision of the Financial Perspective.
I know we should not do so, but there is that link between the two which makes me want to comment on both.
For the Commission proposals to be successful three factors will be crucial.
The first is the assessment of needs for the western Balkans.
In a couple of weeks' time, Parliament will send an ad hoc delegation to Kosovo to try and make an assessment.
We will need to opt for the Commission proposal of EUR 5.5 billion in total or move towards the Council which is proposing a somewhat lower figure.
The second factor will be Parliament's attitude to redeployment, especially in Category IV, not just for 2001 but for the whole of the Financial Perspective.
That is why I say they have to be linked.
I will give you an example.
One area of great interest for me - I make no secret of it - is South Africa.
The proposal to take EUR 2 million per year away from South Africa for six years may not seem much.
But EUR 12 million is a lot of money for the projects in South Africa.
I would not be happy with that and I am sure other people in other areas of interest in Category IV would adopt a similar attitude.
Then we have Parliament's attitude towards redeployment in Category I. Similarly, we have to consider our approach to the use of the flexibility instrument if it was invoked for Serbia, as you suggest.
We have to bear in mind what the Interinstitutional Agreement says about a rule not being used for the same things in consecutive years.
Once again that would be a challenge for Parliament.
The third factor, and probably the most important one, is the attitude of the Council.
If they reject what you are proposing, especially as far as the revision goes, the question remains: what will you do next?
I know we have a trialogue and a conciliation before their first reading but it is a problem we have to resolve before the Council's first reading.
What happens if the Council is adamant and rejects the Commission's proposals?
Mrs Schreyer, you are something of a juggler and an illusionist at the same time, with the proposals that have been made.
You have to keep several balls in the air and, at the same time, because of what is proposed after 2003, you have to make more appear.
One of the great mysteries in your proposals on the revision is where the money will come from after 2003.
But that is not for next year.
That is for the future.
In the meantime we await developments on those three factors.
Hopefully, at the end of this process, we will get a satisfactory outcome.
Protecting the Communities' financial interests and the fight against fraud
The next item is the report (A5-0116/2000) by Mr Bösch, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the 1998 annual report by the European Commission on protecting the Communities' financial interests and the fight against fraud.
Mr Dell'Alba has the floor on a point of order.
Mr President, I should like to ask a preliminary question, pursuant to Rule 143.
The fact is, I think that tolerance can only be taken so far, and that it is no longer acceptable for a parliamentary committee to set itself up as a public welfare committee, going into anything and everything with every report, setting forth considerations which are far removed from the subject under consideration.
Some 80% of this report entitled "report on the 1998 annual report by the European Commission on protecting the Communities' financial interests" , on the legal basis of Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure, refers to OLAF, the White Paper, the reform, all sort of subjects covered by other reports, and even other committees, but has nothing to do with what Mr Bösch was supposed to be dealing with.
According to my rights under the Rules of Procedure, I should like my preliminary question, which is a question of principle, to be put to the vote.
The Committee on Budgetary Control must stop meddling wholesale, as has been the case recently, with the subject areas of other committees.
We have seen rapporteurs, particularly Mrs Theato, obstructing documents outside their own area of competence for weeks at a time.
Some of us are starting to become annoyed.
In this specific instance, I move that this report be deemed inadmissible and that we move on to the report which is the next item on the agenda.
I request that this be put to the vote.
Thank you, Mr Dell'Alba.
Allow me to remind the honourable Members by quickly reading Rule 143(1) out loud: "At the beginning of the debate on a specific item on the agenda, its inadmissibility may be moved.
Such a motion shall be put to the vote immediately."
According to the Rules of Procedure, one person may speak for and one person against the motion, after which it is put to the vote immediately without further debate.
Mrs Theato, are you speaking against Mr Dell'Alba' s motion?
Mr President, I am somewhat surprised because this report was duly and unanimously adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control.
I would have expected such matters to be clarified in committee, rather than here in plenary.
The report has been available for some time and I therefore see no reason why we cannot debate and vote on it.
Secondly, I would be obliged if Mr Dell'Alba could tell me what he means by saying that I have blocked documents for weeks.
I fail to understand Mr Dell'Alba' s choice of words and assertion and I would welcome an explanation.
As no one wishes to speak for the motion, the vote shall now take place.
(Parliament rejected the motion.)
Mr President, allow me to start with a few comments on the judgement of the Court of First Instance of 2 May on the rights and duties of the members of this House vis-à-vis OLAF.
I welcome this judgement.
It clarifies that, as elected representatives of the people, we may rightly claim a special status and that, in the event of doubt, protecting our independence takes precedence.
That was my position from the outset, incidentally.
That was why, during negotiations with the Commission and the Council, we made all the sensitive passages in the OLAF regulation subject to the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities.
That was why we suggested last autumn in the Committee on Budgetary Control that the provisions for members should be kept separate from the provisions for officials.
Unfortunately, the Committee on Constitutional Affairs did not subscribe to this view.
I said from the outset that members' offices were off limits for OLAF.
Obviously, the Commission' s legal service took a different view.
Now it has been taught a lesson by the Court.
However, the court judgement has put us in a position of inequality, because only the plaintiff can cite this judgement.
This state of affairs may last for a ridiculous amount of time, perhaps until a judgement is returned on the main issue, which may not be for two years.
I have therefore taken recourse to Rule 181 of the Rules of Procedure and proposed an amendment to the Rules of Procedure.
The text which I have proposed is in line with the original proposal of the Committee on Budgetary Control.
It keeps to the letter of the interinstitutional agreement with the Commission and the Council and takes full account of the stipulations of the Court of First Instance.
I urge you to support this initiative to amend the Rules of Procedure.
It would allow the matter to be clarified as quickly as possible and, I think, would even allow the members who took recourse to the Court to withdraw their action.
If the proposed amendment to the Rules of Procedure is implemented, their action would, as a matter of course, be pointless anyway.
This too is perfectly clear from the Court' s judgement.
Parliament' s internal decision was out of order, but the Parliament and Council regulation of 25 May 1999 on the work of OLAF is here to stay and is not open to question.
This is why I fail to comprehend why a number of proposed amendments to my report claim that the Court' s judgement has strengthened the position of the European Investment Bank and the European Central Bank in their opposition to the regulation.
It is true that both banks maintain that the Parliament and Council regulation cannot under any circumstances be applied to them because this would encroach upon their independence.
I totally fail to understand that; we have no intention of interfering in the banks' work.
What we do want is to guarantee that they have a minimum degree of protection against fraud, or do they want us to end up using private detectives to carry out this work?
The European Court of Justice and the Court of Auditors have duly implemented the provisions of the OLAF regulation in corresponding internal decisions.
They certainly would not have done so if they had felt that their independence was being jeopardised.
Neither bank has a plausible explanation as to why they do not accept what the independent judges of the European Court of Justice have accepted.
Three points on the content of my report.
Point number 1 concerns OLAF as an investigation unit which identifies and investigates suspicious cases quickly and efficiently.
The legal basis for this is in place.
Together with the Council, we have done everything within our power.
The development of OLAF is well under way.
Point number 2 concerns the European financial public prosecutor who, in the initial stage, has the right to support the national courts in prosecuting criminal offences committed by officials or employees of the Union.
Point number 3 concerns really effective disciplinary procedures.
The Staff Regulations and Financial Regulation have long made provision for the competent decision-makers to pay for damage for which they are responsible out of their own pocket in cases of gross negligence or intent.
This provision has never been applied.
The Commission is planning even now to delete it from the Financial Regulation.
That would be precisely the wrong signal.
We urge the Commission to reconsider such a move.
What is wrong with the present disciplinary procedures is that, of necessity, they lead to huge conflicts of interest.
In the case of senior officials, the College of Commissioners decides whether or not disciplinary proceedings should be instituted and it is the Commission which passes the final judgement, at the proposal of a disciplinary board on which senior officials have to advise on the fate of senior officials, i.e. colleagues sit in judgement on colleagues.
That cannot work and it does not work.
As long as this system is maintained, the accusation will be made time and again, rightly or wrongly, that proceedings are open to manipulation.
Nor will this change once the disciplinary board becomes an interinstitutional board, i.e. a board of officials from various institutions.
It will only change if the Commission takes up the proposal of real externalisation, as agreed by the House in the vote on the Hulten report on 19 January, in which Parliament called for disciplinary proceedings in the case of infringements of the Financial Regulation to be referred to an external chamber of the Court of Justice or the Court of Auditors so that proceedings are objective and fair beyond doubt.
We even stipulated in this report that the Chamber should form part of the Court of Auditors, with the Court of Justice sitting in appeal.
The report also includes a number of points from the White Paper on the reform of the Commission in connection with OLAF.
And yet I have just heard from some quarters that we should postpone a decision on these points and not take a stand on them just yet.
Except that the Commission wants to implement all the points addressed here before the summer recess.
If we do not take a stand on them now, then we can spare ourselves the trouble altogether.
One last word to Mrs Schreyer: I know from conversations last week with the members of the OLAF Supervisory Committee that the recruitment and appointment procedures for OLAF are proceeding too slowly.
Clearly one reason for this is that the Commission is obviously proving to be too inflexible, despite the fact that, on paper, it has transferred full powers to the director of OLAF in a decision in due and proper form.
I can only urge you to stand by your own decisions and not create difficulties where none exists.
(Applause)
Mr President, I speak on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
I am standing in for the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee, my colleague Mr MacCormick, who is unable to be here today.
In our Community, there is hardly anything worse than fraud to undermine public confidence in the activities of the Union, and so the views of the rapporteur deserve our full support.
Fraud, of course, affects only a small fraction - i.e. just over 1 % - of the EU' s total budget, but it is a very serious problem which seems to extend to almost all political sectors.
The EU budget, however, is largely administered within the Member States, and this is where huge potential for fraud exists.
We must also remember that applicant countries, i.e. the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, should be involved in this fraud prevention process for the very reason that such a large share of the Community budget is administered within the Member States.
So far, fewer than half of the Member States have ratified the protocol on protecting the Union' s financial interests.
This process should therefore be speeded up considerably.
Furthermore, some Member States are particularly unwilling to undertake the mutual exchange of information concerning fraud.
Therefore it is important for Member States to have a direct obligation to report cases of VAT fraud, for example, to the Commission.
It is quite appropriate to examine the possibilities of creating the post of public prosecutor, expressly from the point of view of the fight against fraud, and this should be done, but even that will be to no avail, if the Member States lack the political will to protect the Communities' financial interests.
As far as OLAF' s position is concerned, it is important to protect its independence and equally important for the European Parliament to come to an agreement with OLAF with regard to the conditions on which Parliament can obtain information about its operations.
.
Mr President, in the time available, I wish on behalf of the Economic Committee to stress three issues that we considered to be of cardinal importance when we examined the annual report on the Community's financial interests and the fight against fraud.
First was the issue of definition.
It is the case that the Commission have come under a significant amount of attention in recent years from Parliament and from the European public at large who want the Commission to deal with allegations of fraud, but it is also important that we should know what we are talking about when we define fraud.
The annual report itself indicates that for the first time there has been an attempt made to try to assess what amounts to fraud and what is general irregularity, and I am of the view that it does not help the reputation of our European institutions if we are lax with definition.
It is important that the work being undertaken by the Commission should be expanded because, in a situation in which 20% of irregularity amounts to fraud, the fact of the matter is that by referring to it as fraud and irregularity, European citizens can often be left with an impression that all of the claims are fraudulent ones.
The second point that I want to make is about the commitment of Member States to deal with fraud.
The fact of the matter is that Member States have a high responsibility here.
They are responsible for administering some 80% of the EU's budget and they must recognise that they are, at the very least, partners if not prime movers in attempting to address this important issue, and the report indicates that the performance of Member States has been mixed to say the least.
My final point concerns the accession countries.
We must demand that the accession countries also endeavour to work in conjunction with the European Union and to the highest standards.
Mr President, Commissioner, when deciding here in Parliament whether or not to grant discharge to the Commission, we check that there is no irregularity in expenditure by the administration.
In the past - as we are now all aware - there have been irregularities within the Commission.
Each report by the Court of Auditors also highlights the decisive role of the Member States in distributing Community funds.
A number of errors for which the Member States are to blame occur during the distribution of funds, which makes us apprehensive, especially as a considerable percentage is the result of fraud.
Consequently, it is not just within the Commission that we need to wield an instrument to fight fraud, which we call OLAF.
OLAF is the outcome of the modus operandi of the Member States and the Commission and should take on an objective role precisely so as to get to the bottom of these errors and prevent them from arising.
The EU must use European measures such as the introduction of the euro to prove its European competence to the outside world, because the accompanying counterfeiting industry, to name but one example, is an external matter.
Nevertheless, deeper causes for error rates clearly lie in the different handling systems in the Member States.
Right from the outset, legislative texts are often worded differently and allow perfectly legal but differing definitions of fraud.
This opens the door to fraud.
Just think of the example of the collection of value added tax.
Under no circumstances should OLAF become nothing more than a help desk.
OLAF is not one of your broadcasts for DIY enthusiasts, along the lines of "How can we build a model railway?"
The issue should not be taken lightly.
Protecting the financial interests of the Union and fighting fraud are a necessity, pure and simple, which call for a uniform instrument which can act independently, preventively, efficiently and as a deterrent, and which depend upon transparent regulations both internally and externally, so that everyone knows where they stand.
I would like this financial instrument to have an additional name such as prosecutor, a broad-shouldered European financial prosecutor.
This prosecutor must be accepted by the Member States, take on an active role and, at the same time, be integrated into the national jurisdiction of the Member States.
I would remind you at this point that Parliament called for an external chamber for budgetary discipline in its resolution of 19 January.
In my view this is a good idea and is not only worth considering, it is indispensable if we are to create a comprehensive area of justice and law.
A neutral, objective judgement will serve the cause and the individual concerned, condemnation of colleagues by colleagues will not.
OLAF is no Big Brother à la Orson Welles, but is limited in its remit by the rule of law.
The immunity of members, for example, will of course continue to be protected.
I call on the Intergovernmental Conference to take our concerns on board.
We are fighting here for technical measures which, hopefully, will not turn into a long-running saga.
We must concentrate once again on European values so that, for example, our money is not misappropriated for the drawing up of military measures.
I know it is difficult to impart ideals and virtue to another person.
But that is where our efforts should be concentrated.
Because worthlessness soon turns into helplessness.
- (PT) Mr President, the current year is the first in which OLAF is fully operational.
It needs to be pointed out here that this is a decisive step in protecting the financial interests of the Union, the impetus for which came from this House and, in particular, from the Committee on Budgetary Control and from the present rapporteur, our colleague, Herbert Bösch.
With an increase in staff, with a new structure and independence, all the conditions are now in place for OLAF to concentrate on fighting fraud in an area where the objective and verifiable figures point to a more serious situation.
Fraud and other irregularities in the traditional own resources reported by Member States reached a total of EUR 538 million in 1998, an amount unparalleled in any other area of Community expenditure, either in absolute or relative terms.
Special report No 9 of the Court of Auditors on the protection of the European Union' s financial interests in the area of VAT on intra-Community trade points to an even more serious situation.
According to the Court of Auditors, the gap between actual receipts and their theoretical amount is EUR 70 thousand million.
Unlike the main areas of expenditure, which the Commission monitors and on which it imposes a system of sanctions, there is nothing comparable in these two vital areas of the Community' s own resources.
The Commission, specifically in its recent reports on administrative cooperation and on procedures for collection and taxation, describes a situation which is characterised by the maintenance of a system for VAT collection, which was only intended to be used on a temporary basis but is being used permanently.
This system is also characterised by the increasing complexity of the system and by the widespread shortage of human resources and monitoring materials compared to the volume of transactions.
Despite the fact that there is widespread agreement on the need to overcome the problems of fighting fraud which result from restrictions imposed by national legislation, or to the lack of a legal basis in Community legislation, the Commission' s proposals have not, until today, met with any response and the anti-fraud sub-committee in the area of indirect taxation has found it impossible, in the words of the Commission "to achieve meaningful progress and cannot take the necessary decisions to improve the fight against fraud" .
What is more serious than this is the fact that the Commission' s reports on VAT collection have been scandalously disregarded by the other institutions and have not been followed up to any degree by the Member States.
Compliance with Article 280 of the Treaty, specifically where it requires the effective and equivalent protection of the Community' s financial interests will be dead letter unless we overcome the situation of there being a loophole in the law in the area of traditional own resources and VAT.
The protection of the Community' s financial interests, and particularly those of the taxpayers, who comply, cannot continue to be disregarded when it comes to indirect taxation.
Mr President, I too would like to start by congratulating Mr Bösch on his relentless efforts to turn OLAF into a success.
There are many points in the present resolution which the Liberal Group can endorse.
Firstly - and this cannot be repeated enough - we think that at the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference, a decision should be made in favour of setting up a European Public Prosecutor, which in its capacity as an independent body, will work to safeguard the financial interests of the European Union.
We would call on the Commission to submit proposals to this effect as soon as possible.
Also, the date mentioned in the report is important, in our opinion.
We also endorse the proposal for an external chamber to enforce budget discipline, which will mainly be concerned with examining the financial liability of officials.
In our opinion, it is important that this task is taken from the Commission, so as to take away any semblance of nepotism and such like.
OLAF starts its first full working year this year.
We will all have to wait and see what the outcome of that will be.
Expectations are naturally very high.
One aspect, however, could be improved on, namely the Supervisory Committee, as Mr Bösch calls it in his report.
Everyone has a right to a defence, including those who need to be investigated by OLAF.
We must see to it that these investigations are carried out as independently and fairly as possible.
I would call on the Commission to submit proposals to this effect too.
There has been a lot of publicity lately surrounding the issue as to whether or not OLAF should be able to investigate the European Investment Bank regarding the use of European funding, as well as the European Central Bank.
The Liberal Group is of the opinion that this should clearly be the case as these are European institutions too.
They cannot remain outside OLAF' s general scope of investigation.
We support the Commission so as to make this possible.
Finally, over the past few years, the European Court of Auditors has become increasingly aware that fraud and irregularities in structural funds are on the increase, whilst those in agricultural funds are still excessive but are dropping.
This is diametrically opposed to the opinion held by the Commission, which believes that fraud and irregularities occur far less in structural funds than they do in agricultural funds.
This anomaly must be resolved without delay.
The structural funds are gaining in importance all the time and form a large area of investigation for OLAF and the Commission.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, I too would first of all like to congratulate Mr Bösch on his sound report and, unlike Mr Dell'Alba, I think that Mr Bösch has indeed drawn the right lessons from OLAF' s annual report which was published late last year.
We might as well admit it, there are a great many money-grubbers active within the European Union, and organised crime no longer concentrates solely on drug smuggling, the arms trade, trafficking in humans, meat fraud, alcohol and cigarette smuggling, VAT merry-go-round fraud and oil fraud, and has not done so for a long time.
They are all forms of crime which cause serious harm to the EU' s budget, both on the revenue side and the expenditure side.
We may have had a single market since 1993 which accommodates the free movement of goods, services, people, capital, as well as organised criminals, but this single market does not exist - and this is so unfortunate - for police services and magistrates alike.
On my own behalf, I will therefore stick my neck out and endorse all paragraphs of the Bösch report which call for the setting up of a European Public Prosecutor' s office.
I know it is a controversial issue, even within my own group.
Despite this, I believe that such a European Public Prosecutor' s office should be set up.
I would therefore ask the European Commission, as a matter of extreme urgency, to meet the request of the Bösch report to add an extra clause to the present OLAF regulation before 30 June, providing for a kind of trial project in which a European Public Prosecutor is appointed from within OLAF who can only act on behalf of members and staff of the European institutions.
I entreat Commissioner Schreyer to give very specific answers to this request and would ask her whether she would be prepared to take any initiative in this matter before 30 June.
Mr President, Mr Bösch's report deals clearly and relevantly with the problems bound up with protecting the EU' s financial interests and combating fraud.
Fraud is a scourge as far as the EU is concerned.
I do not know how large a percentage of the Member States' budgets disappears due to fraud and irregularities.
In my own country, it is close on zero per cent, and I think that what we have noted in recent years in the EU' s accounts reflects the fact that common funds are not handled so carefully and meticulously as money which the States regard as their own.
Mr Bösch's report goes a very long way towards representing the positions adopted by my group, most especially in its observations concerning the European Investment Bank and the European Central Bank.
We have a problem in relation to appointing a European Public Prosecutor, whose office we would regard as an integral part of the federal EU we do not wish to see.
We think that the problems highlighted can be solved at national level.
We are quite clear about the fact that these provisions are aimed especially at the new Member States whose legal arrangements differ from those of the EU countries.
We think, however, that this ought to be an incentive to engage in negotiations designed to promote cooperation between the legal systems.
However, it is not, of course, by means of the present report that we are to decide this matter and, against that background, I should like to inform you that my group is voting in favour of Mr Bösch's report because we think that there are clear demands which Parliament is making here and with which the Commission must comply.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I wish to emphasise the point I raised to the effect that, out of the 19 recitals and the 30 paragraphs of the Bösch report, there were only 11 recitals and 6 paragraphs to do with the subjects that Mr Bösch was supposed to be discussing.
The other paragraphs are about something completely different.
Important matters, I do not deny, but matters which have already been dealt with in the van Hulten report and the Theato report, or matters which will be dealt with when we come to discuss the White Paper, the reform and OLAF, with the judgement and the ruling of the Court of First Instance.
I am astounded that Mr Bösch is pleased with this because he was one of the people who thought that Parliament' s text was fine and that OLAF was entitled to poke its nose in everywhere, though this is not the case.
The European Central Bank was thus quite justified in saying that it was not very sure what authority OLAF actually had in this area.
My criticism of the Bösch report, then, is the very simple reason that we have other instruments.
A situation whereby the Committee on Budgetary Control' s many reports keep bringing up the same subject is not normal.
Let us take the proposal for an independent Prosecutor.
Mrs Theato attempted to have this adopted as a legislative initiative.
She did not succeed.
The Committee on Budgetary Control tried to do so, and Parliament rejected it.
This is not a proposal for a legislative initiative.
What, then, is the point of harping on all the time about something which is, obviously, a problem area?
Even though the fraud problem primarily affects the Member States, you wish to set up a special court, ad hoc courts.
You know, Mr Bösch, in the past, in Italy and other countries, they had special courts.
Probably in your own country too, and these were not exactly models of democracy.
So I would adopt a more cautious approach.
I think this report is a waste of a lot of paper.
Mrs Stauner might well write another letter asking why so much money has been spent in order to repeat things that have been said already, Mr Bösch, but which it was not worth repeating.
What is more, many of the amendments seek to remove paragraphs.
We shall readily vote in favour of these because we must confine ourselves to the points included in the reports and it is high time that this practice, which is common to all the committees, were adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control too.
Mr President, Mr Bösch has prepared a good report on protection against fraud.
We agree with the way in which the problems are described, but I do not believe that crime and theft are combated by establishing a common public prosecution service and common penalties and by appointing more inspectors within the EU.
I believe that it is through transparency that irregularities can most effectively be cleared up: complete openness about the budget procedure, complete openness as to who has been involved in deciding upon an appropriation, complete openness about who the recipient of the appropriation is and complete access to all documents for the ombudsman and for the European Parliament' s and the national parliaments' auditors and supervisory committees.
If it can always be seen who has obtained what, fraud will be revealed by journalists and a critical public - perfectly free of charge and with far greater preventative effect.
I would therefore ask the Commissioners to promise us that, in future, Parliament, the Court of Auditors and the ombudsman will be allowed to see any document.
What are we not allowed to see?
What is the ombudsman not allowed to see?
When will we be given a complete overview of all the committees and working parties, together with their members?
Will our rapporteurs be allowed to check on any payment from the funds?
Lack of transparency is the fraudsters' best friend and makes it more difficult to clarify matters.
It is due to a lack of transparency that the new Commission too will, unfortunately, be concealing fraud instead of bringing every instance of it into the light of day and so deterring anyone else who might have the same idea.
Mr President, Commissioner, we are dealing with the first report sent to us by OLAF and I would like to thank Mr Bösch for the excellent work he has presented to us.
The most interesting parts of his work are surely those which refer to the subject of the report, that is to say 1998, and OLAF, the body which is presenting its first piece of work.
I agree that this report perhaps prejudges certain aspects which should be subject to further debates in the Committee on Budgetary Control and in this House, but I would like to highlight the positive aspects of its contribution.
With reference to 1998, I believe that we should recognise that, after having intensified the task of control, which should be initiated by Parliament and which OLAF carries out, the number of cases of fraud and irregularities has stabilised.
Without relaxing our efforts to control expenditure - of which we have shown signs in the past - we can see that this stabilisation has been the result of an increase in control.
We should therefore be pleased about this and hope that this work continues, so that cases of fraud can be reduced rather than merely stabilised.
It is clear that, in fundamental fraud, there are discrepancies between what the Court of Auditors says and what OLAF says.
In OLAF' s judgement, it appears that it is not in the Structural Funds that fraud and bad management prevail.
It is other expenditure that we should be concerned about.
In any event, returning to OLAF, by means of this report, we should, in my view, ask for OLAF to be provided as soon as possible with the officials which have been allocated to it.
However, I think it is very important that, in this first stage - precisely because we are interested in control - we do not increase OLAF' s scope of activity so soon after it has begun its work.
I understand that there are and there will be - although we hope that this is not the case - great problems with the counterfeiting of currency, trademarks or VAT.
It is essential that we allow OLAF to continue to pursue its scope of activity little by little and that we expand its role at a later date.
Finally, we should not duplicate responsibilities.
In order to use resources correctly, one body should be responsible for each issue and we should not have a situation where everybody is responsible for everything.
I therefore believe that we should clearly separate objectives and not allow confusion to reign.
At the end of the day "he that too much embraceth, holds little", as we say in Spain, so if we want to manage control, we cannot all have the same objective.
Mr President, I would like to join the many speakers who have congratulated Mr Bösch on his report.
As usual - and as has already been mentioned - the annual report shows that in 1998 too, an excessive proportion of the European resources was not spent according to the rules.
As usual, most irregularities pertain to expenditure in the Member States and vary in nature.
The irregularities are partly caused by deliberate abuse of the regulations, partly due to errors in the implementation of European legislation or simply down to bad policy.
I would like to distance myself somewhat from what Mr Mulder said on this score.
The fact that so much fraud is being committed using agricultural funds is a sign that something is wrong with the way in which we organise our support for agriculture and this needs to change.
The steps required to fight fraud have been mentioned on countless occasions, including today.
I would like to highlight two.
Firstly, there are still Member States that have not signed the Convention on the Protection of the Financial Interests of the EU.
My own country is one of them and I hereby call on the Dutch Parliament to ratify the act which ratifies the Convention and which has been with the Chamber since October.
In addition, it is also important that steps are being taken within the Intergovernmental Conference to appoint a European Public Prosecutor.
To my amazement, I noticed that in one of the amendments to this report tabled by the PPE-DE Group, an attempt was made to limit the mandate of this public prosecutor, whilst I was under the impression that the PPE-DE was actually in favour of it.
The PPE-DE Group would like to limit the European Public Prosecutor' s mandate to the European institutions only, while we have just seen that most fraud takes place within the Member States.
The PPE-DE Group had better have a good explanation for this.
We have made a new start with the independent OLAF.
In my opinion, it is rather important for the functioning of OLAF that its work be open to public scrutiny, and for there to be set rules governing investigations, which are available for perusal by Parliament too.
This will prevent us from running behind the facts in future, as is now the case with the 1998 discharge procedure.
Mr President, my last point concerns the European Parliament itself.
As you know, the Court recently decided in an initial ruling that OLAF only has limited access to the European Parliament.
I regret that the Court has reached this decision and hope that it will arrive at a different decision in the final ruling.
Meanwhile, however, I would like to make it clear that immunity for parliamentarians does not mean that we are above the law.
If the Court' s final ruling stipulates that OLAF has no access to Parliament because the rules will not permit this, we must adapt our rules rather than overrule the decision, so as to grant OLAF access to Parliament, including parliamentarians, because, I repeat, we are not above the law.
Ladies and gentlemen, this report is an excellent illustration of what should be done and what should not be done.
As far as we are concerned, combating fraud is more than a priority, it is a commitment we have to the people who elected us.
This principle has been emphasised all the more by the revelation of inefficiencies within the Community institutions.
In this respect, our determination to implement sound management procedures beforehand that are capable, subsequently, of being monitored must be absolutely foolproof.
In order to do so, we must focus on the effectiveness of the procedures set in place, particularly under OLAF.
So, I beg you, please, do not try, for ideological reasons, to come and complicate matters, adding yet more structures and procedures.
This is the reason why we are not in favour of creating a European Public Prosecutor' s Office.
We must be able to have confidence in relying on the national structures.
In fact, the proposal to create a European Public Prosecutor' s Department is unacceptable since this requires us to be effective immediately.
In the same spirit, we shall support Amendment No 13 from the Group of the Party of European Socialists, which will prevent us creating a budgetary discipline body just for show.
These declarations of intent are more than anything motivated, I fear, by the determination to establish a European sovereignty on the pretext of protecting the Community budget, which, I must remind you, is made up of contributions from our Member States.
From the point of view of the effectiveness of the fight against fraud, these creations are no more than fresh grounds for sterile conflicts.
In conclusion, I feel that the Commission' s watchwords must be rigour, discipline and proper collaboration.
I sincerely believe that the rest can be achieved by adhering to OLAF' s prerogatives, combined with proper cooperation between national and European audit authorities.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, a few days ago, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung published a survey which showed that an overwhelming majority of my fellow countrymen were in favour of a more common approach to judicial matters.
No other area attracted nearly as much support for new initiatives at European level.
Other surveys in the past have always confirmed that this applies both to Germans and to the citizens in most other Member States of the Union.
We are therefore responding to the expectations of the people in tabling proposals on how to strengthen effectively the protection of the European Union against fraud.
There are without doubt more pleasant topics of conversation than fraud and corruption, I grant you, but discussing them demonstrates clearly that we are not sweeping this tricky question under the carpet; on the contrary, we are setting ourselves this challenge, in precisely those cases which affect the institutions of the Union itself.
This is why the Bösch report deserves particular attention and support.
It was not adopted unanimously by the Committee on Budgetary Control for nothing, as I have already explained.
Allow me to congratulate you on this report.
It clearly illustrates that creating the European Anti-Fraud Office OLAF is an important step, but is only a step on the path towards the European prosecutor which I have called for time and again both in a personal capacity and as rapporteur.
A public prosecutor' s office to protect the interests of the Union against fraud would be the only really effective instrument to counteract the threat from organised crime.
Organised crime has identified the institutions of the European Union as a particularly easy target.
I am delighted that both the Commission and Parliament have included this question in the Intergovernmental Conference.
The Committee on Budgetary Control has gone one step further in this report.
We want an even more proactive approach and are therefore waiting for the Commission to present proposals for the first stage of a European public prosecutor' s office on the basis of the current Article 280 and I really do hope, Commissioner Schreyer, that you will revise your unfortunately somewhat wait-and-see attitude and accommodate us here.
Mr President, allow me to refer to what was indeed said earlier but could not be answered.
My question is to Mr Dell'Alba; could the honourable Member explain what I, as chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control, allegedly blocked for weeks.
I require an answer and I should like it recorded in the minutes.
Mrs Theato, you know perfectly well what I am talking about.
The matter was discussed at length in the Conference of Presidents.
In your capacity as chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control, not in a personal capacity, you were assigned to assist the Conference of Presidents and the President, Mrs Fontaine, in drawing up the Parliament' s position on the code of conduct for relations with the Commission.
I contend, together with the group chairmen, who have, moreover, disclaimed you, that on the 13 April you informed the Conference of Presidents that on the whole you were in agreement with the spirit of Annex III on the exchange of information with the Commission.
I contend that twenty days later, to the outrage of your partner, Mr Napolitano, you sent a letter in which you said you could no longer agree to this annex.
You mentioned points in German which no one had checked, causing uproar among the group chairmen who thanked you, saying that they would take the dossier back because in effect the situation was no longer tenable.
One group chairman even left the room on an occasion when the matter came up on the agenda one day.
Do not pretend that you know nothing, you know perfectly well what happened.
There are perhaps some of my fellow Members of Parliament who do not know, but I am stating this for the benefit of the House, so that it can be entered in the Minutes: for several weeks Mrs Theato obstructed an agreement with the Commission, thereby putting the President of Parliament and the chairmen of the political groups in an awkward position.
That is the truth of the matter.
I do not wish to interfere in the debate but the issue of OLAF and Napolitano was of course a highly controversial one in the entire House and we are all aware of the problems associated with it.
That has now been cleared up.
Mr President, today we are debating a report which goes much further than the figures on alleged fraud or errors in the Community accounts.
It demands that the Members of this Parliament act responsibly.
We must address the lack of moral responsibility on the part of bureaucracies, which was condemned in such a masterly way by Kafka.
This lack of moral responsibility is perversely able to involve people in a labyrinthine quest for their exact legal position and subject them to phantom judgements regarding unknown crimes.
These situations have happily been overcome in Europe.
The creation of an effective and transparent office to fight fraud is a task with which all Members of this Parliament agree, and I hope that all the institutions agree.
The creation of an omnipotent mechanism, designed to pursue officials on the basis of secret denunciations, accusations and lists of suspects, riding roughshod over the individual guarantees, statutes and regulations which provide basic legal security for people working in the institutions, is a form of irresponsibility which this Parliament or any Community institution should have nothing to do with, because such a climate of suspicion would only benefit the eurosceptics.
The Socialist Group, which is interested in combating fraud as well as protecting the rights of citizens, including officials, and the construction of a Europe based on the principles of fair play, democracy, proximity to the citizens, transparency, efficiency and solidarity, has presented an amendment to paragraph 29 of this report, which lays down the principle that combating fraud should not take precedence over the basic rights of officials.
To demand lists of suspects, as suggested in the report, would be a form of McCarthyism which is beneath the dignity of this House and, furthermore, it may possibly be illegal.
I would like to remind you that claims have been made that no action has been taken against this type of action and that OLAF' s monitoring committee, in relation to these appeals, is aware that certain aspects are not functioning properly within this body.
While accepting that, with the dynamic of European construction, the increase in the budget and the growth of the administration, there may be more fraud and errors, we must not fall into a kind of policing paranoia, or at least this Parliament must not.
The immunity which we enjoy as MEPs must not be confused with impunity.
It is important that this report does not simply create a Kafkaesque type of system, but that it also provides a guarantee for officials.
Mr President, I have to depart a little bit from what I intended to say.
I have some sympathy with the last speaker: sometimes the Committee on Budgetary Control gets so involved with the important work they are doing, that they are unable to see the wood for the trees.
I also welcome the presentation on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee and the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee which took a balanced approach to the major and indeed legitimate concerns of the Committee on Budgetary Control about fraud.
I heard Mr van Hulten's reference to the fact that OLAF should have the right to investigate Members of Parliament.
He has a point and a minority of people in this Parliament agree with that.
But before we embark on such a radical decision, we should look at the history, particularly in the United States, of the relationship between security authorities and public figures and recognise that we could overstep the mark by giving such powers to OLAF.
In the end, OLAF might have the political leverage and power to demand as much money and staff as it wanted.
We should not throw staff, money or powers at an organisation just because problems exist.
Those problems exist and we have dealt with the solution to the problem.
Mr Bösch has rightly dealt with the problem of identifying and prosecuting fraud when it occurs.
I do not agree with all of his report.
There are a number of paragraphs I have doubts about - 14, 15 and 16 for example, regarding the legal basis and whether it is necessary to involve both national and European responsibility to resolve problems of fraud that affect national states more than they do the European Union.
I have run out of time without saying what I wanted to say but I wanted to respond to some of the points already made.
Mr President, I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on a very good report.
The very fact that my Italian colleague is opposed to it means that it really is a report of very high quality.
Even though there was a slight decline in fraud and irregularities between 1997 and 1998, there is nonetheless still a need for more effective supervisory mechanisms.
Reform of the Commission is now under way.
Mr Kinnock has submitted a timetable, and it is now up to us to applaud it.
I am very impressed with the reform plan.
In general, it is both visionary and realistic.
There are nonetheless a number of sticking points, and these are what we ought to draw attention to and criticise.
Parliament has already proposed, in the Van Hulten report, that an external court should be established under the aegis of the Court of Auditors.
This would deal with disciplinary matters and help recover money which has been paid out unlawfully.
This idea is one we should stick to, I think.
If such a body were to be established, this would mean that disciplinary matters would be taken away from the Commission.
We have had a lot of bad experience with internal disciplinary councils.
At present, officials who have had actions brought against them by the disciplinary council have colleagues of theirs sitting in judgement over them.
That is indefensible.
Both the ECHO and MED cases are all too well-known examples of this state of affairs.
I also agree with the rapporteur when he criticises setting up an advisory panel to deal with irregularities.
We have, of course, established OLAF to deal with suspicions of fraud and irregularities.
Another panel would serve only to undermine OLAF' s powers.
I cannot, however, vote in favour of setting up a European Public Prosecutor' s office.
I can well understand people' s being tired of all the fraud and therefore demanding that we have a common public prosecutor' s office.
It would, however, be a colossal enterprise to set up when the problems are, in reality, elsewhere.
In actual fact, there is a need for a fundamental staffing reform.
It is, for all that, only the most serious cases which will have penal consequences.
Ninety per cent of cases will be disciplinary matters concerning negligence or incompetence.
Instead, there is a need for public, internal supervision and for more leeway when it comes to sacking people.
We need changes to staff regulations and to the disciplinary procedure, as also proposed in the report.
I would also point out that I had three minutes in which to speak.
I spoke for only two, but I am very disciplined.
I am happy to let someone else use my time.
You should also, of course, be allowed to make mistakes from time to time.
Mr Blak, allow me to apologise officially.
You are quite right, you had three minutes.
I was not wearing my glasses.
Do you wish to add anything else?
No?
Well that puts the friendship between Denmark and Bavaria back on terra firma.
Thank you Mr Blak for overlooking my error.
Mr President, this is just the sort of issue which gives rise to lofty declarations.
But I should like to go into a few points which, as far as I am concerned, are relatively unclear.
Problem number one: every year the media present the refusal to issue a declaration of assurance as an indication of the alleged or actual state of corruption in EU finances.
At the same time, however, both the Court of Auditors and the Council of Ministers grant this refusal to issue a declaration of assurance the status of a mere water-level report, while we here in Parliament and the media see it as an indication of the poor state of the Union' s finances.
I think we need to amend and clarify the basis of the matters about which we are talking.
Otherwise we shall find ourselves in a situation in which every year we regularly and hence permanently, as it were, negligently cast an air of general suspicion over the state of EU finances, if this state of affairs is allowed to continue.
Problem number two: of course further investigation may show that some financial irregularities are in fact cases of fraud.
Nonetheless, these two points need to be kept apart both in terms of how they are defined and how they are measured, because otherwise they will both be lumped together and this will give the impression of a huge level of fraud which is not justified to that extent.
Problem number three: clearly - and I am grateful to Mr Bösch for pointing this out - the findings of the Court of Auditors differ from those of the Commission as to the extent of financial irregularity which has occurred in relations between the agricultural budget and the Structural Funds.
Clearly there are measuring problems, statistical problems which we must solve so that we know what we are talking about when we start investigations or conduct further investigations.
Mr President, I also congratulate Mr Bösch on his report.
He is the acknowledged expert within the European Parliament and, to a large extent, was the architect of the new OLAF.
One thing that is certain to create a stir in terms of the EU is big stories about fraud.
They always get big coverage.
That is quite right too because any fraud is unacceptable.
The figure that is being attached to it is about 5% of the EU budget.
But there are two important points to remember, which have been touched upon several times here today - and Mr Cunha has just raised them again.
The Court of Auditors does not distinguish between fraud and administrative and financial irregularities; that is, administrative mistakes and people who set out to cheat the EU of money.
To give you an example, a farmer may fill out a form incorrectly.
That is not to say that he means to defraud.
It may be that he measured his land incorrectly.
And then there are the big fraudsters: the people who, for example, import cigarettes illegally, avoiding tax.
There is a huge difference between these two things.
We need to have them distinguished much more clearly.
Let us not forget that 80% of the fraud takes place within Member States.
Yesterday the Commission made a commitment to us that they want to cut irregularities by 2%.
We want to know whether the Member States will follow that lead.
It is clear that a lot of the problems lie there, in particular with the Structural Funds.
To take up Mr Dell'Alba's point, the Socialists will be voting against a number of paragraphs in this report, not necessarily because we do not agree with them, but because it is not the right context in which to discuss these points which relate to the White Paper.
Finally, I want to read out a list of shame - Member States which have not yet ratified the Convention on the Protection of the Financial Interests of the EU: Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Ireland and France.
It is about time they signed up.
They have had five years to do it.
Let us see them ratify it.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the fight against fraud and protecting the financial interests of the Community are among the top priorities of the new Commission.
The fight against fraud includes activities such as preventing, uncovering and prosecuting customs and subsidy fraud or tax evasion, as well, of course, as uncovering and prosecuting irregularities within the institutions of the European Union.
But I am most pleased that numerous contributions to the debate have stated that we need to make a distinction between financial irregularity and fraud.
When we talk of the Court of Auditors' report, this covers the whole spectrum of financial irregularities.
We are talking here of the UCLAF or OLAF report on fraud, i.e. deliberate damage to the financial interests of the European Union.
The report before you, which is the subject of Mr Bösch' s report, is the last report drawn up by UCLAF on the fight against fraud in 1998.
Although UCLAF only had 120 employees at the time, this annual report illustrates the considerable success of their work, in my view.
There were 5,318 cases of suspicion of irregularity or fraud investigated by UCLAF in 1998, in cooperation with the Member States, and around 20% of these cases were classed as fraud following the investigation.
I should also point out in connection with the question as to why the findings in the Court of Auditors' report are different, that it has been ascertained that the number of irregularities is falling in the area of agricultural policy, while it is clearly highlighted here that regulations as to which cases of fraud or suspicion must be reported to the Commission differ from one Member State to another, and this explains the difference between the two reports.
Mr Blak stated in his speech that the citizens of the European Union are sick and tired of fraud.
Unfortunately, I must point out that duty- or tax-free cigarettes still sell like hot cakes and tax evasion is often regarded as a national pastime.
In this respect, we face a situation in which we must acknowledge that we cannot completely eradicate fraud which damages the European Union's financial interests.
We must of course do everything within our power to fight customs offences and offences in connection with subsidies and taxation which damage the Community' s financial interests.
I should like briefly to go into the individual proposals in the Bösch report which now come within a wider context; this applies, for example, to the proposal on disciplinary procedures or the chamber at the European Court of Auditors.
The Commission explained in its statements on Parliament' s demands in connection with the 1998 discharge procedure that it did not think that the right way forward was to call in a chamber of the Court of Auditors or the Court of Justice to issue orders in disciplinary proceedings against employees on the grounds of irregularities in connection with the budget, because the European Treaties had granted each of these bodies its own specific remit.
It is precisely the European Court of Justice to which employees can take recourse if they wish to appeal against a judgement in disciplinary proceedings.
As a result, such a move cannot be reconciled with the present Treaties.
The Commission therefore decided to take up the proposals contained in last year' s independent experts' report, which are extremely comprehensive and relate to overall financial management, fraud prevention and disciplinary procedures.
The Commission explained that it also shared Parliament' s view that confidence in the objectivity of disciplinary proceedings would be enhanced by involving an outside agency.
It explained this in its White Paper tabled on 1 March and will also make detailed proposals on reforming disciplinary law in the paper on the overall future disciplinary procedure to be published by the Commission in October.
Naturally we shall include Parliament' s considerations in the overall procedure and in our proposals during discussions.
It was rightly pointed out in numerous debates and in the report that good cooperation and the involvement of the Member States are essential if the fight against fraud to the detriment of the financial interests of the European Community is to be efficient.
Article 280 of the Amsterdam Treaty also makes this clear.
The complaint was also rightly voiced that the corresponding agreement between the Member States has only been ratified by a few Member States.
I should like to thank all the speakers who wrote home calling for the necessary steps to be taken at long last.
OLAF, the European Anti-Fraud Office, is itself working intensively with the Member States and, in certain areas, with other countries, in order to conclude cooperation agreements.
Since the UCLAF report was filed, the European Anti-Fraud Office OLAF has succeeded, for example, in concluding an agreement with the Anti-Mafia in Italy, the aim being to achieve good cooperation at all levels and with all organisations dedicated to fighting fraud.
A conference on this subject is to be held in Ancona at the end of the week.
The Commission welcomes the fact that some enlargement countries are already taking steps to set up and activate structures similar to those set up by the European Anti-Fraud Office.
In Poland, for example, it has been decided to set up a Polish OLAF.
I should like briefly to go into the subject of "What happens next in the legislative area?" and point out that the Commission has proposed for the Intergovernmental Conference, which is responsible for revising the Treaties, that the present system for protecting the financial interests be supplemented by a legal basis creating a European Public Prosecutor and allowing provisions on the criminal prosecution of cross-border fraud to be adopted.
The Member States have indicated that they will not amend the Treaty in this area.
However, the Commission does not intend to give up on this and we are continuing to refine this proposal and will ensure that it is on the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference.
I should like to comment briefly on the complaints filed by the Commission against the European Central Bank and the European Investment Bank.
The aim is to implement precisely what was introduced into the OLAF regulation by the European Parliament, namely that OLAF is responsible for fighting fraud in all the institutions of the European Community.
Unfortunately, neither bank has made a move over recent weeks.
They too have probably been waiting for the outcome of the litigation pending as the result of the proceedings instituted by a number of members against the amendment of the European Parliament' s Rules of Procedure.
I think that the summary procedures of the Court of First Instance have in fact made it clear that what is at issue is not the legal bases for OLAF - in this respect neither bank can withdraw or hide behind this - the issue is, of course, the need to safeguard the independence of the institutions.
Not that this was ever disputed for the European Central Bank.
Of course, the other issue is that it needs to be made clear that the immunity of members is a democratic achievement and cannot be interfered with under any circumstances.
I should like to thank you for calling for account to be taken of the principles of the rule of law in all procedures, including the work of OLAF.
I think that the new director of OLAF defends this view very vigorously, including in a personal capacity.
We shall have the opportunity of debating other reports on the subject of fighting fraud this year.
The OLAF Supervisory Committee, which monitors the independence of OLAF, will soon submit its report, which we shall also have the opportunity to debate.
I should point out that the Commission is currently working on a fundamental strategy paper on the fight against fraud.
This too will certainly lead to further intensive and fruitful debate.
I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Bösch, for his report and, above all, I should also like to thank the House for supporting the introduction and the work of OLAF so unwaveringly.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place today at 12 noon.
(The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 p.m.)
Vote
Madam President, in order not to delay a decision on this regulation, the Commission is ready to accept Amendment No 1 on commitology.
However, I regret to have to inform you that the Commission cannot agree to Amendment No 2.
The Commission proposes an amount of EUR 850.5m as part of a comprehensive package for the programming of heading IV to take account of the commitments made for the Balkans.
(The President declared the common position approved as amended)
Report (A5-0115/2000) by Mrs Jeggle, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the Commission proposals on the prices for agricultural products (COM(2000) 77 - C5-0121/2000 à C5-0126/2000 - 2000/0045(CNS) à 2000/0050(CNS))
(In successive votes, Parliament adopted the six legislative resolutions)
Report (A5-0124/2000) by Mrs Schierhuber, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1251/1999 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops to include flax and hemp grown for fibre (COM(1999) 576 - C5­0280/1999 - 1999/0236(CNS)) and on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in flax and hemp grown for fibre (COM(1999) 576 - C5­0281/1999 - 1999/0237(CNS))
Madam President, the following problem has arisen in connection with the report by Mrs Schierhuber now being put to the vote: the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European United Left filed a motion for a split vote on a number of points.
However, for some technical reason, the services did not receive it.
Now we have the following problem: either you now allow an oral motion for a split vote on the article in question during the voting procedure and we vote today or, if that is not possible, then I move that we postpone the vote until tomorrow.
The services have, however, said that we have a tightly-packed voting programme tomorrow, so that it would perhaps make sense to vote today.
We would be happy to vote.
The vote is not the problem, the problem is that you did not receive the motion for a split vote in time.
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, indeed, I checked the situation: it was only this morning that we received the request for split voting, which was therefore not within the time limits set by our own rules.
In Parliament we have certain rules that are applicable to everyone.
They must be observed, and I cannot make any exceptions.
I must be frank and tell you that, even though I appreciate the problem.
We shall then proceed to the vote, unless you are going to propose postponing the vote, which is a proposal I would, of course, put to the vote.
Madam President, in that case - I understand your position - I should like to move that we postpone the vote until tomorrow or Thursday.
I would like to hear the opinion of our rapporteur, Mrs Schierhuber.
Madam President, I am sorry that the Socialists' voting list was not received by the services in time.
I should like to state unequivocally that I personally, as rapporteur, have no problem in accepting this split vote, even during today' s vote, and it would be good if we could vote today because, as you know, the Council of Agricultural Ministers is meeting today and tomorrow and it would be good if the agricultural ministers knew what we had decided here.
Unfortunately, if we vote tomorrow, it will be too late.
Mrs Schierhuber, let us be clear on this.
Personally speaking I would not have any objection to split voting either, but, once again, there are rules, and I cannot make exceptions.
This would establish a perfectly dreadful precedent and then there would no longer be any rules to govern the tabling of split voting requests.
You have just expressed your view to the effect that you prefer to have the vote today.
I shall give Mr Goepel the floor and then we shall proceed to vote on Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf' s proposal to postpone the vote until tomorrow morning or Thursday morning.
Madam President, I should like to explain on behalf of my group that we too have nothing against this oral amendment and I should like to support Mrs Schierhuber again here.
The Council of Agricultural Ministers is waiting for our decision and a postponement would not be a good idea.
(Parliament rejected the proposal to postpone the vote)
Following the vote on legislative proposal No 1 and adoption of the Commission proposal as amended
Madam President, I should like to ask the Commission if it has changed its opinion in the last twelve hours on the proposed amendments adopted by a large majority in the Committee on Agriculture.
Mrs Schreyer, can you give our rapporteur an answer in the affirmative?
Mrs Schierhuber, the Commission has not changed its opinion.
The Commission presented this proposal as the outcome of experience in past years.
We discussed a report on the fight against fraud on a previous occasion and that has a direct bearing on this.
I can only repeat that, if the question of the division of land is again discussed in the Council - and this was an important issue in the Committee on Agriculture - then the Commission is of course open to suggestions.
However, as the Commissioner for the budget, I am bound to say that a solution must be found which does not affect the budget.
Madam President, the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are also very keen to put a stop to fraud in all areas in the Union.
We still do not have any right of codetermination in agriculture, which is why our only option is to refer this report back to committee and I urge the House to vote in favour of my motion.
Our rapporteur, Mrs Schierhuber, proposes referral to committee.
Is there anyone who wishes to speak in favour of referral to committee?
Madam President, I should like to speak for the motion.
The groups have agreed that this is the only way of exerting any influence.
To put it plainly, including to Commissioner Schreyer: I think that the Commission and Parliament are at one on the question of the fight against fraud; the question here is what methods will be chosen.
If the method now being chosen takes hold, it will kill off flax and hemp cultivation, which are an ecological form ideally suited to disadvantaged areas.
We must prevent this and Parliament and the Commission must join in the discussion to find a compromise.
(Parliament decided to refer the first part of the report to committee) - Following the vote on legislative proposal No 2 and adoption of the Commission proposal as amended
Madam President, exactly the same applies to this second decision as what you said for the first decision.
Two proposed amendments in this second file are of fundamental importance to the Committee on Agriculture, namely Amendments Nos 28 and 29.
I therefore again ask the Commission if it has perhaps revised its opinion here.
Madam President, my colleague Mr Fischler made a statement on this yesterday.
The Commission has not changed its position.
Madam President, in that case may I again ask the House to vote to refer the report back to committee.
(Parliament decided to refer the second part of the report to committee)
Report (A5-0116/2000) by Mr Bösch, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the 1998 annual report by the European Commission on protecting the Communities' financial interests and the fight against fraud (COM(1999) 590 - C5-0058/2000 - 2000/2032(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)EXPLANATIONS OF VOTES
Rothley report (A5-0130/2000)
Madam President, I voted for this European Parliament directive regulating insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles which may injure citizens who come from States other than the State in which they are insured, but I would have liked the report to have been more audacious.
Many pensioners, with whom I often discuss matters in Italy, say to me "Mr Fatuzzo, I have had a serious car accident.
I was the victim of a road accident.
The insurance company asked me my age, and when I replied that I was 80 years old, they said 'You are worthless, you count for nothing, and so we are not going to give you any compensation.' "
Now, it does not seem right to me for a person who is 70 or 80 years old to be considered worthless, and I therefore call for care to be taken that morally acceptable payments are made when the victims of road accidents are elderly.
- The proposal for this directive deals with situations in which a traffic accident occurs in the country of residence of the person causing the accident or in a third country.
The objective of this directive is to ensure that the injured party has a right of action against the insurer of the person who caused the accident.
We must remember that we live in the European Union where the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital is in operation.
This directive which streamlines the issue of civil liability in respect of accidents involving motor vehicles is a logical extension to directives which have been put in place over the last 13 years to complete the European Single Market.
It is only right and proper where there is a system of wholesale freedom of movement of persons and cross-border traffic that a streamlined and structured procedure is in operation so that recourse is available to injured parties in the case of accidents.
To that end every insurance undertaking operating within the European Union must now appoint a representative within each Member State to be responsible for settling claims on its behalf if an accident occurs involving an EU national.
This proposal would also involve information centres being set up so as to enable victims to identify appropriate claim representatives.
A compromise has been reached between the institutions at a recent Conciliation Committee meeting which was held last March.
The most complex problem concerns the directive's territorial application.
This matter is now resolved.
The directive will apply to accidents involving nationals of a Member State of the Union on Union territory or in any third country operating the Green Card system.
The Conciliation Committee has also agreed to enable Member States to retain and implement more favourable arrangements in respect of the victim than the provisions required so as to ensure compliance with this directive.
I fully support this proposal and would like to commend Mr Rothley for his work in bringing these proposals to this stage.
The European Union, as a result of the Treaty of Amsterdam, has greater powers to bring forward legislation in the field of consumer rights.
This legislation governing the issue of civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles and accidents in Europe will ensure that the rights of the 370 million consumers in Europe will be enhanced in the case of accidents taking place within any of the territories of the European Union.
- I welcome my Socialist colleague, Willi Rothley's recommendation on protecting motorists abroad.
We are sadly all too familiar with the high figures of road accidents across Europe.
As many as 500 000 drivers in the European Union are victims of road accidents abroad every year.
This is 500 000 too many.
We must put safety first and ensure that as much as possible is done to protect our citizens whilst travelling abroad.
The proposal extends current EU directives on the handling of motor insurance claims to cover cases where a person visiting another Member State is the victim of an accident caused by a resident of that country.
Every insurance company will, therefore, need to appoint a representative in each Member State.
The European Parliament has gone even further, calling for cover for accidents which take place in non-EU countries, provided that the vehicles involved are registered in the EU.
Under the compromise, the directive will apply to such accidents in a certain number of countries outside the European Union.
Thousands of British holidaymakers travel by car or hire cars every year in France, Spain, Portugal and many other countries in Europe.
Surely we owe all of our citizens the right to ensure that things are made as easy as possible for those involved in car accidents abroad and for their families.
This is not about high-and-mighty insurance companies hindering claims, it is about the European Parliament driving forward a lifeline for our citizens.
For my own constituents and for all of Europe's citizens, I give the green light to this proposal.
Martínez Martínez report (A5-0114/2000)
Madam President, I also voted for the measure tabled by Mr Martínez Martínez confirming aid for development cooperation with South Africa, but, also in this case, with some reserves.
Why do we not make one of our inspectors responsible, one of our Commissioners, whenever - every year - we give financial aid to South Africa?
Why do we not monitor, firstly, the use to which this financial aid is put, and, secondly, the human rights situation in South Africa?
The situation is not, of course, as bad as it was - there have been improvements - but even I have received news of all sorts of appalling acts of delinquency perpetrated in South Africa as well as elsewhere.
We should take this into account whenever we provide aid to any third countries, including South Africa.
Madam President, the situation in South Africa is difficult - and it is by no means an easy country to run.
Yet South Africa presents itself as a beacon of hope in an otherwise turbulent continent.
We should therefore be doing everything possible to assist the economic, social and democratic development of that country.
That is why I regret that the Council proposes only EUR 787.5 million for South Africa, which is effectively a 10% cut on the amounts we agreed five years ago.
Parliament, in its Amendment No 2, proposes that we give EUR 885.5 million to South Africa, EUR 98 million more than the Council.
EUR 98 million is not an insignificant sum of money in South African terms.
In terms of the European budget it is not something we would struggle to find.
I would urge that we be generous to South Africa, that the Council finds this EUR 98 million, does not go to conciliation but accepts Parliament's amendments and gets on with implementing this new regulation with South Africa.
Thank you, Mr Martin.
In future, I shall ensure that the Commission remains in attendance during explanations of votes.
They may then hear some interesting information.
The most scandalous aspect of what they are daring to call an agreement on "development cooperation with South Africa" is that this cooperation is subject to the trade agreement with South Africa and that the Council is using it as a means of blackmail in order to foist its own terms on Pretoria.
Such cynicism borders on candour: the European Union grants aid to South Africa on condition that it is able thereby to make a commercial profit.
Although Parliament' s proposals are, financially, better than those of the Council, we have not voted in favour of the amendments, as we do not wish to sanction this farce.
The only reason why we are not voting against the amendments, however, is to affirm our conviction that cooperation between Europe and the whole of Africa is essential.
While, however, it is designed and implemented to profit merchants, bankers and industrialists, it is of benefit only to them and, incidentally, to a select class of privileged Africans.
In these circumstances, "combating poverty" and "achieving development objectives" as mentioned by the Council is nothing but gross untruth that could not be counteracted by any vote here.
Thank you, Mrs Cauquil.
I am given to understand that Mrs Laguiller and Mrs Bordes are also involved in the explanation of vote that you have just given.
Jeggle report (A5-0115/2000)
Madam President, I voted for the measure tabled by Mr Jeggle on the Commission proposals on the prices for agricultural products.
This measure deals, once again, with the European Union' s common agricultural policy.
I welcome our action to support farmers, but I feel that we need to change direction, in some cases completely and in others only in part.
For example, this measure does not contain any initiatives to support the small-scale, family-based elderly mountain farmers who operate, particularly, in the furthermost parts of Europe.
This land is increasingly being abandoned and the European Union' s vast expenditure does not go far enough towards meeting the needs of the farmers.
In future, we must pay more attention to the needs of elderly family-based farmers.
My vote is intended to support the rapporteur' s efforts but prevent the proposed reduction in the monthly increments for cereals.
The European Council stated clearly in its resolutions following the Berlin summit that the monthly increments should be maintained at the current 1 euro per tonne and frozen at this level for the entire period, i.e. from 2000 to 2006.
The planned reduction in the monthly increments would therefore clearly be breaking our promise to the farmers.
Given the worrying economic situation of the rural population, further erosion of their income is unjustifiable.
The income of people working in farming has fallen by a total of nearly 10% in real terms since 1996.
A reduction in the monthly increments would further exacerbate the economic situation of farmers.
- (SV) A transformation of agricultural policy is a prerequisite for enlargement of the European Union.
We Swedish Social Democrats (Pierre Schori, Anneli Hulthén, Jan Andersson, Maj Britt Theorin, Göran Färm and Eva Hedkvist-Petersen) therefore believe that the EU' s agricultural subsidies should be considerably reduced and we welcome the Commission' s proposal for a progressive reduction in the monthly increases in the intervention price of cereal.
Because the report opposes a reduction in the intervention price of cereal, we are voting against the Committee' s proposal.
.
(PT) Following the Agenda 2000 decisions, and also bearing in mind the reforms of the common organisations of the market, the annual setting of prices and of institutional budgets has only affected a small number of sectors.
Nevertheless, the Commission does not always carry out this price setting in the farmers' interests, particularly when it lowers prices, and this warrants our opposition.
In specific terms, for 2000 to 2001, the Commission is proposing the level of increments for rice, whereas we are still waiting for the next reform proposal, which should already have moved forward.
For the monthly increments of cereals, it proposes a two-stage reduction of 7.5% for the equivalent reduction of the intervention price, which was decided on under Agenda 2000, which is unacceptable to various Member States particularly because, at the Berlin Council, the commitment was given to maintain monthly increments at their current level.
With regard to prices for sheepmeat and pigmeat, the Commission is maintaining current levels.
With regard to the sugar sector, the price levels established for the last harvest year are being maintained, and in the next few months a proposal is due to be presented with a view to ending the quota, on the pretext of commitments given at the WTO.
Some positive proposals were made in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, specifically the refusal to make the sugar and agriculture sectors, almost exclusively, finance the EUR 300 million for Kosovo, given that this financing will accentuate the negative pressure on the income of farmers, which is unacceptable.
With regard to the proposal for a Council regulation fixing certain sugar prices and the standard quality of beet for the 2000/01 marketing year, we would make the following point.
The reconstruction of Kosovo is an important issue for the EU and something we wholeheartedly support.
The extra resources required for Kosovo should be obtained from general reductions in subsidies for the whole of the common agricultural policy and not only through reductions within the sugar sector.
- (DA) Agricultural aid is a heavy burden for the European Union.
It is indispensable to undertake a radical review of this aid, especially when enlargement to include the Eastern European countries is to become a reality.
I am very pleased that the first step to be taken towards such a review entails a long-term plan for a certain reduction in agricultural aid.
It is problematic, however, that there is not the courage to engage in a full and candid discussion of how our agricultural sector is, in the longer term, to cope under quite different conditions and with a quite different aid scheme than that which is in place at present.
We are forced to reduce aid to the absolute minimum, and we should have the discussion now.
On the other hand, the reduction in agricultural aid should be gradual and carried out at such a pace that there is no risk of EU aid being replaced by national schemes designed to compensate for its disappearance.
It would also be problematic if the Commission were to withdraw aid from agriculture with a view to using the resources for another purpose.
Aid should not be reduced for the wrong reasons.
Schierhuber report (A5-0124/2000)
Madam President, I voted against this measure on the European policy on flax and hemp.
This is because I feel that we should change the way we support and provide aid to agricultural products in the European Union.
We should start to let go of the policy of giving a sum of money to the producers of a particular agricultural product which we want to support, and endeavour, instead, to reduce the burdens of production costs, burdens which are mainly the result of national State policies and which push up the cost of labour, tying the hands of those who wish to work, produce and increase the number of jobs in their sector.
Basically, we must start to change the way we provide aid to agriculture in Europe.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I voted in favour of Mrs Schierhuber' s report.
I consider proposed Amendments Nos 28 and 29 to be particularly important.
She rightly points out that any limitation on maximum quantities must correlate with actual processing capacities.
Introducing national maximum quantities as proposed by the Commission would create a system which fails to take account of national processing capacities.
The 50 tonne per annum limitation would exclude many Member States from cultivation in advance.
The aim must be to develop a flexible system which also takes account of regional sales potential, thereby allowing all Member States to cultivate on an equal footing.
.
(SV) We Swedish Social Democrats (Pierre Schori, Anneli Hulthén, Jan Andersson, Maj Britt Theorin, Göran Färm and Ewa Hedkvist Petersen) believe that the EU' s agricultural aid ought to be considerably reduced and we are therefore also opposed to aid for hemp production.
Furthermore, the mechanisms for supervising the cultivation of hemp are problematic because it is not possible, with the naked eye, to distinguish hemp grown for fibre from hemp grown for the production of drugs.
It is, therefore, difficult to guarantee that there is no cultivation of hemp for the purpose of manufacturing drugs.
We therefore believe that hemp production ought not to be promoted through increased aid, and we are abstaining from voting on Mrs Schierhuber' s report.
.
(SV) Regarding the proposal for a Council regulation (EC) No 1251/1999 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops to include flax and hemp grown for fibre, we would state the following.
As liberals, we believe that agricultural policy should be adjusted to the market and de-bureaucratised.
If Parliament is serious about eastward enlargement, there must be a drive extensively to cut back on the costs of agriculture.
All direct forms of support for agricultural production ought gradually to be abolished.
Bösch report (A5-0116/2000)
Mr President, I have taken the floor for the last time to declare, once again, that it was with no reservations that I voted against the Bösch report on the 1998 report on the fight against fraud.
This is not because I do not approve of fighting all types of fraud - of course I do!
Naturally I support this fight.
However, I feel that in order to genuinely fight fraud in the European Union we need to change Europe' s expenditure system.
The same report states that these EUR 1 019 million which have disappeared as a result of fraud are only the tip of the iceberg.
Now, we know that 10% of an iceberg is visible but the other 90% is underwater and therefore hidden.
Therefore, the European Union is being defrauded of something in the region of EUR 10 000 million.
It is absolutely essential that we change the way we spend our money.
Madam President, you have just congratulated the rapporteur on his work.
I do not see what reason there is to congratulate him as many of his original paragraphs have been dropped, particularly because of his own Group which, in its wisdom, decided to table a great many amendments to delete sections, and these were adopted.
These particularly concerned all the sections to do with the White Paper.
Consequently, many amendments which went beyond the report and the content of the report that Mr Bösch was supposed to be drawing up have been dropped.
I therefore ask the following question: why did we waste money making Mr Bösch draw up texts that have nothing to do with his work and which Parliament has, quite rightly, rejected.
You can discuss the matter with Mrs Stauner, who is very interested in other people' s reports, and whom you should really meet, and ask her if she is not interested in knowing why the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control are undertaking work which has nothing to do with their assigned tasks.
All honour and tribute, then, to the wisdom of this Parliament for restoring order.
- (DA) We have voted today in favour of Mr Bösch' s report on the more effective combating of fraud and irregularities involving EU resources.
Even though there was a slight decline in fraud and irregularities between 1997 and 1998, there is still a great need for more effective supervisory mechanisms.
Mr Kinnock' s reform plan is, on the whole, both visionary and realistic.
There are, however, a few sticking points.
Parliament has already proposed, in the Van Hulten report, that an external court should be established under the aegis of the Court of Auditors, part of whose task would be to deal with disciplinary matters and which would help recover money which had been paid out wrongly.
If such a body were to be established, this would mean that disciplinary procedures would be taken away from the Commission.
We have had a lot of bad experiences with the internal disciplinary council.
At present, officials who have had actions brought against them by the disciplinary council have colleagues of theirs sitting in judgement over them.
That is indefensible.
Both the ECHO and MED cases are all too well-known examples of this state of affairs.
We ought likewise to criticise the proposal in the white paper to the effect that an advisory panel should be set up to deal with irregularities.
We have established OLAF to deal with suspicions of fraud and irregularities.
Another panel would serve only to undermine OLAF' s powers.
We have voted against establishing a European public prosecutor' s office.
It would be a colossal enterprise to set up when the problem, in reality, lies elsewhere.
In actual fact, there is more need for a fundamental staffing reform.
It is, for all that, only the most serious cases which will have penal consequences.
Ninety per cent of cases will be disciplinary matters concerning negligence or incompetence.
Instead, there is a need for public, internal supervision and for more leeway when it comes to sacking people.
We need changes to staff regulations and to the disciplinary procedure, as also proposed in the report.
- The British Conservatives abstained on the Bösch report overall because we are unhappy with the concept of a European Public Prosecutor, believing that this could well lead to corpus juris.
We were also unhappy with the references to VAT made within the report.
- (FR) I abstained from the vote on the resolution on protecting the Communities' financial interests and the fight against fraud.
I did not wish to vote against the resolution since I fully share the rapporteur' s objectives of intensifying the combating of fraud against the financial interests of the Community.
I did not vote, however, because of the establishment of a new control body.
The Community is not going to achieve the desired goal by creating a tangled multiplicity of such bodies.
(The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
The next item is the report (A5-0117/2000) by Mrs Roth-Behrendt, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down rules for the prevention and control of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (COM(1998) 623 - C4-0025/1999 - 1998/0323(COD)).
Mr President, our discussion today on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, transmissible diseases which include BSE or scrapie, is one of the many follow-up reports or one of the follow-up discussions to the final BSE report and I think that it is also of great interest to the visitors in the gallery.
We have a report here before us which the Commission promised together with its final report on the 1997 BSE report at Parliament' s request.
It has now presented it.
We have drafted a report on it, although not as quickly as we would otherwise have done, due to the break last year.
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and Mr Böge have drafted opinions on it.
In other words, we have been able to keep the BSE team going well.
I should like to tell you briefly how I, as rapporteur for the committee responsible, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, assess the proposal.
The Commission' s proposal is a good one; like so much of what the Commission has presented on BSE and follow-up problems and has satisfied us in previous years, we are also satisfied with this proposal but, like most things, it still has room for improvement, Mr Byrne.
I said that your proposal on BSE testing had room for improvement and I say so again here today.
The involvement of the European Parliament certainly needs to be improved.
We must ensure that the European Parliament can act in the codecision procedure as the real guarantor of consumer and health protection in the European Union.
Only then will we have a high standard and only then will you be able to work in proper collaboration with us, because the Council of Ministers, the individual Agricultural Ministers have not exactly been at the vanguard of the movement over recent years, as we here in the House are only too aware.
It is also important, and here too another proposal needs improvement, for us to hold further discussions on the rapid BSE tests.
You tabled a proposal after this TSE proposal which you then needed to adjust, but the proposal is still inadequate.
If we are to be able to make a real appraisal of the BSE situation in the Member States, we must make it clear that fallen stock are also to be tested for human health safety in a screening process.
So far you have presented no proposal on this.
What we also need, and we have tried to achieve this in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, is to strengthen the Member States' obligation to inform the Commission and to give the Commission information and data on incidents in their countries, on BSE problems or on suspicious circumstances.
Here too we need to take the Member States to task more.
Here, too, I repeat: mistrust is always shown of the Member States, including my own, and rightly so.
Mr Böge rightly pointed out - as I am sure he will again in his presentation - that we need a Community definition of geographical areas.
The definition here is clearly inadequate and the Commission must explain - and I call on you to do so Mr Byrne - how it intends to deal with derogations for cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and other medicinal products.
I am convinced of the need for the Commission to make proposals in order to close any loopholes in current legislation.
Allow me to make a few comments on the proposed amendments and then, thanks to the speaking time for my group, I shall still have time for a comment at the end of the debate.
I agree with nearly all the proposed amendments, but there are some and here I would ask how you evaluate them, Mr Byrne.
This applies in particular to proposed Amendment No 50, which includes cat food in the proposal tabled by Mr Böge, who I know takes a very careful approach to everything.
But you have said that you have a problem with cat food.
Please say something about the risk of infection from cats.
Mrs Attwooll and others have proposed a number of amendments, specifically Amendments Nos 53, 54 and 55.
These proposed amendments limit the present proposal and do not represent any improvement, not even for the situation in the United Kingdom, which I would have understood.
For example, no distinction is made between breeding and fattening; that is a completely inadequate proposal.
I sympathise with the suggestion in the second part of proposed Amendment No 56 that certain materials should be removed if a Member State has a specific and efficient system, but I must also say unequivocally that, at the present stage of the discussion on special risk materials, it is a dangerous signal to Member States such as my own, which are very reticent.
Allow me to repeat quite clearly: the repercussions on the Member States have obviously been overestimated by some members in the House.
In countries which have a good, operational system and a high level of protection, this regulation will not cause any deterioration.
But in countries which do not, it would at long last force them to buckle down and give priority to safety and health protection.
That is why I fail to understand much of the mistrust of many members, but perhaps we can clear that up in the debate.
Mr President, I shall have another three minutes at the end of the debate, which I shall use to comment on some of the interventions by the honourable Members.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development also welcomes in principle the Commission proposal, which is in line with the promise made by the Commission to Parliament.
I should also like expressly to praise the excellent collaboration between the committees and the rapporteurs.
We pointed out on a previous occasion that it is strange that there are still no common provisions for fighting scrapie, despite the fact that scrapie and BSE have somehow been linked since the beginning.
We think it is important to seek a differentiated approach to preventive consumer protection by achieving an understanding of the facts and without panicking.
In addition to what the rapporteur has said, we felt it was important that the Commission had incorporated the principle of regionalising the fight against TSE in order to reconcile strict measures and a sense of proportion.
I should also like to point out that we feel it is important, in the case of the livestock affected, to have a proper discussion on how data on age can be adapted for the purpose of measures to fight TSE.
I would also add that, when we talk of the possibility of introducing tests, for example in the event of dispute between the Commission and Member States or in the event of dispute between the Commission and third countries, carrying out tests can also help to decide if a country belongs in risk category I, II or III if, for example, certain statistics cannot be organised differently.
However, I will not conceal the fact, Commissioner, that the problem of third countries in general will continue to remain an issue for us, as will the question of including pharmaceuticals and cosmetics.
We also expect the Commission to quickly submit legal provisions on animal waste, on meat meal, so that we can define safety keys, thereby ensuring that there is a future for a responsible recycling system and guaranteeing preventive consumer protection.
One issue will continue to remain on the agenda and that is the difference between some Member States and the majority of Member States in their approach to the question of what is more important: to define risk materials or to remove entire stocks from the food chain in the event of one case of BSE.
Even scientists have so far avoided committing themselves on this point.
Mr President, if the BSE crisis taught us anything, it is that health takes top priority over all other policies.
This is essentially the basis on which this proposal for a regulation has been drawn up and we really must use this opportunity to make a concerted effort to prevent, control and eradicate transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
We have been well aware of this problem for many years now.
Unfortunately, however, we have still not managed to eradicate the disease, nor have we managed to identify all the causes for it, hence all the concerns, restrictions and irregularities in the production and marketing of products of animal origin.
It is therefore essential that action be taken throughout the Community so that firstly: we can effectively guarantee public health protection and, secondly, we can restore consumer confidence which, in turn, will help the internal market to develop and operate properly.
One of the important measures recommended in the regulation is the establishment of rapid diagnosis tests, because rapid detection is one of the keys to combating this disease.
Consequently, these tests, which produce results within a relatively short period of time, will most certainly help us to take immediate and appropriate action.
Three tests have already been proposed, although we predict that we shall see future improvements in this area, together with rapid diagnosis tests on live animals, so that we can monitor better how the whole epidemiological picture of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies is developing in the European Union.
A second key measure is to establish an ongoing epidemiological study based partly on laboratory tests using an established protocol.
The introduction of uniform procedures and truly comparable results from analyses by national and Community reference laboratories will help us to monitor the situation closely and to create reliable scientific data and methods of diagnosis which include rapid diagnostic tests.
It would be a good idea if, at the same time, we monitored scientific progress on the new variant disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob, which, as we all know, attacks humans and is caused by food from animals contaminated with BSE.
Finally, the slightest suspicion of any form of spongiform encephalopathy in any animal must be notified to the competent authorities so that we can take appropriate action.
I should like to stress at this point, that in my view, we will in fact only eradicate the disease effectively if we destroy the whole herd, regardless of how much this would cost both in economic and sentimental terms.
That is why the compensation paid by the Commission to beneficiaries must be quite substantial.
Of course, it is hard when just one animal out of a whole herd is sick, as it is very difficult to discern if there are animals which appear healthy but which may fall ill later on.
That is precisely why we are proposing this measure.
"Prevention is better than cure" , as Hippocrates said all those years ago, thereby paving the way for preventive medicine.
This is particularly true today, given that there is no cure either for BSE or for the equivalent human disease, the new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob.
In closing, I should like to commend and thank both Mr Böge, the rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, and Mrs Roth-Behrendt, the rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment.
Thanks to their cooperation and with the help of all their other colleagues, I feel this is truly a much better regulation, and is a vast improvement on what the Commission originally presented to Parliament.
Mr President, I also wish to endorse and praise the work of Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Böge on this issue and the initial proposals from the Commission.
Safety must be a priority and we all understand that if we are to have equal precautions throughout the Member States, we need a variety of measures in place which have not so far been instituted.
Commissioner Byrne is to be congratulated on moving that closer.
These proposals take us a good deal further down the line in the field of diagnostic testing, in a more sceptical attitude to animals which ought to have been under suspicion but in some Member States were not, and in terms of the general prospect of fallen stock being tested for the possibility of BSE.
I want to say something, however, coming from the Member State which first suffered the full rigours of BSE and which has also, as a result of that, been in the vanguard of cleaning up this problem.
We have now had for a considerable period of time in the United Kingdom an over-30-month cull of all animals which have been taken out of the food chain.
We have been able to tackle the problem of the possibility of maternal transmission by also taking out those animals that might be at risk because of their ancestry.
From our position, given the measures we take, we do not see any reason at all why we would need to introduce, additionally, whole-herd slaughter of the kind done in some other countries.
We are being asked not just for a belt-and-braces policy but also to buy a new pair of trousers just in case.
This would cost a great deal of money.
It would not remove a single additional suspect case of BSE.
I would remind those present that, with our additional safety measures, we in the UK are only exporting to the Community de-boned carcasses which have gone through maximum checks and security.
In the circumstances, therefore, there are a number of amendments tabled by a variety of Members in the United Kingdom which I would commend in this debate.
I should be very glad to hear whether the Commissioner feels he can accept that in some circumstances - particularly in view of the over-30-month cull in the United Kingdom - for those countries which are admittedly very high risk but also with a very high level of precaution now in place a certain number of derogations are necessary and would be satisfactory to him.
I sincerely hope so.
Mr President, I would first of all address the Commissioner and say that I naturally welcome the present proposal.
Secondly, I want to congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt on a very good piece of work.
I also want to thank Mr Böge.
I wish to support in principle all the amendments from the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection.
Nowadays, we know a very great deal indeed about the living world.
Life is not, however, complete, as it were, but is evolving all the time.
It is evolving not only in a positive way, but also in a negative way.
As time goes on, we are faced with new viruses and new problems.
The BSE crisis is an example of such a phenomenon.
There are, however, also many more examples.
There are therefore two things which must be done.
The first is the matter with which we are occupied at present, namely trying to ensure that we get the better both of BSE and of TSE, which is, of course, a broader concept.
We must make sure that the situation does not occur again.
However, we must also find ways of overcoming similar tragedies in the future.
Such tragedies will clearly not occur in precisely this area but will crop up elsewhere.
This illustrates what the present debate teaches us: that we must have comprehensive regulations for the whole of the common market constituted by the EU.
We must have the same rules, monitored in the same way.
Everyone must be treated the same.
Understandable differences in attitudes have emerged in the course of the debates which we have conducted in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and in the party groups and which are also being conducted here and now in this Chamber.
I am thinking of the last intervention.
The United Kingdom has been affected badly.
I can well understand why people there have points of view as to how it might perhaps be possible to make savings.
Allow me, however, to say something which is extremely important.
We must never suffer for having looked to short-term economic gains at the risk of long-term security.
There is a danger of the short-term economy' s taking over at the expense of reason and caution.
To my party colleague, Mrs Attwooll, I have to say that I understand the current amendments very well but that I cannot support them.
That would mean our becoming unclear and sending out false signals.
I believe it is extremely important that when, in this context, we decide about this report, we send out a crystal clear signal about the firmness of our judgement on the issue of food safety.
This is important prior to the forthcoming debate on the whole project entailed in the white paper which has been announced.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Roth-Behrendt, according to a Flemish saying, prevention is better than cure, and I assume that this pearl of wisdom is used in each of our Member States and regions.
I would like to expressly congratulate Mrs Roth-Behrendt on her report.
My group has not tabled any amendments and is in full agreement with you.
We give you our full support and have every confidence in you.
After all, the proposal follows on from a pledge which was made previously regarding the follow-up committee.
This is therefore to be welcomed.
I would like to home in on the following issues.
Firstly, it makes sense to include regionalisation and regional differentiation in the goal-oriented fight against TSE.
If you are in any doubt about this, just ask my Scottish and Welsh colleagues.
Secondly, there are tests for a rapid diagnosis and to identify TSE in cattle.
We, as Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection want to make these methods available so as to improve our monitoring procedures, and rightly so.
As it happens, we all know that these tests are not yet scientifically accurate and that when these tests are applied, we do not know precisely whether infection actually occurs at each stage of the disease.
I believe that these tests are at least heading in the right direction and that we should support the scientific research carried out in this field.
Thirdly, I welcome the requirement to destroy or remove the entire herd on farms where the disease has broken out.
Fourthly, there is indeed a need for additional legislation for products such as cosmetics, medicines and pharmaceutical preparations which are excluded from the present proposal.
Finally, I would like to draw your attention to a number of amendments which actually provide for a number of points to be lifted from the appendix and included in the body of the text.
I think that it is important to bring about more democracy, to get away from comitology, and to increase parliamentary control.
These are cardinal amendments, to my mind.
Mr President, the proposal for a regulation under discussion does not aim to address the problems, as the Commission hypocritically claims, but to cover up the problems which have arisen in certain countries, thereby generalising them and making them everybody' s problem.
This is why this proposal needs to be changed, particularly where it specifies classifying countries into categories.
If the Commission really wanted to protect public health from spongiform encephalopathies, it would have proposed rules to prevent such risks a long time ago, but it did not.
It would have made provision for the necessary procedures and penalties.
But the interests of multinational food corporations, which have subjugated everything to the rationale of excessive profit, precluded any such action.
So, this Commission initiative only made its appearance once the situation had got out of control - with dioxin for example - and is now endeavouring to show that it has some control over the situation.
The conclusion which we draw from this draft regulation is that it is probably an attempt to cover up the situation.
That is the direction in which things are heading with the classification of countries, which, rather than taking into account the most basic factor, which is the existence or non-existence of cases of encephalopathy in their raised cattle, takes account of other factors when allocating countries to a particular category.
The worst thing about this is that, theoretically, if a member state in which cases of encephalopathy have been reported can prove that it has established systems for monitoring production, it could be placed in the same category as a country in which no cases have ever been reported.
This same spirit, this "lowest common denominator" approach, pervades the rest of the proposed measures, such as the mandatory removal of various organs (spleen, brain, spinal cord, etc.).
Such measures will blacken the reputation of meat-producing countries in which there have been no cases of encephalopathy and will also discredit sheepmeat and goatmeat, since there is no substantial scientific evidence as to whether this meat is sensitive to spongiform encephalopathy pathogens.
At the same time, the proposal to remove the aforementioned organs and tissues is a recipe for disaster for sheep- and goatmeat, which will be impossible to market; in other words, this measure will indirectly oust sheep and goat meat from the market, demand will be met by other types of meat from larger animals and traditional recipes using offal such as intestines and spleen will be banned.
We therefore oppose the Commission proposal.
Mr President, I welcome the opportunity of making a brief contribution to this debate and I congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work.
Parliament has certainly devoted considerable time on behalf of its citizens to addressing the important agenda of food safety, while at the same time ensuring that our farmers can operate within a production framework of traceability which is the only way to fully restore consumer confidence in the wide range of quality food products produced by European farmers.
For this reason, the creation of a uniform legal basis for controlling and preventing the spread of BSE and scrapie is paramount and there is still, as other speakers have suggested, a lack of consistency in relation to the application of the regulations within individual Member States.
I would urge Commissioner Byrne to prioritise introduction of that level of consistency which is the only way that we can convince our consumers that we have a common policy in relation to ensuring public health.
As I have said in previous debates, farmers are the victims of circumstances beyond their control and those responsible for the manufacture of animal feed which puts public health, our entire livestock sector and indeed farm incomes at risk, have much to answer for.
This House must be vigilant in ensuring that it can never again be repeated.
I welcome the availability of rapid diagnostic testing for improved detection of TSEs in cattle and believe, Commissioner, that further consideration should be given to its use as a means of establishing the health status of animals in Member States.
For my country, Ireland, food exports and in particular beef are of paramount importance to our economy and the income of farmers.
I can say that we have left no stone unturned in tackling this problem, including the removal of entire herds where an infected animal has in fact been diagnosed.
May I say in conclusion that farmers have always responded in a positive way to the introduction of regulations governing public health and the health status of animals raised for food production.
Their task as guarantors of food security and quality is, as everyone in this House knows, becoming increasingly difficult.
Far too often their contribution to society has been taken for granted and certainly not always adequately rewarded with a reasonable income.
Mr President, Mrs Roth-Behrendt, Mr Böge, Commissioner, we have before us a proposal for a regulation on the prevention of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, which is to say degeneration of the brain in bovine animals, sheep, primates, antelope, cats and even humans, since there have been 53 cases of atypical Creutzfeldt-Jakob in Great Britain, all fatal.
So now we are going to adopt regulations to prevent an epidemic that we have known about since 1986, i.e. for fourteen years.
It is rather late in the day to react, but even so over the last fourteen years we have done a great deal.
Last month, for example, we decided to stick labels on meat to warn consumers.
The Commission told us that it was impossible to enforce such labelling before 2002, sixteen years after the outbreak of the disease, but we have done something all the same.
We have had discussions with Mr Delors, with Mr Santer, with Mr Prodi, with Mr McSharry, the Commissioner responsible for agriculture, then Mr Steichen, and Mr Fischler.
We have set up a committee of inquiry chaired by our fellow Member, Mr Böge, a temporary monitoring committee; we have even tabled a motion of censure, against Mr Böge' s wishes.
We have heard expert opinions from Mr Dirringer, the German virologist, Mr Picoud, Mr Dormont, Scottish specialists, our Portuguese fellow Member, Garcia, was a specialist.
We have had debates, topical and urgent questions on the embargo, etc.
After fourteen years of discussion, there are few survivors of this war of nigh on twenty years - Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, Mr Cunha, Mr Böge, and myself.
Mr Happart left us and Mr Pagel died.
So I think it would be useful for the more recent Members, in the end, if I gave a sort of debriefing on the subject, quite apart from the problems with the legal basis under Article 100 A or BSE monitoring problems.
The starting point for this business was the 1984 milk quotas.
To improve their milk reference, our British friends drove their cows like some sort of engines, overfeeding them, and, in order to save on the cost of fodder, they fed their cows on meal made from carcasses.
Then, again, to save fuel oil when manufacturing meal, they reduced the cooking temperature, thereby enabling the pathogen to survive.
BSE is the tragic product of the race for profits and the British farm model.
The disease has been identified since 1986, but nothing much was done until 1996.
Why not?
The public could not be thrown into a panic because the Maastricht Treaty had to be sold to them.
So the press, the Commission and the European Parliament all knew about it, but did not say a word.
So when, in March 1996, the British, via the British Ministers for Agriculture and Health, admitted that the disease could be transmitted to human beings, the necessary measures were not taken.
Why?
Because this time the reason the public could not be thrown into a panic was no longer to sell the Maastricht Treaty but the Treaty of Amsterdam.
So, met first with silence and then with lies, the epidemic spread and we all know what the outcome of that was.
In the first place, BSE has not been eradicated in Great Britain, and will not be eradicated.
Secondly, the belated ban on meal did not serve to eradicate contamination.
Thirdly, either contamination crossed over to the meal fed to poultry, or there is a third transmission route.
In addition to maternal contamination, there may be transmission via the fields, the grazing land, the grass, and there may be badlands, as in the case of ovine scrapie, where the prion would be encysted and would return as soon as bovine animals were put to pasture there.
Fourthly, Great Britain and the industrialists causing the contamination have not, as polluters, paid.
It is innocent farmers, grain farmers, who are paying the price, in the same way that the farmers are paying for Kosovo.
All in all, then, the directive and the regulation are all well and good, but they are somewhat hypocritical.
We all agree that we need regulations on prevention, we are all agreed on adopting the amendments from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, to whom the matter should have been referred.
We all agree that scientific measures are needed, methods to be used in abattoirs to remove the ilia, the ganglia, the duodena, the inguinal, medial, lateral, renal, prefemoral and cervical lymph nodes, but this is not the key issue.
In the BSE crisis, at the moment of truth, when protective action had to be taken, it was taken by the national states.
That is the main lesson to be learnt from the TSE business.
Firstly, protection is always led by the states.
Secondly, the precautionary principle means safeguarding nations.
This is no obstacle to the construction of Europe but, like children making tree houses, it is just a game.
That is what we are doing here, Mr President, all playing out together.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the rationale of maximising profits leads to all sorts of aberrations, including feeding herbivores on meat-based meal.
It is not just the cows that went mad, and as a result, ovine scrapie spread to bovine animals in the form of BSE.
Consumer welfare demands that we use every means possible to prevent and vigorously combat these diseases and their vectors.
The action taken in 1997 is now proving even more inadequate as scientists are today talking about a third transmission route.
We must therefore provide ourselves with effective means to eradicate transmissible spongiform encephalopathies once and for all, if at all possible.
This means coordinating and dealing with the sector as soon as waste is used in animal fodder, destroying at-risk materials if there is suspicion, banning the inclusion of animal protein in cattle fodder, demanding traceability by labelling the animal' s site of birth and rearing, and, at Member State level, setting up the local monitoring systems which are the only ways to guarantee that the campaign will be effective and that monitoring will be transparent, setting in place a fast, systematic screening procedure and also in-depth checks, if necessary.
Finally, the whole herd must be slaughtered if one beast is found to be infected.
This is the price of food safety, but it must not be used as an excuse to cast doubt on the transportation of live animals.
Mr President, in stressing the excellent quality of the work carried out by Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Böge, I would like to dwell on one aspect and take advantage of the presence of Commissioner Byrne.
Clearly, our goal has to be total elimination, but we feel that this would be extremely difficult as the costs of incinerating the large numbers of animals which die on farms are objectively huge.
Consequently, the economic burdens and the amount of technical organisation involved could be extensive, and so could the environmental impact of such large-scale incineration carried out at extremely high temperatures.
In this sense, we ought to ask the Commission - and insist on a reply - whether realistic estimates of the quantities of material to be incinerated are already available to us, whether they have already been made or whether this still remains to be done, according to the various classification procedures of the States, together with an evaluation of the resulting organisational economic burdens, with subsequent referral to Parliament.
It is therefore essential to prevent the adoption of different, uncoordinated paths by individual Member States from causing substantial distortion of competition and disproportion in the treatment reserved for producers.
It is necessary to provide for the adoption of harmonised financial support measures, lay down common organisational guidelines and use applied research measures to develop new disposal technologies with less environmental impact which allow the use of forms of materials recycling which respect consumer safety requirements.
The development of common guidelines should allow firmer, more balanced and, therefore, more effective responses.
For example, we consider that setting up mandatory disposal consortia according to the model already laid down by the legislation of some Member States could be a practical response to the need to limit the economic impact of disposal operations on breeders and, at the same time, thanks to the increase in the degree of social control over the proper use of the service, to the need to consolidate consumer and environmental guarantees.
We conclude that the adoption of the excellent regulation in question will require the development of a combination of initiatives, research and analysis, but also regulation and standardisation, and we hope that Parliament will associate itself with these measures.
Mr President, we have before us a very important directive, aimed at creating a uniform legal basis for the prevention and control of TSEs.
The objective is to gather into one dossier all regulations relating to TSEs to date.
If we are to restore consumer confidence, it is essential that we do all we possibly can at all levels.
I should particularly like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Roth-Behrendt, for the vigour she has shown in her approach to this matter - many of her proposals deserve agreement.
Mr Böge, for his part, has ensured that these views will gain wide support in this Chamber.
I agree that the Commission for its part has done a good job, a job that Parliament can endorse, whereas Member States must eventually be made to understand that this matter is important and that we must gain consumer confidence.
I should, however, like to draw your attention to one more issue: those countries and farms, which have escaped the animal diseases, must also be able to ensure that they will not have these problems in future.
It is therefore essential that the withdrawal period relating to the transfer of animals from one farm to another be increased from two years to six years.
On the whole, we must firmly hold to the notion that within the internal market, too, human health is the most important thing, and that principles of free competition only take second place.
It is imperative that we bear this in mind, particularly when dealing with these food matters, which are all-important to consumers.
Mr President, Commissioner, I too would like to offer my congratulations to Mrs Roth-Behrendt on her report and to thank her for her openness to discussion on the issues involved.
She will appreciate even better than I how far scientific opinion on TSEs has developed.
For example, the Scientific Steering Committee has recently established that it is necessary to regard the vertebral column and dorsal root ganglion as specified risk material in the UK only for bovines over 30 months and in Portugal only for those over 6 months.
That is why some of us seek an Amendment No 56 to allow adjustments in this area on the advice of the Scientific Steering Committee rather than requiring fresh legislation to implement them.
Similarly, certain measures in combating TSEs have already proved effective.
I refer to the exclusion of animals over 30 months from the food chain, the slaughter and disposal of suspects and offspring of BSE cases, a fully effective feed ban and the removal of a wide range of specified risk materials.
Where such measures are in place, in seems unnecessary to impose the more technical requirement of the date-based export scheme and the certified animal scheme to the domestic market; hence, Amendment No 53.
In addition, given that there is no evidence of horizontal transmission of TSEs, there would seem to be no scientific requirement for whole-herd slaughter.
While accepting that some Member States may wish to engage in the practice, I would submit that it should not be compulsory.
Indeed, we take TSE and BSE very seriously in the United Kingdom.
We are committed to the safety of the public and to animal welfare.
We only ask that given that we have taken these measures which we believe to be effective, you do not ask to us to take additional measures which have no scientific justification for them.
Mr President, Mrs Roth-Behrendt' s report seeks to strengthen consumer protection measures but also to extend Parliament' s scope of action, by ensuring that all issues crucial to the prevention of TSEs are included in the regulatory instrument, not just in the annexes which are not covered by the codecision procedure.
This twofold concern seems to be particularly justified today, as French experience shows.
The fact is that considering the range of measures already undertaken, such as the ban on animal-protein meal for bovine animals, the incidence of mad cow disease in France should have started to decline, but this is not the case, and in fact the number of cases is on the increase.
It is this tendency which presents a problem right now, much more than the scale of the epidemic in quantitative terms.
The truth is, at the present time, there is quite simply no adequate explanation for it, hence the debate which has been initiated on the possible existence of alternative disease transmission routes of which we are, as yet, unaware.
Medical and scientific uncertainty still prevails.
In these circumstances, the precautionary principle must be adopted to the full.
All possible resources must be used in order to assess the BSE situation in the various countries, particularly including the development and systematic use of fast screening tests.
The development of BSE in France raises issues that are not purely medical in the narrowest sense.
This is nothing new.
From the very beginning, it has not been possible to give any explanation for the emergence of this disease and its transmission to human beings, and its spread internationally, without taking the key socio-economic factors into account: contemporary trends in the agro-industry, the subordination of producers and consumers to the dominating rationale of capitalistic profit.
Still today, the way in which the agro-industry is organised, and the fact that it is infiltrated by international mafia-like networks, make the fight to eradicate BSE and TSEs even more difficult.
No public health policy should ignore these factors.
They are, however, discussed only on rare occasions and in little detail by the European institutions, including Parliament.
Basically, BSE is one of those medical matters which, in practical and terribly human terms, bears witness to the acute nature of the choices that society makes, and that is yet another reason why preventing TSEs is a political matter to which Parliament' s responsibility is truly committed.
Mr President, as an MEP representing a farming area, I have first-hand experience of how devastating the BSE crisis has been to British agriculture.
I can also vouch for the necessity of maintaining effective controls.
You might therefore expect me to be enthusiastic about these new controls on BSE, but I am not.
We already have enough and I believe they are adequate and effective.
This proposal simply adds more red tape and costs to an already overburdened industry.
Of course, I have no objections to other countries adopting measures which match ours.
In fact, it would be helpful if measures already in place in the UK were implemented throughout the EU and elsewhere.
Thus it is not new laws we need - we need more compliance.
Until all Member States are able to assure us that there is full compliance, this proposal, if passed, will simply add to the list of laws which have not been implemented.
In any case, if more controls were needed, we should not be looking to the Commission for guidance.
The British BSE inquiry which was commissioned by the UK Government at a cost of £20 million is due to report in November.
We should wait to see what this inquiry says.
Mr President, first of all I should like to add my voice to the congratulations addressed to our rapporteurs, particularly Mrs Roth-Behrendt.
Her approach and hence her report is one we can wholeheartedly support.
This regulation is not a major revolution, but it does attempt nonetheless to afford a higher level of protection, based, moreover, on the most stringent practices adopted in specific European Union countries, such as in France.
I should, however, like to draw your attention to a number of specific points and, firstly, the existence of a third transmission route which is now practically certain.
I think it essential in this case to define suspect animals quite apart from the age criterion.
The age criterion ceases to be justified as soon as we are practically assured that this third transmission route does in fact exist.
The important thing, then, is to have systematic recourse to testing whenever an animal dies of unknown causes.
Systematic testing precludes fraud and makes it possible to offer better guarantees.
The issue of slaughtering herds has been discussed at length.
In both France and Germany the whole herd is slaughtered if a single animal is found to be diseased.
We know that this is not the practice in Great Britain, and that this is a solution which is vigorously opposed by our fellow Members from the United Kingdom.
But is it possible to put the argument of the costs of destroying a herd when a public health issue is involved?
I think this is not a tenable position.
It is important for the regulations of the various countries of the European Union to be harmonised.
I should, finally, like to talk about at-risk materials, these notorious substances which may present risks.
Once again, in France, a number of measures have been implemented, which have been more or less understood, but I am convinced that it is essential to be extremely vigilant and to apply the precautionary principle.
So this regulation is a good one.
It represents some progress, but it is capable of being perfected rather than perfect as it stands.
It does not raise any questions concerning the incineration of animal-based meal.
In some of our countries, we have stockpiles of such meal which we do not yet know how best to destroy, or which has not been destroyed sufficiently, and also animal-based meal used for swine and poultry.
I think, Commissioner, that these are questions we also have to ask.
Mr President, I asked to be allowed to speak again at the end of the debate - we are not quite at the end.
Allow me to say a few words on the debate.
I would like to thank the honourable Members who have spoken so far, and Mrs Doyle, Mr Goodwill and Mr Nicholson, who have yet to speak, for what they have to say and for the fair treatment we are giving each other.
Those who sat in Parliament during the last parliamentary term know that it is Parliament which has cause to be proud of having got a grip on the BSE disaster in the individual committees and in the House as a whole, in a way which cut across the political divide.
I tried at all times, as chair of the committee, to be fair to all the Member States, strict but fair, as my teachers always used to say to me, and I am trying to do the same now.
Allow me therefore to say a few words on some of the points raised.
Yes, Mr Trakatellis and others are right, Mr Staes.
We still have no tests for live animals.
We still have no tests for very early infection, which is why the Commission is being called upon to keep on working on this, and I know that it is doing so.
Of course we need that.
Mr Whitehead said quite clearly that safety must be a priority, but he would, of course, like the precautionary principle to be applied in equal measure in other Member States and that is the main point here.
To some members who have spoken or who have perhaps yet to speak I should like to state one thing quite clearly: we are legislating here for the whole of the European Union, for the 15 Member States with widely varying safety levels.
We are not legislating just for Great Britain.
We know that the data-based export scheme, that the OTS over-30-month scheme, that all these things are important and are working.
I am the first to recognise what Great Britain has achieved and at what price to farmers.
I have spoken to countless officials and farmers' representatives in Great Britain over recent years and I know that.
Nonetheless, I must ensure that this level of safety also applies to Italy, Germany and all the other countries in the European Union.
Which is why I believe that this regulation is a good regulation.
When Mrs Attwooll and others ask if we can have derogations for countries which are already that good and if they must still remove the spinal column, then I call on you, Mr Byrne, to table a proper list of derogations to the Council saying countries A, B, C and D comply and are exempt from certain measures.
I will be the first to support it.
But I do not want this to be rushed, as is the case with certain proposed amendments.
This is why I stand by the position which I described earlier.
I think that we really should stick with what we discussed in committee and with what Mrs Doyle and I have re-tabled.
This particularly applies to proposed Amendment No 56, to which Mrs Attwooll referred.
I will be the first to support this at second reading, if the Council makes the proposal, but we need to list clearly and to substantiate clearly where derogations are possible and under what conditions and for which Member State.
What must the Member State do to qualify?
And of course I support Mrs Grossetête: naturally, tests must be carried out on animals which have died from unknown causes but that is already included in the Commission' s proposal on the tests.
Mr President, at the outset I would like to add my thanks to Mrs Roth-Berendt and indeed Mr Böge for their commitment to this important issue.
For some time Parliament, the Commission and Member States have sought the introduction of common EU-wide rules to deal with the problems of TSEs such as BSE in cattle and scrapie in sheep.
The basis of this proposal is that the discovery of any TSE or the first incidence of BSE in a Member State would be covered by common rules which would take effect automatically.
To date, many of the actions taken to deal with BSE have been carried out on a unilateral basis by Members using national measures.
The TSE proposal being put forward includes, among other things, a requirement for educational programmes for farmers, vets and officials; the removal of a list of specified risk material, an active surveillance programme using rapid post-mortem tests; and the strengthening of the ban on the feeding of mammalian protein to ruminant animals.
The proposal also allows for the culling of animals and the compensation to farmers for loss of culled animals.
The principle of this approach cannot be faulted.
Common rules will enhance the protection of animal health and more importantly will ensure protection of the consumer by ensuring that the highest standards of disease prevention and eradication are put in place in every Member State and can be activated when appropriate.
These rules will form a blueprint that can be followed in the event of any new scientific information being made available or if more radical action is required.
However, I am aware, Commissioner, that the vast majority of Member States are of the opinion that the classification of countries for SRM removal purposes should be based on an internationally recognised code set out and agreed by the EU and the many - over 150 third countries - under the auspices of the OIE, the World Organisation of Animal Health, which is based in Paris.
Most Member States are uneasy about the approach being taken by the scientific sub-groups and would prefer a more open and transparent system of classification as set out in the OIE code which is recognised and accepted by countries worldwide.
This view was made plain in Council working groups and was reflected in the final draft Presidency Proposal, a draft that is supported by the vast majority of Member States.
For the purpose of agreement and the speedy implementation of this regulation and hopefully to avoid a lengthy conciliation process, the use of common OIE criteria would be appropriate.
Having discussed this with Mrs Roth-Berendt, we have tabled Amendment No 51 to Article 5 as a compromise to this effect.
I welcome the principle of laying down common rules for the prevention and control of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
However, this proposal may have negative consequences for countries trading in sheep and this is an important point as it currently stands.
There is a view that there should be separate rules for scrapie rather than the current mix of rules where the treatment of SRM in sheep depends on the BSE incidence in that particular country.
I would reiterate in conclusion my support for the use of OIE provisions to have an internationally recognised basis for classification, a basis supported by 150 countries in resolving world trade disputes and recognised by the WTO.
I make no case for leniency of treatment at all.
The UK would be in class 4, Ireland would be in class 3 under either classification system, the SSC or the OIE.
The OIE meets next week in Paris to consider amendments to their classification system and consequently I hope to bring further amendments to this regulation for second reading.
Mr President, legislation which seeks to protect the public from a terrible brain disease such as new variant CJD should be drafted to complement measures already in place in Member States, to recognise the stage of the epidemic that we are at and have due regard to the body of scientific knowledge we have built up.
The United Kingdom already has comprehensive and effective measures in place to protect human health and eradicate BSE in our herd.
This is working.
Cases of BSE are declining rapidly.
But most importantly, so far, we have not had a case in an animal born since the complete feed ban was introduced.
That should be happening around about now, if it was going to.
No older animals over 30 months of age enter the food chain.
It is likely that cases may occur due to maternal transmission but these will be isolated and not feed-related, and there is no justification for a return to cohort culling.
Incidentally - and Mrs Grossetête referred to this - there has been recent press speculation about a third possible infection route through grass contaminated by faecal material.
This only applies - as I understand - to animals excreting pathogens ingested with contaminated feed, not, as some newspapers inferred, from animals incubating or suffering from this disease.
I am concerned about the practicality and cost of having to post-mortem all animals for which the cause of death is unknown.
Very large numbers of animals die of natural causes or common ailments.
BSE is a degenerative disease which does not cause sudden death anyway.
Amendment No 26 seeks universally to impose the whole-herd slaughter policy which some Member States with low levels of incidence have introduced in an attempt to reassure the public.
This could well result in the under-reporting of cases, as we have seen in Switzerland recently.
BSE is not an infectious disease that is transmitted horizontally.
Whole-herd slaughter has no scientific justification.
The majority of herds that have experienced BSE in the UK have had only one or two isolated cases.
Most herds in Britain are not closed herds and therefore animals come in from all over the place.
If one of those animals gets a disease, why kill the whole herd?
Whole-herd slaughter is not an effective way of reducing cases of BSE.
It would cost a small fortune for no tangible benefit.
I hope Parliament, in amending this directive, will do so in the light of sound scientific advice, not as a knee-jerk reaction to tabloid newspaper scare stories.
It is my pleasure to give the floor to a Member of Parliament who received the title of Great Chief of Rangatira, when he led our delegation to New Zealand.
Mr President, I will omit replying to that particular remark.
Can I first of all thank you very much for giving me the floor and can I pay tribute to the rapporteur and indeed to Mr Böge.
As someone who was in the last Parliament I know how much thankless time and effort they have put in since BSE first began in a very difficult area to try and find a resolution and a way forward to help everyone in a very sensible way.
I think both of them not only take credit for themselves but indeed bring credit to this Parliament for the way in which they have carried out that duty.
BSE has unfortunately been with us for some considerable time and I suspect that we have to recognise that it will probably be with us for some years ahead.
We have to try to find ways by which we can control the disease of BSE and TSE and at the same time create the consumer confidence that is needed because consumer confidence has been lost.
With respect to Mr Martinez I will only say one word to him - sludge.
I will say no more as far as that is concerned.
Everybody has problems in the European Union of one type or the other and no-one should try to make or take advantage of the other's problem.
However, whatever we do, we should not overburden the producer because he has already been considerably overburdened.
As to the argument whether you slaughter the whole of the herd, there is no scientific evidence to say you should.
There are many instances in my area where maybe BSE occurred five, six or seven years ago in one animal and there has never been another case since.
Once we get to the stage where we have a vaccine or some way of identifying or testing if an animal has BSE, then there is an argument for testing the rest of the herd and if there is a trigger level whereby it goes beyond that, then the whole herd should be taken out.
But it would be wilful carnage to simply go in and slaughter good animals in the thought or the notion that BSE may possibly be in the whole herd.
That would be a drastic approach.
One other point: where I come from, in recent years there has been a continuing downward trend.
Indeed, in Northern Ireland last year, we only had, I think, three identifiable cases of BSE and the projection for this year is one or at worst maybe two.
I was listening to what the rapporteur said that if there are clear reasons then she would agree for areas that have low instances of BSE to have certain controls and mechanisms.
That is an important thing to recognise because in my area farmers feel very secure because of the very low instances we have of BSE and because of the strict controls that we have monitored and made sure worked over recent years.
That is perhaps why our situation is much better than the rest of the United Kingdom.
This is an area which has to be looked at in the months ahead - we must create the confidence within ourselves that we can begin to move forward as we begin, hopefully, to see the back of the TSE/BSE problem.
Mr President, I would like to join in the congratulations to the rapporteur on her excellent report.
The report that we now have before us is an example of the kind of issue which requires of us the ability to demonstrate that the European Parliament places public health before internal market considerations.
The EC Treaty - for instance, Article 30 and points 4 and 8 of Article 95 of that Treaty - presents us with both the opportunity and the duty to do so.
The priority is to protect consumer health, particularly against diseases like TSE, the mode of infection of which is not adequately known and the testing of which so far is only possible after the symptoms have developed.
Secondarily - and this is justified by the notion of the internal market - we must be able to restore consumer confidence in the foods on the market in order to enable the market to function with a minimum of disruption.
Both issues are important, but we must be able to show clearly the priority of values; public health comes first.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has adopted a position that allows both of these objectives to be met.
One important aspect of this view is the whole-herd slaughter on a farm where disease has been discovered.
Even without knowledge of whether any of the other animals have become infected, this action is nevertheless justifiable, precisely in order for the above objectives to be met.
At the same time, we must, of course, ensure that the breeder receives proper compensation for his livestock.
In addition, the internal market must be able to operate in such a way that the spread of the disease is checked, and so that Member States, where no disease has yet occurred, can rely on the Community to protect the animal population of those States.
In the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, I prepared a proposal for an amendment on this matter myself, stating as reasons for the issue specifically the above-mentioned prioritisation of values, where public health is the first.
This objective has now been met in the Committee report - in a slightly different, but nevertheless satisfactory manner.
Extending the period referred to in the Annex to the Regulation (the scrapie-free period) from two years to six, may be an adequate means of ensuring that the imported animals and processed material are risk-free, and of preventing the spread of the disease to countries where it does not yet exist.
Contrary to the Commission' s proposal, the report refers to instant tests, which are being used to detect TSE, by name.
This in itself is acceptable, but we must bear in mind that we are dealing with a technology which is continually being developed.
Hopefully, better tests than the current ones will soon be available, and when the time comes, it will be important that the currently approved regulations are kept up to date with the advances in technology.
Mr President, I am pleased to outline our position on your amendments to our proposed regulation on the prevention and control of TSEs.
I wish to begin by thanking you for the excellent cooperation between your assistants and my services.
Due to this thorough preparation I am in a position today to agree in full or in part to almost three-quarters of your proposed amendments.
Furthermore, most of the amendments, which I am not in a position to accept, relate to two issues: the so-called "whereas" clauses - that is the recitals - and whether or not changes to certain provisions of the regulation should be by commitology or codecision.
That is an issue which I have referred to before.
I know it is a controversial issue and I look forward to discussing this particular issue in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development which is scheduled for July.
In substance, therefore, the Commission and Parliament are equally committed to a strong regulation which puts in place a comprehensive framework to tackle TSEs.
I should like especially to thank Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Böge for their huge contribution to this proposal.
I can think of no other individuals who have made such a positive contribution to tackling BSE.
They have both rendered an enormous service to the health protection of Europe's citizens.
I might also add that this piece of legislation is an excellent example of the good work and cooperation which has taken place between our two institutions and could provide a precedent for the future.
I turn now to the specific amendments and formal Commission position.
Firstly, on commitology, we accept Amendments Nos 6, 11, 12, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36.
With regard to the recitals, I also accept Amendments Nos 3, 4 and 5.
However, I cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 and 2 because it is inappropriate to introduce recitals in a piece of legislation which are not matched by substantive provisions in the text.
However, I shall be raising your concerns on pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, which a number of you mentioned, with my colleague Mr Liikanen and I will ask him to address those concerns.
With regard to the articles themselves, firstly, the scope: I accept Amendments Nos 7 and 8.
With regard to definitions: I can partly accept Amendments No 9 to Article 13 on the definition of TSE suspected animals.
But the inclusion of "fallen cattle, sheep and goats" in the definition cannot be accepted.
It is not practicable to collect, incinerate and carry out a full epidemiological investigation on each fallen animal.
The Commission will, however, be monitoring the situation closely both through the recently agreed measures on random testing for BSE and in the forthcoming proposal on animal waste.
However, I accept Amendment No 52.
I also accept Amendments Nos 10 and 49 to Article 3, with a slight reformulation to create the possibility of delegating the evaluation, not the approval, of tests to an external body.
With regard to classification, BSE status: I accept Amendments Nos 13, 14, 51 and 58.
With regard to epidemiological surveillance: I accept Amendment No 15 to Article 7, introducing the mandatory use of the rapid diagnostic tests in the annual monitoring programme.
Let me add, however, in passing, that we will keep under constant review the scope for increased testing of animals for BSE.
On specified risk material: unfortunately I cannot accept Amendments Nos 16, 17, 18, 40 and 41 to Article 8, bringing under codecision the approval and conditions for use of rapid diagnostic tests.
I happen to believe that it is essential to maintain the flexibility of the commitology procedure.
Nor can I accept that tests should be capable of detecting infectivity in all products and at all stages of the disease.
That is the advice I have been given.
I partly accept Amendment No 19 to Article 8, requesting a review of the age limits for SRM removal under a commitology procedure.
I cannot, however, accept the restraint of annual reviews and, in particular, the proposed deadline for the first review which is foreseen for 1 January next, which is too soon.
I also accept Amendment No 20 to Article 8, which brings under codecision the principle of granting derogations from the provisions on SRM removal in high-risk areas or for taking account of an effective feed ban.
I also welcome Amendments Nos 38, 39 and 56 to Annex IV.
They mainly propose no longer requiring the designation of long bones of cattle as SRM and suggest a reformulation of the proposed derogation for the removal of a vertebral column under a commitology procedure.
On feed ban, I accept Amendments Nos 22 and 42.
I can partly accept Amendments Nos 21 and 57 on condition that the possibility of extending the feed ban is allowed, irrespective of risk status.
I also partly accept Amendment No 54 to Annex V, laying down the detailed rules on the extended feed ban.
I cannot accept the derogation for dicalcium phosphate, as this is against our scientific advice.
I also cannot accept the limitation of extending the feed ban to any species, mainly pet animals, only if a risk of cross-contamination of livestock feed exists, as we believe that ruminant protein should be banned for all susceptible species.
I identify cats here in particular.
That is the advice I have been given in relation to cats.
I can partly accept Amendment No 50 to Annex V where it exempts gelatine from hides from the ban.
However, I cannot accept the exemption for feeding cats with ruminant protein from the ban.
I also cannot accept Amendment No 23 to Article 9, ensuring immediate application of the feed prohibitions, as this amendment does not fully make sense legally.
On disease eradication: I accept Amendments Nos 25 and 28.
I also welcome Amendment No 24 to Article 11, but propose to reformulate, providing for "regular" rather than "immediate" notification.
I can also partly accept Amendment No 26 to Article 13 and Amendment No 43 to Annex VII, introducing whole-herd slaughter for BSE in cattle, sheep and goats and, secondly, excluding research animals from these provisions.
Whole-herd slaughter for BSE only, not for scrapie, is acceptable to me on condition of approval of equivalent measures by commitology.
I cannot accept the second part of this amendment as it is in fact superfluous.
I can partly accept Amendment No 44 on condition that the equivalent measures are approved on a case-by-case basis under commitology.
I do not accept Amendment No 27 to Article 13, requiring a complete standstill on a holding with a confirmed TSE case, as I consider the extremely strict conditions of our proposals are already sufficient, as they require measures to be taken under strict, official veterinary supervision, duly certified.
I also cannot accept Amendment No 37 to Annex II, as the proposed definition is not used elsewhere in the text and is, in addition, inadequate for TSE control purposes.
I should add that ADNS regions are too small and too difficult to control.
Bigger regions which are legally defined may be possible, for instance the Azores, and I refer to what Mr Nicholson said earlier about Northern Ireland.
On the conditions for marketing animals: we welcome the intention of Amendment No 53 to Article 16.
However, I propose to reformulate the text to ensure approval of the equivalent schemes by commitology.
I also welcome the intention of Amendment No 45 to Annex VIII, but would ask for flexibility to determine the exact duration of the scrapie-free period.
I cannot accept Amendment No 55 to Annex VIII, reducing the protection measures against scrapie.
Furthermore, I cannot accept Amendment No 46 to Annex VIII, extending the ban on placing on the market offspring of TSE cases, for lack of scientific support.
Finally, on laboratory techniques, I accept Amendments Nos 47 and 48.
Thank you again for your cooperation.
I sincerely hope that this will continue to be a hugely important proposal and that we shall continue our cooperation on it.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Organisation of working time
The next item is the report (A5-0129/2000), on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council directive 93/104/EC concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time to cover sectors and activities excluded from that directive [C5-0183//2000 - 1998/0318(COD)].
As President for today' s sitting, it is my honour to inaugurate a new procedure.
Before giving the floor to our rapporteur, Mrs Smet, we are going to hear from Mr Provan in his capacity as chairman of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee.
Mr President, as you say, this is a new procedure and I hope that it helps to establish in Parliament the importance of the conciliation procedure in achieving legislation to which Parliament has aspired.
I want to say today how much I enjoyed the support and the great help of the rapporteur and the Chairman of the Employment and Social Affairs Committee.
Mrs Smet, our rapporteur, was President of the Council of Ministers when the original Working Time Directive was enacted.
Mr Rocard is a former very well-known French minister and indeed Prime Minister.
We had an exceedingly strong team which Parliament was able to deploy in the negotiations with the Council and I am extremely grateful to both of them.
Parliament should be extremely grateful to both of them - especially the rapporteur for all the work that she put into this negotiation.
The delegation also had a great responsibility in this negotiation because we had many difficult decisions to take.
We did not achieve everything that we wanted to achieve as a Parliament, but I think we went a long way towards helping all those people who are now going to be included within the Working Time Directive to see some progress so that they can eventually get to the goal that we were all trying to achieve.
If we take, for instance, the junior doctors, we discover that Parliament originally wanted a six-year period in which to achieve the 48 hours.
That was never likely to be negotiated with the Council, but we were able to make substantial progress from the Council's original proposal of 13 years.
Indeed, we finished up with a nine-year period.
Only in extreme circumstances will governments be able to go through a procedure to justify an extension of that period of nine years.
The interesting thing in this aspect is that we are making real progress on reducing the time of work for junior doctors.
As many people will be aware, today, many junior doctors are working 72 hours in some countries.
The progress that we are making is that in the first three years, the junior doctors' hours will be reduced to 58 and over the following two years to 56 hours and 52 hours respectively.
We see that the junior doctors are, in fact, going to get a great benefit from this extension to the directive.
We also were able to clarify the position regarding the classification of mobile workers.
The case was argued that, for instance, somebody driving a lorry for a large retail store should be included in retail-type legislation for working time, and only genuine transport workers are now going to fall exclusively within the transport sector.
That, I think, was another major achievement for Parliament in this negotiation.
We move on to the fishermen who were greatly concerned by the application of this directive to their working life because they felt they would not be able to operate properly within that system.
In all honour to everybody concerned in the negotiation, the Council and all Members of the delegation, they have made real progress and I recommend the outcome of the conciliation process to the House and hope they support it.
Thank you, Mr Provan.
I think we can in fact thank all the Members of Parliament that were involved in this conciliation procedure.
Mr President, I would first of all like to thank the President, Mr Provan, for his kind words, but particularly for the way in which he, together with Mr Rocard, has presided over and guided the entire process.
I would also like to thank all the delegates, as it would indeed be impossible to find a compromise on a number of difficult and sensitive issues, if it was not for the fact that everyone moderated their demands, and this is what eventually happened.
My thanks go to all of you.
The vote in the European Parliament tomorrow and in the Council the day after will provisionally end a decade of European legislation concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time.
I am adding "provisionally" , because although a number of sectors and activities are already covered by conclusive horizontal legislation, the vertical rules are still pending.
The best way to establish these vertical rules is via collective labour agreements, but if these collective labour agreements are not forthcoming, then the Commission will need to take the initiative and propose draft directives.
This has already happened in the case of road transport.
The European Parliament has made its position clear but it appears that the Council is unable to adopt the common position.
This is intolerable, really intolerable, because road transport is one of the key sectors, there are many difficulties within that sector and because so many accidents happen within the Member States due to a lack of legislation and control.
I would call on the Council and both sides of industry finally to resolve this matter.
Since no draft directive has been proposed for inland shipping yet, I would ask the Commission to work on that.
Fortunately, agreements have now been concluded within aviation, navigation at sea and also rail transport, which have been translated into directives.
Like rail transport, the sea-fishing and off-shore sectors, as well as the activities of junior doctors, fall within the scope of the directive which we are discussing today.
For the sea-fishing sector, the European Parliament managed to secure a maximum working week of 48 hours, over a twelve-month reference period.
Exemptions are only possible under a collective labour agreement or following consultation involving both sides of industry.
It is indeed necessary to provide for these exemptions, because not only do sea fishermen stay at sea for extended periods of time, in certain countries even 3 000 hours on average annually, they also carry out heavy work at what is by far the most mobile of workplaces.
Regarding junior doctors, I would refer to what Mr Provan said, because he explained quite clearly what we eventually achieved.
The main thing is that those countries that want a transitional period in excess of nine years will need to follow a very demanding procedure in order to achieve this.
The reason why they want to have an extended transitional period and the decision which is eventually taken have to be published in the EU' s Official Journal.
I hope that this procedure will create a disincentive for those countries because we do not intend to carry on applying the number of working hours prescribed for longer than nine years.
In 1993, when I, in the capacity of President of the Council, signed the directive concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time, I was aware that the Commission' s proposal of 1990 did not exclude any sectors or activities.
But at the time, it appeared impossible for the Council to draw up a directive which covered all employees in all sectors and activities.
Hence the Commission proposed to take a separate and additional initiative for the benefit of those sectors and activities which were excluded from the Council' s directive.
That culminated in the 1997 White Paper and the 1998 consultation paper and communication.
The present directive is the first to be born out of negotiations in a Conciliation Committee within the framework of the European social policy, with the European Parliament acting as co-legislator.
The power of codecision proved to be decisive.
I think we owe our success, the fact that we eventually reached a sound compromise, to Parliament, among other things, which in its wisdom, only tabled a few amendments.
Indeed, had we found ourselves in a conciliation procedure faced with 30 or 40 amendments tabled by Parliament, it would have been extremely difficult ever to reach a compromise.
In this case, we managed to keep the procedure within bounds.
As such, the European Parliament gave evidence of a legislative maturity, which the Council and the Intergovernmental Conference, in particular, would do well not to lose sight of.
Mr President, as British Conservatives, we have always opposed the Working Time Directive.
The idea that politicians in Brussels or Strasbourg should determine how many hours different people work across Europe is, we believe, fundamentally daft.
To extend it to groups such as offshore oil workers and sea fishermen is particularly so.
However, because of the special issue of over-worked junior doctors in the UK, as Conservative MEPs we voted last November to extend the directive to them.
We very much hoped that this would pressure national governments - especially our own - to produce a better deal.
Certainly Parliament as a whole was of similar mind, hence the Conciliation Committee on which I was privileged to serve.
I extend congratulations to you, Mr President, in your former capacity as president of that conciliation group - plus Mrs Smet and Mr Rocard.
I believe in the circumstances we could not have done any better, but those three played a major role in that.
I should briefly like to mention a point made by some of my colleagues from that delegation.
I hope other nationals will forgive me if I mention only other British colleagues, for a reason that will become apparent.
The first speaker in the main meeting was Mr Hughes.
I am not known for agreeing with him regularly but I congratulate him on the intensity of what he said which set the meeting off to a very good start.
He was followed by Mrs Lynne - also due to speak today - who reinforced what was said with great vigour.
I mention that because, when it came to my turn to speak, it enabled me, as a British delegate from a third party, to speak in support, despite the fact that all three parties have many different policies on different issues.
The fact that I could say that on this issue we were speaking as one and it was a cross-party alliance hopefully helped to reinforce the overall message and the will of Parliament.
One of my colleagues afterwards said that point was a powerful intervention.
Certainly it was meant to be.
Imagine my disappointment after the meeting when an official came up to me and said that while I was making those points on behalf of Parliament another Member also from the UK was busy shaking his head negatively the whole time that I was speaking.
That will not have strengthened our case.
It may or may not have made any difference but certainly it will not have done the Parliamentary delegation any good service.
A few weeks later, we did the best that we could.
It will be presented - as you, President, have already presented it - as "nine years".
But it is, as you know, nine years, plus two years, plus one year.
The UK Government will add that up to twelve years as against the 13 years which the UK Government was asking for initially.
Having only got what we consider minor concessions, we can confirm that, as British Conservatives, we neither support the Working Time Directive nor its extension to any other grouping.
We still support a better deal for junior doctors; we will still continue to pressure our own government to provide it, but a directive from the European Parliament is clearly not the right way to secure it.
I would like to begin by echoing previous speakers and adding my words of thanks to the rapporteur and to our chairman and to you for the magnificent work you did in that conciliation.
The progress we achieved is in large part thanks to the formidable effort and attention to detail the rapporteur put in to this.
There are three main issues which I would like to concentrate on in the brief time available to me.
In the original working time directive we had agreed way back in 1993 that it would be possible to introduce annualisation of working time for categories of workers, but only where collective agreements allowed that to happen.
The first two points I would like to make relate to categories of workers where we have managed to achieve that progress in the conciliation.
As far as offshore workers and mobile workers in the transport sector are concerned - there was an attempt in the common position to allow annualisation of working time for those workers without collective agreement.
Thanks to conciliation, collective agreement will now need to be the route for an extension to annualisation.
That was an important point of progress.
The second point concerns sea-fishing.
There we have now built in to the directive the principle that a 48-hour average working week over a period of one year will be the rule.
That can be subject to derogation but again only after attempts to broker collective agreements to involve the social partners.
That should be the rule wherever there is an attempt to introduce annualisation and that principle has been safeguarded as a result of the conciliation.
The third area I want to concentrate on - and it is what other speakers have mentioned - relates to junior doctors.
Looking at this part of the agreement without detailed knowledge of the negotiations that went into it, it must seem like a very strange animal.
A four-year transposition period - five years transition and then the possibility of extra time beyond that.
But of course that was to take account of the special difficulties facing one or two Member States.
I would repeat what other speakers have said: for us the period in question is nine years.
That will be the normal period within which Member States will be expected to comply with the requirements of this directive in relation to junior doctors.
That is why the procedure to go beyond that into what we might term extra time is so open - in a way humiliating for any government that attempts to take that step.
I think that in fact we will see all Member States complying with that section of the directive relating to junior doctors within that nine-year time frame.
I am confident, speaking today, that will be the case.
A further important point might have been missed.
The provisions relating to nine years for junior doctors only relate to the average working week.
The other provisions of the directive relating to daily and weekly rest breaks, annual leave and nightwork will, of course, apply to junior doctors after a three-year transposition period just as they do for all other workers.
Those parts of the directive can, of course, be subject to derogation but only by collective agreement so those elements will apply to junior doctors.
The sections dealing with annual leave cannot be negotiated away and it is important to bear that in mind: i.e. the nine years for junior doctors applies only to working time - average weekly working time - and the other provisions of the directive apply after three years.
The final point I would like to make relates to the transport dossier.
It is very important that we get movement in that area in the Transport Council.
Maybe the Commissioner has some news for us today.
There was an agreement in the rail sector that the provisions of the working time directive would apply in that sector so long as there was parallel progress in other transport sectors, particularly the road sector.
Unless we get progress in that sector, I am quite certain we are going to see a problem for the rail sector.
The agreement will not be implemented in the near future at national level.
Mr President, I would also like to add my thanks to Mrs Smet in particular for doing an excellent job of work on the working time directive and also, of course, to Mr Rocard and to you, yourself.
I would agree with Philip Bushill-Matthews as well.
I think the strength of having all-party support throughout the UK on our delegation was very, very useful.
I would like to talk specifically about junior doctors.
I am very pleased that they are going to be brought in line with the working time directive.
There are 270 000 junior doctors across the EU who will be affected by this.
50.1% in my constituency work over 72 hours a week as do 10 000 in the UK as a whole.
You can see from those figures that it is extremely important that all Member States actually meet those objectives and I mean the nine-year objective.
The present situation is not good for patients or doctors alike - they have our life in their hands.
We would not want to be treated by a drunken doctor and I do not believe that we should be treated by an over-tired doctor.
Evidence proves that somebody who is impaired by tiredness is impaired in the same way as drunkenness.
The British Medical Association was saying that 15% of junior doctors were leaving the profession citing stress, overwork and length of hours.
A lot of those were going to Australia and New Zealand where the working practices were better.
We have to stop that drain.
The nine-year timetable, of course, is an improvement on what the Council of Ministers wanted.
It is made up of four years' implementation and five years to bring down the working time from 58 to 48 hours.
It is far better than what the Council wanted which was the 13-year period.
I, of course, would have preferred a shorter time.
As I have said before, our life is in their hands and it is important that we get this right.
The UK Government, of course, was part of the problem.
They maintain that they cannot achieve the reduction in this timescale.
I believe that they are wrong and that is why we have the extension for two years and also the extension after that for one year.
But as everyone else has said, it has to be in exceptional circumstances.
There must be rigorous notification and justification procedures and I hope that the British Government, and other Member State governments who feel that they can delay further by seeking two years and then another will feel so embarrassed that they will not seek to do so and meet the goal in nine years.
It is not twelve years - it is nine years and we must state that very, very clearly.
It is long enough - I would have liked it to have been shorter, but let us hope the governments, and the British Government in particular, adhere to that.
Mr President, I must apologise for this appearing to be a British show at this moment.
I assure you that it does change with the next speaker.
I also would like to thank Mrs Smet, our rapporteur, for the excellent work that she has done throughout this entire process.
With the support that she has received from Mr Rocard and from yourself, she has managed to make progress in face of the tensions between the high expectations of those whose lives will be affected by these decisions, some six million workers, and the difficulties and some intransigence presented by certain Member States.
I speak as my group's representative on that parliamentary delegation and I know what I have seen.
This is a health and safety issue, as has been said, for both the workers concerned and for the public.
While I recognise, like others, that junior doctors are not the only group affected, this issue has proved the most difficult.
I have been deeply concerned at some of the arguments put forward by certain governments which have said that other aspects of health provision could be threatened if the reduction of working time for this group was brought in more quickly.
I cannot understand why it is less important for these workers to have reasonable working conditions and hours than any other group of health workers.
I want to know whether junior doctors in some countries are some sort of superhuman who can do without adequate rest and who will not harm their own health or that of their patients in the process.
The mother of one such trainee doctor said to me recently that she had been writing to the British Prime Minister and his wife, Tony and Cherie, to ask if they would be happy if their new baby were to be delivered by a tired, stressed-out doctor in a semi-drunken condition as that described by Mrs Lynne.
I consider that would be a real health and safety issue requiring rapid action.
As we have all said, we must be clear that nine years has to be seen as an absolute limit, that anything more is an aberration.
Any country not managing that should not be surprised if they find their staff moving elsewhere, to countries which have managed to implement more modern working conditions.
The stepped approach which has been brought in must not be used to simply give a redefinition of working time such as removing meal breaks or time spent on call but not actually treating patients.
That would simply be following the bad practices recently tried out by certain burger chains.
However, at least some of those chains pay their part-time 17-year-old staff more per hour than some junior doctors get in overtime payment.
I would like to congratulate in advance those Member States that will meet their obligations under this directive for all sectors.
The progress of others will be monitored very carefully.
I acknowledge the Commission's role in this and hope that the Commissioner at that time will show the same commitment as that shown by Mrs Diamantopoulou.
Regretfully I am not sure that my group will be able to fully support the proposals overall despite the improvements that Mrs Smet and the Parliament team have been able to obtain in this very difficult situation.
Mr President, I too want to thank and congratulate Mrs Smet on an excellent piece of work in the Conciliation Committee and also on her report.
I also want to thank other key people such as Mr Provan and Mr Rocard.
They have played an important role.
The Parliamentary delegation was basically very much in agreement, even though we differed in our willingness to compromise when it came to the crunch.
It was, of course, important to solve problems.
The idea was that seven million people should be brought within the scope of the directive.
When I learned that the whole thing was to go off without a hitch, that is to say that there was to be an agreement, I nonetheless took the liberty of voting against.
I wanted to make the point that, in spite of everything, I was not satisfied with everything in this compromise.
I was especially critical of the agreement when it came to the issue of young doctors.
If the decision is interpreted as it already has been by some people in this debate, namely as saying that the transposition and transitional periods for doctors should add up to nine years and that there should, above and beyond that, be the possibility of an additional three years' extra time, then we arrive at a total period of twelve years.
This is really little different from the Council' s position, involving thirteen years.
There was, therefore, not so much of a compromise on that particular point.
I think this is a serious matter, because it is about patients having to suffer and about doctors being placed in impossible situations, from both moral and personal points of view.
Young doctors do not choose these working conditions and working hours but are forced to accept them.
I thought it was appropriate for at least someone in this Parliament to use his voting right for the purpose of indicating this dissatisfaction.
I now hope to see the three extra years become a facility which cannot be counted upon but which is only granted in really exceptional cases.
The intention expressed by this Chamber has, of course, been that, where junior doctors are concerned, the period for implementing the present directive should be nine years and that the three extra years should only apply in extreme and exceptional cases.
Naturally, we hope that, in reality, the process will be still more rapid.
We also want, in the future, to see the working time directive apply to those groups which have still not been brought within its scope.
In common with Mr Hughes, I should like to ask the Commission a question regarding these groups.
How far has the work progressed when it comes to the transport sector and lorry drivers?
I want to conclude by saying that, on more than one occasion, the European Parliament has shown itself to be a significant force where working time legislation in Europe is concerned.
I hope that this will continue.
It is not just a question of establishing longest permitted working times but of a good deal else besides.
There are ever more differences in the way in which working time is distributed in our society.
For young families, the difficulty of reconciling full-time work with family and children is becoming ever greater.
Working time puts the squeeze on women and children, in particular.
It is also an issue relating to age and to where one is in one' s life.
Young and old have different needs and different abilities.
We need a whole series of changes to working time policy, and it is my hope that it will be possible for the European Parliament to come back with more initiatives in this area.
Mr President, I join in the congratulations to all involved with this matter.
Rather than reiterate what other colleagues have said, I think the core issue is the junior doctors in training.
Obviously, whilst nine years is not the perfect solution which Parliament originally sought, it is the best possible compromise.
It is incumbent on us to send out a clear message that we would expect every government in the European Union to comply fully with the nine years.
Even though I know there are rigorous tests and standards as to whether or not an extension would be granted, it should only be granted in the most exceptional circumstances and not for any willy-nilly ideology.
In addition, as Mr Hughes pointed out, the other parts of the entitlements come into force immediately.
Even though the overall reduction in working hours may be postponed for some time, the actual rest-period times and so on come into force immediately.
I shall just deal very briefly with two other points concerning the whole working time directive.
Firstly, concerning fishermen, there is some attempt to compromise within the proposals before us.
However, it is a notoriously difficult area to enforce because of outside conditions, such as bad weather, that will affect the way fishermen operate.
Perhaps we should review this at some stage in the near future and look at it anew to try to come up with a better solution.
Secondly, transport workers: when we already have tachograph legislation in place, why do we need to bring in a separate and new directive on transport workers, in particular lorry drivers and so on?
Perhaps now is the time to look at this afresh.
New technology - in particular digital tachographs and individual smart cards for individual drivers on the tachograph - could be the best way to regulate the hours during which drivers are on the road and at work.
It will also ensure that they can have equal benefits with every other worker in the Union.
Finally, I wish to pay my compliments once again to Mrs Smet.
I have one small, further request to the Commissioner.
Perhaps now is the time, after we have agreed this conciliation and brought this new piece of legislation into being, to carry out an impact assessment on how the existing legislation is working, whether it is of benefit to the workers - increasing their health and safety - and whether it is increasing employment, which is one of the original arguments behind it.
Mr President, I too would like to convey my heartfelt thanks to everyone who took part in the negotiations on our side, especially the rapporteur but also you yourself and Mr Rocard, as well as other members of the negotiation delegation.
I would like also to extend warm thanks to the Commission, particularly for their declaration on working on Sundays.
This was a major obstacle for us, mainly because the Commission had skirted this thorny issue a little too easily in the past.
The declaration was therefore a great help to us.
I would like to say one thing to the representatives of the GUE/NGL Group and the Greens.
If you vote against this compromise - and I would understand if you did, because I myself find nine years for junior doctors far too long - you will then be against everything, in effect.
If this line were to be taken across the board, and if Parliament were to say "no" , then we would not have a solution in nine years, or ninety years.
If it were up to the British Government - we heard this quite clearly in the negotiations - it could well be 50 years and maybe longer before they resolve this issue.
The first problem was that they appeared unable to train a sufficient number of doctors.
If, therefore, you do not train sufficient doctors, you need to obtain them from other countries.
If this plan fails too, then the whole procedure could take a very long time.
If this is not something you want, then you need to approve this directive now, obviously with the reservation that it is an empty exercise - I am still convinced of this - and junior doctors should not need to be in this exemption position at all.
That is the problem.
I have one question for the Commission.
It concerns the other matters at issue, specifically that of transport.
I would like to know how the Commission intends to deal with this.
It is now up to the Commission.
The working time directive will not be complete until these issues have been resolved.
The ball is now quite clearly in the Commission' s court.
The Transport Council is behaving badly.
Transport conjures up images of action and movement, but the Transport Council must be the most inactive of all councils and does absolutely nothing.
I wonder if the Commission can think of a way to resolve this.
Failing this, Mr President, we should seriously consider taking legal action against the Transport Council, as was done very successfully a couple of years ago before the Court.
More of this later.
Finally, Mr President, one of the first people to propose working time legislation was Winston Churchill.
That was a key moment in history, not only in the history of Great Britain, but also in the history of Europe as a whole, because in the Netherlands too, we adopted this legislation without questioning it.
That makes it all the easier to bring this directive about.
We thus have the feeling that we are in a way completing Winston Churchill' s work with this directive, especially if we bear in mind that he did at least manage to bring a terrible war to a successful end in five years, while the present British Government would not even be capable of resolving the problem of junior doctors in 50 years.
He - more than anyone - should be in our thoughts when dealing with this subject matter.
Mr President, for me it has been a real privilege - and a surprise - to attend this conciliation procedure and to witness first hand the resistance and difficulties we have had to face in order to make progress.
This is demonstrated by the excellent work of Mrs Smet, and also Mr Provan and Mr Rocard.
I would also like to thank the Commissioner, Mrs Diamantopoulou, her department and so many people - also the Portuguese Presidency - who have allowed Parliament, like Churchill, to set a milestone in the construction of a social and more humanitarian Europe.
I am convinced that there is another reason for recommending that Parliament vote in favour of this report: the difficulties we have faced in making progress with regard to certain governments.
I will be truly happy to see these sectors, which were excluded from the 1993 directive, provided with a recognised European regulation on working time, even if it does involve long and protracted timescales.
However, we should not be dazzled by the light.
There is no doubt that public opinion - and I too am concerned about this public opinion - does not understand why these procedures are so slow and why, with regard to the problem of young doctors or fishermen, we have not been able to make any progress.
It is not acceptable - since we all agree that we cannot continue to ask these young doctors to work these exhausting hours and that we cannot continue to put our patients at risk - that we have not been able to make speedier progress.
I hope that, in fact, the timescale will be nine years and not thirteen years, although it pains me to say that, as a Spaniard, I feel restricted by the fact that it has been my government which has insisted most on having this additional period.
They may have requested this additional period, but we should take great care to ensure that they do not use it.
Lastly, I would like to ask the Commissioner and the Commission, to monitor closely the application of the directive, so that in nine years time they do not ask for three more.
Mr President, in previous debates here last November and in April of this year I supported the general principles behind the idea of directives on working time and I still do so.
Clearly there are significant health and safety issues which can be addressed - not only for the protection of workers but also for the protection of their customers and the general public - and issues of customer health and safety of course are particularly relevant in relation to doctors in training.
Like my colleague, Mrs Lambert, I am concerned that this compromise has not gone quite far enough in relation to doctors' hours.
There would remain though some workers in some working places where practical issues do not readily lend themselves to the implementation of this type of directive.
Coming from Scotland, with one of the largest EU fishing fleets, I would like once again to focus on the problem of fisheries and the defining of working time.
I note the compromise concerning sea-fishermen - a maximum of 48 hours of weekly work in a reference period of 12 months and the possibility of derogation after consultation and by agreement.
This may be an improvement but I still have some questions to put to the Commission.
We have to recognise that there were good reasons for the initial exclusion of the fisheries sector.
As regards fishing there is a deep-seated suspicion of Brussels in many respects and a lot of opposition to the whole idea of fishermen being told when to sleep or when to go to sea, given that their working time is governed by uncontrollable factors such as climatic conditions and the movement of shoals of fish.
The directive says that work at sea comprises sea fishing and other offshore work.
Many fishermen, particularly in Scotland, are organised on a family basis - they are share-fishermen paid only a proportion of their vessel's catch.
They are clearly not employees in the sense of the word that we would understand.
Is this directive going to affect them or is it not?
I have asked the Commission this question previously in committee and in plenary and have not yet received absolute clarification of this point.
The Conciliation Committee concluded in the case of those share fishermen who are employees - a statement which seems to me to be contradictory - that it is for Member States to determine the conditions for entitlement to annual leave and payments etc, but there is no explanation as to whether or when a share fisherman is employed.
I know for sure that the fishermen that I see around the coast of Scotland can only be defined as self-employed and I stress the need for clarification of this.
There are huge differences between a large-scale long-distance fleet where fishermen are employed by companies and sent off for months on end and the smaller- and medium-sized boats, which operate on a family or a cooperative basis.
This is an issue about the definition of self-employment or owner operation and I know that the compromise deletes own-account transport operators, clearly and quite properly identifying an exception in that area.
I call for a similar exception for share-fishermen.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is crucial that all employees are assured a decent working environment in order to guarantee that their health and safety is protected, which requires an organisation of working time that allows daily and weekly rest breaks, annual leave, holidays and other aspects.
This is why an appropriate solution must be found to the problem of all workers in activities that were excluded from the scope of Directive 93, specifically in the area of transport, fishing and the activities of junior doctors.
The truth is that, despite a positive proposal by Parliament, which sought to respond to these issues, the Council has insisted on an unacceptable position.
This substantially reduces the initial proposals of the European Parliament, specifically the increase of the period for transposing the directive to all sectors from two to three years.
The only exception made concerns junior doctors, for whom the period is extended from four to nine and possibly to twelve years.
Apart from anything else, this also threatens the safety of the patients themselves who are examined by doctors who work excessively long hours.
That is why we have voted against this agreement, since what we want, of course, is a better agreement.
It was never going to be easy to satisfy all of the interested parties who have lobbied and worked closely with the Union institutions to bring about amendments to the 1993 directive.
This is the new directive, of course, and I am pleased that it has been extended to offshore workers, fishermen and doctors in training.
The most contentious part of the directive was bound to relate to doctors in training who would benefit from this piece of legislation.
One should recall that the Council had originally proposed an exemption for a period of some 13 years before doctors in training would secure the benefits of the directive.
Naturally, Parliament put forward its own proposals to support the right of doctors in training to be covered by this directive after a period of 4 years.
Hence the conciliation procedure which you, Mr President, were involved in.
But whatever honeyed words are attached to the conclusions of the procedure, the bottom line is that junior doctors will not secure benefits for a period of nine years at least.
According to the conclusions of the Conciliation Committee, junior doctors will secure benefits after a transitional period of five years and a four-year transposition period.
I fully support the right of junior doctors and doctors in training to secure the benefits of this directive, but the Conciliation Committee conclusions will have reluctantly to be accepted.
I would like in conclusion to refer to one small but very important matter, namely that under exceptional circumstances there may be a further extension of two years and indeed up to three years if governments argue that the reduction would cause real administrative difficulties.
I do hope that this directive can be implemented sooner rather than later.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, working time policy - as we can see once again - is not economic policy, it is health and safety at work policy.
When used preventively, it saves the state and the economy a great deal of money.
I have completely failed to understand in this debate why a reasonable set of rules was not adopted back in 1993, especially as the Commission and Parliament did not want any derogations even then.
Seven million workers were affected and specific sectors, such as the mobile worker sector, have been subject to ruinous competition over recent years, especially in Germany.
It is therefore also a social problem and it is not enough, Mr Crowley, to use tachographs or other technical aids.
One does not exclude the other.
We also need a framework directive, because the employees who are affected have been working in a grey zone for a long time now.
They had no rules, they were not covered by a collective agreement, they were exploited and some also engaged in self-exploitation.
We know that this overload sometimes gave rise to alcohol-related problems.
Parliament has shown sufficient flexibility;
Mrs Smet highlighted our legislative maturity.
I think, Mrs Smet, you have proven that we can also fight.
The results are acceptable.
I am trying to muster support, even if we have not achieved everything we wanted to.
But the transition period and the graduated plan are the maximum we have allowed the Council.
I hope that no government will use up the full period of time and am counting on constructive competition between the Member States to see which State will be the first to implement the proposals from Parliament and the Commission.
Directive 93/104 was already very restrictive as far as worker production is concerned.
It does not harmonise social legislation upwards, quite the opposite.
It establishes a European framework which falls a long way short of workers' expectations: an 11-hour daily rest period, a 48-hour working week, a 24-hour weekly break.
What is more, a number of categories were excluded from its field of competence.
We find the compromise, which Parliament is to vote on today following the meetings of the Conciliation Committee, unsatisfactory in terms of both the health and the safety of workers.
It makes flexibility more widespread, particularly for sea fishermen, establishing the systematic annualisation of reference periods.
It will permit further exemptions to the already excessive legislation of 48 hours per week.
Finally, it will take nine years, in the best possible case, for the working week of doctors in training to be reduced from 58 hours to 48.
In fact, the proposed working time organisation institutes social deregulation at the very time when, in France, doctors in training are campaigning for decent working conditions and genuine safety for service-users.
Proper organisation of working time would entail, we reiterate, a real reduction in working hours accompanied by moves to create a sufficient number of jobs.
We cannot support this report as it stands.
Mr President, this proposal will bring an additional seven million workers in Europe under the protection of the Working Time Directive, allowing them to have reasonable working conditions and proper rest periods.
However, to get a 48-hour week, junior doctors must wait nine years minimum and possibly twelve years.
I will not pretend to be happy with this situation.
It is, however, the best that we could achieve if we were to end once and for all the Council's delaying tactics.
It has been obvious since 1993 that those excluded from the directive at that time would eventually come under its protection.
One has to ask, therefore, why over that seven-year period virtually nothing was done in Ireland or in Britain to bring the number of doctors forward that would be needed to implement it.
In Ireland some junior doctors work over 100 hours per week, the average being 70 to 80.
Only last night they suspended strike action which they had threatened because they have now reached an interim agreement which will ensure that they are actually paid for the overtime they work.
In some cases they were not paid at all, in some cases only half the normal rate.
Some progress has been made and no doubt the conclusion of the conciliation has helped them in that regard.
Through the Council of Ministers both Britain and Ireland fought tooth-and-nail to slow the process down.
That was unfortunate.
The working arrangements for junior doctors are like a horror story from a Dickensian novel of the nineteenth century.
I find it bizarre that at the beginning of the 21st century we are still arguing for common sense with regard to health and safety.
I would appeal to all national governments, including Ireland, not to utilise the additional provisions for extending the implementation of this directive beyond the nine-year period and would remind them that it is intended only as an exceptional measure if all other genuine steps have been taken to implement the measures here.
Mr President, the proposed working time directive for specific categories of worker such as doctors in training, offshore workers or mobile workers, is typical of the slow and derisory nature of social Europe.
The recitals of the proposal, nonetheless, stress the specific importance of this file, the first major file on social issues, adding, even, that it is a matter of the health and safety of 7 million workers.
In France, for example, a number of strikes by junior doctors recently drew the attention of public opinion to the intolerable length of the working day for this category of worker, harmful to the doctors in training themselves, but also to the quality of the care they are providing their patients with.
The same question arises, with at least as much urgency, for other categories such as offshore workers or transport workers.
What we should have had was a quick decision and an appropriate reduction in working hours.
Well, the proposal does intend to cut hours, but by phasing in the cuts.
For the first three years, 58-hour working weeks are permitted.
We have to wait 5 years for the maximum working week to be reduced to 48 hours, and the Commission is cynical enough to cite technical reasons in order to grant a further 2-year delay in application.
Who are they trying to kid that these measures could not come into force almost immediately if there was any political will to act in favour of the interests of the workers concerned rather than favouring the claims of management?
Some restriction, even a derisory cut, in working hours is better than no restriction at all.
We shall not vote against this text, but we shall conclude from this experience that workers can have no expectations of social Europe and that, decidedly, nothing can replace the collective strength of the workers when it comes to amending legislation in favour of the workers.
Mr President, the chairman of the European Parliament' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs could not remain silent in this debate.
Thank heavens, my fellow Members have already said what needed to be said about the issue itself.
I shall come back to this point.
We are not terribly proud of the final result, but I should at least like to pay tribute to it, as some outcome had to be found.
At this point, I should like to thank Mrs Smet, our efficient and indefatigable rapporteur, and Mr Provan, who was also the persistent and efficient chairman of our Conciliation Committees.
I should like to thank all our coordinators, Mr Brok, Mr Hughes, Mrs Flautre, Mr Schmid, Mrs Lynne, who demonstrated great understanding in order to reach some sort of outcome.
I should like to pay tribute to the Commission.
Without wishing to embarrass you, Mrs Diamantopoulou, throughout almost all this debate Parliament has had the technical and even political support of the Commission, particularly on the important amendments.
I have one small correction to make, unless I misunderstood, to what Mrs Smet has just said.
It is not exactly the first successful conciliation on social matters between the European Parliament and the Council.
It is the second, following the successful conciliation on the minor issue of workers working in an explosive atmosphere.
This is, however, an infinitely more wide-ranging issue, of course.
Mr President, I must point out how unusually tough the Council is to deal with.
The political truth is that the Parliament team, in an astounding spirit of responsibility and unanimity - and you have witnessed the benign respect which I and Mr Bushill-Matthews, for example, have for each other - was remarkable for its united front as much as for its determination to succeed.
Parliament made most of the running.
We are not proud of the result in terms of the content.
In a real democracy Parliament would have been determining the legislation.
I would like to remind the Council that we are just as dedicated to achieving results, but that they must not expect Parliament to make quite so many concessions on a regular basis.
Mr President, I would like first of all to make three political comments.
I feel that the successful outcome of the conciliation procedure proves that where there is a will, there is a way.
In order for this conciliation to succeed, we had to take account of the fifteen different systems in the Member States, different fields of work and proposals from various employer and employee federations.
We also had to take account of the viability of health services as things now stand and competitiveness in sectors such as transport and fisheries.
This was no mean feat!
It has taken six years to achieve today' s result and it is the first major conciliation decision in the social sphere - and I say major because it affects some 5 million workers.
I feel that the most interesting point - and this is my third comment - is the number of workers affected by this directive, who are at present excluded from the working time directive and who will enjoy these rights once this directive is applied.
In my view, therefore, we should be satisfied regardless of whether or not this directive meets all our requirements.
The upshot is that the provisions of the working directive will apply to doctors in training, workers at sea, rail workers and all non-mobile workers in excluded sectors.
I would like in particular to thank the Chairman of the Committee, Mr Rocard, the Vice-Chairman, Mr Provan, who used his great experience to guide the conciliation procedure, and of course, Mrs Smet who, with her wealth of ministerial experience, helped achieve such a difficult conciliation.
I would also like to give special thanks to the Portuguese Presidency and the Member States, particularly those which, for reasons we cannot go into right now, have experienced major problems with their national health services, such as Great Britain, Spain and Ireland.
Certain speakers raised the issue of the implementation of the directive.
I should like to stress that it is indeed a particularly important issue.
One of the Commission' s fundamental duties is to monitor the implementation of directives.
Here I should like to ask the MEPs to cooperate with us and closely monitor any underhanded plans in Member States, so that the Commission can intervene immediately.
A further two questions have also been raised, the first by Messrs Hughes, Schmid and Pronk as to what we intend to do in the road and rail transport sectors.
First, I must tell you that the Transport Council is involved, making the whole process even more complicated.
Secondly, as for road transport, the Commission tabled a proposal in 1996, but it was blocked by the Council in 1998.
The Commission intends, with the cooperation of the French Presidency, to re-table the issue.
We are awaiting new negotiations by the social partners and we hope to obtain their assent.
If we cannot proceed in this way, we shall have to change the whole approach we have adopted so far.
With regard to the issue of fisheries, the matter was raised once again by Mr Hudghton.
We have discussed this in the past.
I will try to clarify it.
I am afraid I was not clear enough.
So I would like to repeat that the issue of self-employment in fisheries is not included in this directive.
The self-employed in fisheries is a matter of national competence.
That is very clear and very precise.
I thank you very much for all your support and help during these discussions, and that of your services.
It is very much appreciated indeed.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Reviewing aid to third countries
The next item is the Commission communication - Reviewing aid to third countries.
Mr President, I hope Parliament will excuse me if shortly after making a brief presentation I have to leave, but this is, as Parliament knows, very much the collective work of the RELEX Commissioners as a whole and very much the shared work of my colleague, Commissioner Nielson and myself.
Commissioner Nielson will still be here to make his own contribution to this report and to answer any questions which may arise.
The function I have to attend is a joint meeting of two committees which was specially arranged to discuss a number of external assistance issues so I hope Parliament will be understanding.
I think it is fair to say that the proposals that we have put forward go right to the heart of the issues that are raised in the White Paper on reform and it is extremely important for us to demonstrate that the reform of our external assistance programmes is the flagship or one of the flagships, for an overall reform process.
People occasionally get a little bored when one talks about internal procedures but what they should recognise is what we are discussing in these particular proposals: ways in which, first of all, we can get assistance to people more rapidly and effectively and, secondly, ways in which we can change the image of the European Union around the world.
All of us have, alas, experienced too frequently occasions when instead of us getting the credit for what we are trying to do on behalf of Europe's taxpayers, we get blamed for not doing it a lot more effectively and a lot more rapidly.
I hope that is a problem which we will be able to tackle.
Very briefly, it is worth reminding ourselves what the background to this issue is.
We have seen a threefold increase in external assistance commitments managed by the SCR over the last 10 years.
That has been driven by events and by political pressures; a recognition of the responsibilities we should discharge in Central and Eastern Europe - the recognition which that triggered of our responsibilities in the Mediterranean.
It is worth noting that our assistance programmes in the Mediterranean have increased four and a half times since 1990.
Then there is the Balkans crisis where the attempts to put in place a common foreign and security policy are being particularly tested.
While our external assistance programmes themselves have grown very rapidly, staff resources have failed to keep pace.
The Commission has 2.9 staff for every EUR 10 million that we manage.
That compares with an average figure about twice that for Member States - the figure is 5.7 but it goes as high as 9 for some Member States and 4.2 for the World Bank.
One of the consequences of that has been the increasing use of technical assistance offices which has been much criticised by Parliament and by the Court of Auditors on the grounds of weak monitoring and a lack of political control.
It is worth noting that we have spent about EUR 170 million a year on the 80 technical assistance offices which is equivalent to the cost of 800 staff working for the Commission.
A consequence of all this is that the SCR today has over EUR 21 billion in outstanding commitments awaiting payments.
That is an embarrassingly large figure.
I do not blame the staff of the SCR who work extremely hard in very difficult circumstances, but there are not enough of them.
They have had to operate with extremely difficult procedures.
They have also had to operate against a background of Member States second, third and fourth guessing every implementation decision that we try to make.
We have brought forward in the document, which has now been made public, our proposals for dealing with this problem.
As honourable Members will know, over the years Parliament has put forward a number of proposals including the idea that we should externalise the management of our overseas aid.
That remains a possibility for the long term though it would take some time because one would first have to get in place the necessary legal framework.
However my principal concern at the moment is not how we get from A to Z - that often seems rather easier than getting from A to B. What we have to do - whatever the long term objective may be is - to find better ways of managing our external assistance straightaway.
We have put forward a number of proposals.
We have put forward proposals for improving programming: making sure that all the RELEX Commissioners share responsibility for programming - we have suggested the reuniting of the project cycle from identification to implementation - we think the present split has not worked well.
What we propose to do is to create a new implementation body replacing the SCR which we think should be called Europe Aid.
It would be initially an office under a board made up of all the External Relations Commissioners though, as I say, the option of moving to externalisation in the longer term remains on the table.
We want to devolve more responsibility to delegations and, where possible, to national authorities in the field.
We have proposed special treatment for the pre-accession strategy: humanitarian assistance and macro-financial assistance with fully integrated management.
That means, for example, transferring the residual SCR functions for PHARE to the Directorate-General for Enlargement.
We have proposed taking urgent measures to tackle the backlog of old and dormant projects.
We are writing to the relevant chairmen of parliamentary committees and to the Court of Auditors to explain our approach.
I do not want to go on for very much longer, except to say this: where will the resources come from to manage and run our programmes in the proposed office, Europe Aid, rather better in the future than we have managed in the past?
We have to take our turn with others in the Commission in arguing our corner in the peer group process for the assistance we think is required to manage our programmes effectively.
We may, as a result, present the budgetary authority with a rectifying letter to the 2001 budget proposals in September.
That is for the future.
The simple point I want to make is this: we cannot go on as we have.
In my judgement it is simply not an option.
We have to do better.
We are not bidding for a bigger empire.
The budgetary authority will ultimately have to judge the right scale of European Union external aid programmes.
However, my only aim is to put the Commission in a position where it can run these programmes competently.
I have to say very bluntly to Parliament that there are two possibilities: either the budgetary authority agrees with our ideas and will then try to implement them from 2001, or else, in order to manage what our programmes amount to more competently, we will be obliged to propose very large cuts.
We cannot go on in a situation in which we are not prepared to provide the resources to manage effectively the money that is voted by the budgetary authority for our external assistance programmes.
We have to be prepared to face up to the management and administrative consequences of what we are trying to do around the world, otherwise the people who suffer are those who should be receiving our help to enable them to read and write or live a better and healthier life or create the institutions of good governance in their communities.
They are the people who suffer as well as the European Union's reputation.
I am sure this will be a long debate.
I am sure that Parliament will have a considerable contribution to make to the discussion over the next few months.
However, my impression after a few months in this job is that Parliament wants as badly as the Commission to deliver a more competently run assistance programme all around the world.
Mr President, this is refreshing - the fact that the European Union is acknowledging that there are problems but that we have solutions.
Commissioner Nielson will recall that a couple of months ago I suggested that it might be the case that he could become an emperor without clothes.
Is it not the case now that this proposal, taking away so much from DG Development as it does, is likely to make my prediction come true?
Secondly, at the end of what Commissioner Patten was saying, I think he reiterated what he was quoted as saying in "The Times" this morning where he said that Member States should back his plans with resources or cut aid.
I have to say, Commissioners, that I find this a deeply worrying and dangerous statement and likely to be taken at its face value by Member States and not in the way that you suggest.
I would very much appreciate clarification of those two questions by one or other Commissioner.
Mr President, I do not feel like an emperor without clothes, but you can judge for yourself.
The situation is that we had to do something not just to integrate the project cycle in terms of the line management of activities.
We also had to do something concerning squaring the circle organisationally giving substance to my political overall responsibility for development policy.
We have done this without changing the portfolios that were defined.
The solution we have reached is to create a board of directors which will oversee and politically be the managerial part of running the new office or EuropeAid or whatever SCR is going to be called.
My role on that board will be that of the chief executive officer.
Commissioner Patten will be chairman, reflecting the position he already has at the head of the table being the ultimate coordinator of all RELEX Commissioners' activities.
We are in a sense structuring the political roles that have been defined and we are doing it in such a way that I think it really does have a chance of functioning.