# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
There are two elements in this which will contribute to better coherence and better political consistency.
One is what I have already mentioned with a closer political involvement in the management of the actual implementation.
The other one is the quality-support group which will have its secretariat in DG Development.
The role is to make sure that the formulation of the different programmes, including those in DG RELEX, is consistent with the policy and principles that we have defined.
All in all, I think this is a good attempt at doing things given the way things were defined last July.
This will also concentrate a lot of attention among all RELEX Commissioners on the problem of whether or not we actually are delivering.
We have to get out of the culture of commitment and into the culture of delivering.
What we are doing here will be part of that change.
We also talk about ownership in our partner countries as being a major problem.
The reality, because of the way we are organised in the Commission, is that ownership on our side is extremely vague and problematic.
This is going to change as a consequence of the reform we are putting forward now.
Finally, I will address the issue of the risk of what happens if we do not get the staff and the resources to do the job.
Clearly continuing the way things are now is not acceptable, it is not possible.
We have to make the point as clearly as Commissioner Patten just did which means that we want those resources.
We have commitments, we have an agreement with 71 ACP states, we have the Member States backing that and accepting the next ninth European Development Fund.
All this is part of the promises we have made already, so there is really no alternative to getting the people to do the job.
But how to do it - this is a problem we cannot solve alone, which is why we are appealing as strongly and clearly as we are; and we make no secret of the fact that if the budget authority will not make it possible to get the staff, we will not be able to do the job.
This is the situation as we see it.
We do not want to invest our own role as Commissioners in fighting a losing battle.
We want to fight a battle we can be proud of participating in.
Mr President, I am very happy to hear that, in order to fulfil commitments, more resources and personnel are required.
As Parliament is aware of this, we will offer our full support.
However, I would like to ask a question, since I have not had time to study the document at length.
What will happen to humanitarian aid?
We understand that the Union' s policy of humanitarian aid does not end with simply granting it, but it has to continue - we talk in this context of a 'continuum' - so that development policies can be carried out.
Otherwise, we may see a repetition of what is happening in Mozambique at the moment: clearly, humanitarian aid was removed, ECHO disappeared, development policy is no longer being implemented and therefore, violence may erupt once again.
Within this 'continuum' I would like to know whether, as has been the case until now, ECHO will be an office dependent on the Commission, but whose action will be based on development policies aimed at what we want to see, and that is the eradication of poverty.
Mr President, it is a shame that Mr Patten had to leave so soon.
I actually wanted to put my question to him.
But I think that Mr Nielson is equally well placed to answer me because he has been standing by his colleague' s side and he also said that both Commissioners were responsible for the proposal.
Mr Nielson, of course we here in Parliament share your aim of providing quicker aid to men and women, and raising the profile of the European Union.
That goes without saying.
But we had all agreed that what the Commission wanted to introduce now by way of reform had to be done jointly with us.
When Mr Patten says in his presentation that either the Commission programme is accepted or we must make cuts, I find that highly displeasing.
It is we who are the budgetary authority, or at least part of it, and I think that the Commission cannot simply say we shall make cuts or we shall have to make cuts.
That, if you please, has to go through the budgetary procedure first and what is certain is that you will have to implement your reform programme jointly with us.
I should like to know what your colleague meant by this threat.
Mr President, I am very sorry that Commissioner Patten had to leave.
In his absence I am delighted to direct my questions to the Development Commissioner, Mr Nielson.
I am delighted to hear of new innovations and reorganisations which the Commission is going to put into place.
EuropeAid would be a very important attribute of the European Union as far as our external relations are concerned.
It has been extremely embarrassing so far that some of our promises have not been kept.
Not keeping promises to the poorest people in the world is not the nicest way to go about - as a rich part of the world - trying to help them.
Consolidating the RELEX Commissioners and increasing the management support staff and resources have my fullest support.
I am also delighted to hear that they are planning to create a board very much like the World Bank.
But I should like to ask Commissioner Nielson if he has thought about something which is very important to this side of the House - the IFC in the World Bank has the ability to help in the private sector with funding.
Micro-credits and various other mechanisms are key to helping people to help themselves.
Have they considered extending, in EuropeAid, some element of helping people to help themselves through an investment arm where the European Union becomes a partner in venture and enterprise?
Firstly, ECHO is not affected by this reform of development assistance.
ECHO is going to continue.
This is clearly part of what we have decided.
The only issue is to create a better link or bridge between the phase of humanitarian assistance and the more forward-oriented, long-term development assistance.
This is a well established discussion.
We want to keep ECHO more or less the way it is.
I have confidence that with the new director of ECHO we are on track.
To Mrs Haug I should like to make it clear that Commissioner Patten was saying that we will have to propose deep cuts in the level of activity if we do not get a positive response from the budget authorities concerning the staff issue.
Why are we saying this as clearly as we are, even running the risk of being interpreted as if issuing a threat?
I noticed your choice of word there.
We think it is necessary to make it clear that we seriously think it is problematic to continue without the resources and the manpower that we need.
It is not possible to do this well without being more or less organised like other well-performing donors.
This is the message.
It may very well be the case that we are being misunderstood in this Parliament because, on this matter, we are definitely among friends.
So saying it as clearly as we do here may sound wrong.
I realise that.
But there are other elements around.
We have to say it à tous azimuts.
It is absolutely necessary to make these measures clear.
I do not mean to be negative about ministers of finance, but sometimes they can be quite demanding partners in discussion.
Development ministers are not that unproblematic either.
The biggest problem is actually the lack of consistency between the level of ambition defined in this field and the resources and tools that we have available to carry out the job.
This is our biggest problem.
We will be making a positive effort to get a solution that makes it possible to continue at least at the level of activity that we have now.
I should like to add that, though it is right to point out the backlog, the problems and the embarrassment, it should not be forgotten that we are building roads out there, thousands of kilometres in length; we are drilling bore-holes for clean, safe water, giving millions of people access to safe drinking water every year.
We are investing in people in primary education in a large number of countries.
We are making a contribution to the debt initiative second to none, even comparing ourselves with the biggest countries in the world.
We would welcome a little more competition as far as that is concerned.
I warn against giving the impression our development cooperation activities have all but stopped.
That is not the case.
We have to be realistic, clear and demanding in order to enter the primary league amongst donors and not to remain where we are right now.
This is the goal.
Mr Deva, we will, as part of the new Suva Agreement - the successor to the Lomé Convention - be including in our activities a EUR 2.2 billion private investment facility which will be administered by the European Investment Bank at arm's length.
It will deal with private partners, inspiring and helping the creation of business activities between European companies and business in the developing ACP countries.
This major innovation is being prepared right now on the same basis as you were talking about.
Micro-credit is a big thing but it is not the only answer to all problems.
However, we are quite active in this field also.
I thank Parliament for what I sense to be a more than positive reception because the critical notes that I have heard are of a kind that I would tend to interpret as enthusiastic support.
We should be careful not to end up facing a situation where there is a real threat of having to set our sights lower.
Thank you very much, Mr Nielson, for your optimistic view of the future.
Question Time (Commission)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0220/2000).
We will examine questions to the Commission.
First part
Question No 32 by (H-0433/00):
Subject: Jailing of opposition politician Xu Wenli in China Is the Commission aware of the recent trial involving Xu Wenli in China and the severe prison sentence that was imposed.
What action did the Commission take?
The Commission is aware of the recent trial referred to by the honourable Member in his question and of the sentence imposed on Mr Liu, who assisted Xu Wenli in setting up a branch of the banned China Democracy Party.
Xu Wenli, one of the founders of the CDP, was sentenced to 13 years in jail in December 1998, along with two other prominent democracy campaigners.
As the honourable Member will know, the longstanding policy of the Union is to raise the individual cases of Chinese citizens who have been in prison for political offences with the Chinese authorities, particularly in the context of the human rights dialogue, the last meeting of which took place on 25 February this year.
The Union has therefore raised with the Chinese Government the cases of Xu Wenli and others who have been trying to exercise basic rights that are specified by the United Nation's Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which was actually signed by China in October 1998.
To date, the Commission knows that at least 23 CDP members have been jailed for subversion as a result of their efforts to exercise those rights to which China is committed.
In relation to these and other cases, the Commission consistently calls upon the People's Republic of China to comply with the letter and spirit of the United Nation's human rights conventions which it has signed; to do so even before China's ratification of those conventions and actively to pursue ratification.
These efforts by the Commission will continue.
I thank you, Commissioner, for your answer and I should like to ask whether the Commission is aware that 14 months into his 13-year prison sentence Mr Xu is suffering from hepatitis and there are serious doubts as to the effectiveness of the medical treatment he is receiving.
I would seek an assurance that the Commission will enquire into this and ask the Chinese authorities whether they are providing the appropriate medical treatment.
Bearing in mind, Commissioner, what you said about your willingness to raise individual cases, could I also ask you to make enquiries about the fate of Rebiya Kadeer.
She was arrested on 11 August 1999 in Urumqui, the capital of the XUAR, while on her way to meet representatives of the US Congressional Research Service.
She was charged with providing secret information to foreigners and is believed to have been sentenced to eight years' imprisonment at a secret trial.
I will gladly provide more detailed information on that, Mr Commissioner.
It makes me even more angry that European Union Member States, faced with these cases and the 23 in general you referred to, show such spinelessness in refusing to support the US initiative in Geneva at the UN Commission on Human Rights attacking China's human rights record.
I should like to tell the honourable Member that in respect to Mr Xu, I will convey what he said about the apparently grave condition of that political prisoner to my colleagues in the external relations area.
I am certain that they will follow previous practice in making enquiries of the Chinese authorities as to the quality and consistency of the treatment of Mr Xu for hepatitis.
I know that my colleagues will be happy to respond to the honourable Member in order to keep him informed with any information they are able to obtain.
So far as Miss Kadeer is concerned, obviously I did not have notice of that question and am not in a position to respond.
The question will, however, have been recorded.
I will bring it to the attention of my colleagues and they will provide the honourable Member with the response he is seeking.
Obviously, it would be a matter of great concern if someone, whose only offence is to be antagonistic towards an existing regime, were to be the victim of insufferable treatment.
I know that my colleagues elsewhere in the Commission share this view, which I share with the honourable Member.
As the author is not present, Question No 33 lapses.
Question No 34 by (H-0357/00):
Subject: The Commission's reform programme and enlargement On 1 March 2000, the Commission adopted the White Paper on the reform of the Commission.
The measures and actions announced in the White Paper provide for a radical reform of the Commission which will involve a considerable amount of time.
Can the Commission indicate to what extent the present reform proposals take account of the forthcoming enlargement?
Do they anticipate the consequences which enlargement will have on the internal structure of the Commission and do the proposed measures and actions take account of such consequences?
If so, in what way?
If not, would it not have been more logical for the Commission to take account of enlargement in respect of certain aspects, thereby avoiding a situation whereby shortly after completion of the current reform process the Commission has to enter into a fresh round of reforms to cope with the impact of enlargement?
Does the Commission intend to present an action plan with a timetable, as is the case with the present reform plan, in order to prepare the structure of the Commission for the forthcoming enlargement?
The Commission's reform strategy White Paper fulfils the undertakings readily given to Parliament and to the Council last year to give immediate attention to addressing the way in which the Institution, as an organisation, currently undertakes its duties.
Delay in designing a practical strategy and in pursuing necessary modernisation would not have been acceptable to the Commission, to the Council, to this Parliament or to the public, as I am sure the honourable Member understands.
One of the specifically stated purposes of comprehensive reform is the development of strengthened administrative performance which will, amongst other things, enable the Commission to deal more effectively with changes in the current and the future Union and in the wider world.
Clearly the challenges posed by the forthcoming extensive enlargement are different in nature and scale than those presented by any previous enlargement.
The Commission must therefore be capable of achieving the highest standards of executive and administrative performance in the discharge of its powers and duties in order to facilitate that massive and welcome development.
As the College of Commissioners made clear in our introduction to the White Paper, and elsewhere in that document, and I quote what we said: "the challenges of globalisation and future enlargement require better governance at all levels including the European Union".
All political institutions must rise to this challenge and so must the Commission.
Reform is therefore an essential precondition - a precondition for realising our vision of Europe.
The current administrative reform is not a limited exercise - it is an evolutionary process as we have made very clear - it will be continuously monitored and the results achieved will be assessed in order to provide for any relevant adjustments.
Proper account will be taken of any specific requirements that arise from the enlargement process, and naturally that will apply to human resources implications of the ongoing change.
Issues such as the management of the increased cultural diversity within the Commission and an early retirement scheme that is directly linked to enlargement will, for instance, be amongst those that receive particular attention.
As with past enlargements, specific measures concerning the appointment and integration of officials from the new Member States will be adopted at the appropriate time.
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response.
I would, however, like to add something.
One of the main challenges in the enlargement process will be to tailor the veterinary and plant-health conditions prevalent in the acceding countries to those in the European Union.
Would the Commissioner be prepared to encourage observers from the Central and Eastern European countries that wish to join the EU, to attend management committees, scientific committees or any other committees concerned with veterinary and plant health, on a permanent basis?
Mr President, the honourable Member's approach to these and many other matters is I know extremely constructive.
What I know on the basis of precedent, and also the Commission's assessment of the scope and the depth of the challenges that arise from the forthcoming enlargement, is that appropriate measures will be taken at the right time not only in terms of the recruitment and integration of properly skilled staff from the new Member States but also to assist with the preparation of other areas of expertise - presumably including the Scientific and other committees.
To some extent, of course, the process will be assisted by the fact that the international science community inside and outside the European Union is genuinely international.
In addition to relying upon those casual professional relationships, I am sure that the Commission will want to ensure that there is continuity and access provided for those new incoming Member States not only in areas like those that he has mentioned - veterinary and plant health - but in many other areas where the smoothest possible integration of efforts is a matter of crucial and mutual importance.
Question No 35 by (H-0411/00):
Subject: Boarding of Community vessels by Canadian inspectors in international waters Five years after the seizure of the Estai, the Community fleet fishing in NAFO international waters has expressed deep concern at the boarding of a Portuguese vessel, the Santa Mafalda, supposedly by Canadian inspectors.
The Santa Mafalda, a vessel used to catch halibut, was boarded on 24 April last.
The inspectors confiscated all documentation and refused to leave the vessel.
Furthermore, a launch belonging to the Canadian authorities has been tracking the vessel constantly, thus hampering its fishing activity.
A few days earlier, Canadian inspectors had apparently boarded a Spanish freezer trawler, which was also fishing in international waters.
European fishermen fear that the underlying aim of these boarding incidents is to deter them from using the fishing grounds in which they catch halibut and cod.
What information does the Commission possess on these incidents?
Can it clarify whether the inspectors were acting on behalf of NAFO or the Canadian Government?
Has it taken any action in this regard, or does it intend to do so?
Should accepting Community monitoring rules for inspections in NAFO waters prove problematic for Canada, what initiatives could the Commission take to set clear and binding rules which would allay the doubts of those working in the sector and the Canadian Government alike?
Thank you Mr President.
As the honourable Member who raised the question will know, in accordance with the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation scheme of joint international inspection and surveillance, each contracting party may assign means of inspection and inspectors to the NAFO scheme and NAFO inspectors may inspect any fishing vessel flying the flag of a contracting party.
NAFO inspectors are obliged to carry out their duties in accordance with rules set out in the NAFO scheme and they are also obliged to remain under the operational control of the authorities of their contracting parties and be responsible to them.
Against that background, on 23 April two Canadian NAFO inspectors accompanied by a trainee carried out an inspection of the Community fishing vessel Santa Mafalda which was operating at that time in the NAFO regulatory area.
The Canadian inspectors in question and the surveillance vessel from which the inspection was carried out are assigned to the NAFO scheme.
Their inspection was carried out under its auspices.
Having been informed by the Canadians, inspectors of the Commission boarded the Santa Mafalda to verify the grounds on which the Canadian inspectors based their citation of a serious infringement.
In conducting this verification the Commission inspectors ensured the security and continuity of the evidence on board and transmitted their report to the Portuguese authorities.
Those authorities in turn ordered the Santa Mafalda to the port of Aveiro in Portugal for a thorough inspection.
The Santa Mafalda arrived in Aveiro on 10 May 2000 and two Commission inspectors participated in a thorough inspection of the vessel.
The Commission has drawn the attention of the Canadian authorities to the procedures followed by the Canadian inspectors in relation to their seizure of documentation and their continued stay on board the Santa Mafalda.
The Commission takes the view that the Canadian NAFO inspectors in question acted in breach of the NAFO scheme by taking away documents from the vessel without the permission of the master and by continuing to stay on board the vessel.
However, it is relevant to note that in this case the master of the vessel and the Portuguese authorities did not oppose the prolonged stay of the Canadian inspectors on the vessel and the fishing activities of the Santa Mafalda were not obstructed.
Mr Commissioner, I am satisfied with your reply, but I would like to add something else.
The sea is a difficult world, and the Community fleet which fishes in international Atlantic waters experiences the interference of controllers and patrols from coastal countries which give the impression that, behind the harassment they sometimes suffer, there is one sole intention; to expel them from those fishing grounds.
The Commissioner knows, as I do, that the current situation in the NAFO is not, fortunately, what it was five years ago after the seizure of the Estai.
The European Commission - like the fishing sector itself - has made significant efforts to iron out our differences.
However, there are still outstanding questions, such as the extraterritorial clauses, which allow the Canadian Government to carry out inspections, controls and seizures beyond their national waters, in open sea, which is incompatible with international provisions and which, all too frequently, involves the arbitrary application of controls within the framework of the NAFO.
For all these reasons, I would like to ask the Commissioner how the European Commission intends to defend the right of the Community fleet to fish freely in these waters, albeit within the existing rules.
Mr President, I am grateful to the honourable lady.
The only way in which we can actually ensure the proper maintenance of an international convention which has the effect of law is to demand on all occasions that the procedures required under the law are fulfilled properly in a balanced but a completely full way.
That is the position being taken by the Commission which is why I drew attention to the fact that the Commissioners have already reached the conclusion that the Canadian inspectors actually acted in breach of the scheme by taking documents without the sight of the master and by virtue, maybe, of their very prolonged stay on board that vessel.
The Portuguese authorities, as the honourable lady will know because of her interest, are now undertaking a full investigation and it would therefore not be proper for the Commission to communicate opinions beyond those I have already offered, but she can be absolutely certain that the Commission and its inspectors together with the Member States are vigilant in sustaining the proper rights of all vessels on the high seas.
Mr President, I had asked the question as a result of Mr Kinnock' s first reply, before Mrs Miguélez asked her question.
I had understood from Mr Kinnock that the ship was in fact being inspected in a Portuguese port and that this inspection had taken place in the presence of Community inspectors.
I understand, from his second reply, that he does not yet have the result of that inspection.
That is what I wanted him to clarify.
If he does have it, I would like him to say so, but I understand from his second reply that he does not.
If that is the case I believe it would be prudent and logical for us to await the final result.
I would ask Mr Kinnock to communicate to Mr Fischler that, as chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, I would like to know the result of that inspection as soon as possible.
I would like to receive it because this Parliament will have to act accordingly.
In any event, I would like to condemn, in support of Mrs Miguélez, the abuse of authority on the part of the Canadian NAFO inspectors which Mr Kinnock mentioned.
I would therefore like to make that request and condemn this violation of NAFO regulations.
Mr President, I will draw the honourable Member's remarks to the attention of my colleague, Mr Fischler, and I know that they will be of interest to him.
He summarises the position precisely because the inspection has taken place and the Portuguese authorities are reaching their conclusions.
It would not be proper publicly to pursue the matter further, but when the report of that inspection and the assessment by the Portuguese authorities are available, I am certain that they will be communicated to interested Members including, of course, the chairman of Parliament's Committee on Fisheries and I am certain the honourable lady whose interest is manifest.
Question No 36 by (H-0415/00):
Subject: Need to support and strengthen the olive oil sector The implementation of the new olive oil regulation is having severe consequences for Greek producers who are poor farmers in infertile and island regions.
The abolition of the intervention price which had already been eroded has brought producer prices down to derisory levels: together with the co-responsibility levy this has had the effect of decimating olive oil producers' incomes.
The profiteering of traders who sell olive oil to the consumer at prices many times the producers' price have increased, and the small quota accorded to Greece in practice cancels out the entitlement to plant a further 3 000 hectares provided for in the new regulation.
Since olive oil is a basic product and the main source of income for farmers from the most disadvantaged regions in Greece and is also a staple of the Mediterranean diet, will the Commission say what measures it intends to take to protect olive oil cultivation and producers' incomes so as to enable them to stay on the land and when it intends to act?
Does it intend to increase the quota in order to cover existing production and the volume of production expected to result from the new plantations?
Will it reintroduce the institution of intervention, but improved as far as prices and the date of commencement are concerned?
Finally, will it draw up and implement an integrated and effective policy to promote and advertise olive oil both in the EU countries and in third countries, so that olive oil can occupy the place to which it is entitled - according to scientific findings - in the human diet?
Second part
Questions to Mr Solbes
One of the greatest benefits of the question time arrangement is the way in which it endows me with instant expertise on issues as far apart as fishing, olive oil and human rights in China!
I am happy to respond to Mr Korakas.
In June 1998, the Commission undertook to present a proposal on the future of the common organisation of the market in olive oil to the Council and Parliament in 2000.
The new regime would apply from the 2001/2002 marketing year which, as the honourable Member will know, begins on 1 November 2001.
The Commission is currently studying new data on the structure of olive oil production in the various producer Member States, as well as developments in the world market where the Community is the leading producer by a considerable margin.
The study will also take into account the need to draw up an olive oil quality strategy in order to add more value to the product.
As far as product promotion is concerned, the Community is already financing promotion campaigns through the International Olive Oil Council.
Those campaigns appear to have a positive effect within the European Union and indeed in third countries.
In response to a specific issue raised by the honourable Member's question, I have to point out that the produce of new plantings would not give entitlement to aid.
However, the Commission hopes that the Community producers concerned will benefit fully under derogations from the rules as they relate to approved planting programmes, although the olive oil in question would count towards the maximum guaranteed quantity which has already been set.
Finally, the Commission wishes to point out that rather than simply abolishing the intervention system, what has actually happened is that it has been replaced by a system of private storage which is more flexible than the intervention system because it applies throughout the marketing year if the market situation calls for such support.
Since the start of the 1998/99 marketing year, it has not been necessary to pay private storage aid.
However, it is worth emphasising that over that same period the old buying-in intervention system would not have been activated either.
Mr President, we do indeed appear to be having problems understanding each other in this Chamber.
Because of the policies of the European Union, olive oil producers are truly at the mercy of big producers who negotiate among themselves and try to buy olive oil at unbelievably low prices.
This situation has reached dramatic proportions with the abolition of the albeit downgraded intervention system and the system of private storage, let me assure you is, quite frankly, a joke.
So how are we to deal with this situation?
Will an improved intervention system providing rudimentary protection for producers be reintroduced?
And given that, on a global scale, olive oil is so important to the human body and plays such an important role in maintaining farming populations in disadvantaged areas, why is it that the quotas, particularly for Greece, are so low?
Are you going to increase them?
And with the widespread practice of mixing olive oil with sunflower seed oil, what does the Commission intend to do to put a stop to this practice, which is harming producers and consumers to the benefit of industrial racketeers?
In this spirit, does the Commission believe that this phenomenon can be tackled through guile, i.e., by increasing the quota for Italy, which is the main country responsible for mixing oil, and reducing the quota for Greece?
I am grateful to the honourable Member and I know of the deep concerns he voices.
They certainly are communicated in this House and he does it in a most articulate fashion.
All I can say to him at this juncture, because I know this is a matter of continuing concern and activity by him, is that the CMO for olive oil is due to be reformed, as I indicated earlier, by 1 November 2001, following agreement in the Council and in this Parliament in adopting Regulation 1638/98.
I cannot assume that if the situation were precisely as the honourable Member describes, and smaller producers were in a dangerously disadvantaged position by comparison with the big producers, there would have been such agreement in the Council and in this House.
Therefore, I hope he will give attention to the results of the studies I mentioned being undertaken at the moment by the Commission, both in terms of the general questions he raised when he submitted his question and also in terms of the relative fortunes of big producers and small producers.
Finally, as someone who is merely a consumer of olive oil, I hope there is no extensive dilution of what is one of my favourite complementary foodstuffs and that, whatever else we do in the European Community, we strive together with olive oil producers of all sizes to maintain the maximum quality.
That is how we sustain our considerable lead in world markets.
Thank you very much, Mr Kinnock, for your cooperation during this Question Time.
We also congratulate you for using olive oil, which is very good for the health.
I also say this from a Mediterranean standpoint.
Question No 37 by (H-0409/00):
Subject: Further integration entailed by EMU In the Commission's estimation, to what extent do the requirements imposed by EMU on economic policy - which include permanently fixed exchange rates - create the need for further economic integration in the form of a more extensive common budget (a common fiscal policy), cyclical transfers between Member States, increased labour mobility between the participating states and/or a more flexible labour market?
The introduction of the euro will increase economic integration and reinforce the positive effects of the single market, primarily by eliminating the risks relating to exchange rates.
There are also other factors.
There is greater transparency in prices, an improvement in competition and an increase in trade and investment both cross-border and also between other countries or areas affected by monetary union.
At the same time, as the common monetary policy will mean the same interest rate for all Member States of the monetary union, it will not only have an effect in terms of developing demand, but it will also mean greater integration of the financial markets.
This should also bring benefits for savers and investors.
For this to have the greatest positive effect, it is essential that we carry out a policy of rationalised public finances, which will not generate tensions in monetary policy itself, and at the same time, a decisive policy of structural reforms and a competition policy, which will allow the maximum benefit to be drawn from the process.
In order for economic and monetary union to function successfully, we do not need a major budget which will allow cyclical transfers in the event of difficulties.
I believe that the Treaty, supplemented by the Stability and Growth Pact, provides adequate instruments to implement an economic policy which is compatible with a unified monetary policy.
The basic framework which we have introduced is a framework of mutual supervision of national fiscal policies and of coordination of economic policies by means of processes to improve our structural situations and the coordination or creation of a positive macroeconomic environment which will favour growth and employment, and at the same time reduce the possibility of asymmetric clashes caused by economic policies.
Budgetary consolidation itself, which is, of course, the reduction of the public deficit, gives each Member State room to act in adverse situations.
Greater labour mobility may certainly help to confront the problems which may arise in the event of asymmetric clashes.
Both an increase in the available work force and an improvement in productivity would improve the situation in terms of creating jobs and helping to reduce unemployment.
That is why we attach particular importance to labour mobility.
The Commission has therefore insisted on its various strategies regarding the specific point of labour mobility, while remaining aware that this is a difficult issue.
It is difficult within Member States and it is difficult between one Member State and another, due not only to historical and cultural incompatibilities in terms of education, but also to a series of other aspects related to this type of situation.
Finally, I would say that clearly these difficulties which are being considered - and which may arise in the future - will surely be much less serious than those which have been brought up in theory by people who study monetary union, given that - and this is our experience to date - we are seeing an approximation of the economic policies of the countries and we have created room, in monetary terms, for us to confront difficulties more easily than in the past.
Thank you very much for your answer which, up to a point, contains many of the features I had expected.
I should like to follow up your answer and ask you what is meant by saying that the euro project will not be a success unless there is a large budget which can cope with fluctuations in the trade cycle.
What kind of large budget?
Is it a large EU budget which is being considered?
I should also like to hear whether it can be imagined continuing with a policy based upon recommendations and exhortations to the euro zone countries.
For example, Denmark has, in fact, on a number of occasions disregarded recommendations from the Commission.
Is this state of affairs to be accepted in the long term or will the Stability and Growth Pact be followed up and a stable environment ensured for EMU by adopting working methods of a type different from those involving recommendations and exhortations?
In your reply - or comment - I note two implicit questions.
Firstly, a major budget is essential to tackle the cyclical difficulties.
This would lead us into a very complex debate.
The problems are not caused by clashes themselves, but by asymmetric clashes; asymmetric clashes differ depending on whether they are temporary or permanent, whether they relate to supply or demand.
We have little experience to help us define a typology and lay down a single formula for resolving these difficulties by budgetary means.
We believe that it is a much better idea to establish a general framework of economic health, of good economic behaviour, which will allow us to confront the difficulties in the case in question.
In the future we will continue with recommendations to comply with the stability and growth pact.
I do not know whether it is a good or a bad thing, but that is our obligation as the Commission.
This is an agreement adopted by the Council of Ministers as a result of initiatives by certain Member States and which I also support, since I believe that a good budgetary policy provides greater room for manoeuvre in the event of difficulties.
Earlier I referred to the fact that the situation is different in each of the Member States.
In this year' s recommendations we have taken particular account of the Commission' s own analyses regarding what the margins are, and which benchmarks we are setting in each of the Member States to tackle the crisis without exceeding the 3% public deficit, which is the figure we have established as a reference.
We can see that that situation is different in each of the countries and, therefore, our recommendations and our comments will always be different in each of the countries, although this is not the only aspect that we take into consideration.
Mr President, the current weakness and volatility of the euro is a cause of concern both within and outside the euro-zone.
Does the Commissioner feel that the current stability pact and the powers of the European Central Bank are sufficient to force the Euro-land states to make the difficult and fundamental adjustments in their economic and labour markets, which are essential if the euro is going to be taken seriously by the global financial markets?
I do not see any great correlation between the two questions, but I do note that the euro is being taken seriously.
What has happened with the euro?
There are many technical explanations as to why we are in this situation.
This would require a broader debate, focussing on the starting point, which is the development of economic forecasts and the real economies of each of the areas.
It would also clearly concern changes in interest rates and certain other technical elements, such as expiry dates for certain types of issues etc.
The reality is that, by analysing the euro on the basis, fundamentally, of the evolution of the exchange rate, we are making an incorrect evaluation of its introduction.
The euro has been a great success, in terms of its introduction, in terms of issuing it as a currency, in terms of the consolidation of an excellent economic situation in Europe and in terms of the forecasts for the future.
It is true that the interest rate is not what we would have liked.
We believe that a strong economy means a strong euro.
We also believe that the development of growth in Europe will be strong throughout 2000 and, as a result, we will match US growth by the end of this year.
In these circumstances, we believe that the value of the euro will be rising in the coming months.
Therefore, despite a certain degree of concern - because that concern exists within public opinion - about the evolution of the euro, we believe that this situation will be corrected and that it should be considered to be temporary rather than permanent.
Mr President, in my opinion, the supplementary question by Mr Purvis was most pertinent, since recently the need for increased economic cooperation amongst the EMU countries has been justified by precisely this weakening of the value of the euro in relation to the US dollar.
The reason for the dollar becoming stronger in comparison to the euro is simply that the national economy of the USA is stronger than that of the euro countries.
Hundreds of thousands of new jobs have recently been created in the USA, while the number of jobs in Europe has been cut.
I would like to ask the Commissioner firstly, whether the Commission admits that the weakening of the euro that has been much thrashed out in public, is a consequence of the infrastructural problems and lack of dynamism of the EU economy, particularly in relation to the USA, and whether he really believes that the kind of Keynesian action as proposed by Mrs Frahm would be the cure for this weakening of the euro, and whether he believes that the Commission will achieve better results in this matter, when the national governments of France and Germany have actually proceeded in the totally opposite direction, and their actions have weakened even further the competitiveness of the euro area.
As an example, I refer here to the decisions made by the French Government on working hours.
I will try to reply briefly, although these are complex questions and I will therefore have to give this point some attention.
Firstly, with regard to increasing cooperation in terms of coordinating economic policies, I believe that it is necessary and positive and is one of the elements which is emerging from this current crisis.
The French President has highlighted this and it will obviously be a point for debate during the next presidency.
I do not agree with the theory that the euro' s development is leading to a fall in employment in Europe and an increase in employment in the USA.
Transfers of capital may generate additional activity in the United States, but the positive increase in exports is generating activity in Europe.
It would require a very complex and profound debate to deal with this issue.
In any event, what I do believe - as I said earlier - is that the euro, at the moment, has an exchange rate which, if we analyse it in relation to its components and its historical situation, is not that different from situations which have existed at other times.
I am convinced that this is a transitional situation which will improve during this year.
Question No 38 by (H-0419/00):
Subject: Precarious employment and the industrial-accident rate in Spain and in the Murcia region At the Lisbon Summit, a commitment was made to achieving full employment in proper jobs throughout the EU.
In response to the French Government' s proposal involving a reduction in working hours in order to create more proper, stable jobs, the approach agreed between the Spanish and UK Governments, which calls for further deregulation of employment conditions in order to increase the number of jobs, has been adopted.
Spain' s experience over the last four years has demonstrated that jobs are indeed created but are predominantly casual and precarious in nature, and they are associated with a high rate of industrial accidents, the Murcia region being the part of Spain where that rate is highest.
Does the Commission not think that there is an urgent case for monitoring the conditions under which jobs are being created in the various EU countries and regions, so as to ensure that job-creation is not at the expense of the stability and dignity of workers and especially of young people entering the job market for the first time?
Questions to Mr Verheugen
Mr President, despite the fact that I was born next to the Murcia region, it is difficult for me to analyse, in Community terms, the problems of the precarious employment there.
Therefore, allow me to make a rather more general comment.
The assessment of the labour market reforms which have resulted from the processes we have established in the Union - the Luxembourg process and the broad guidelines for economic policy - demonstrates that the reforms of the regulations on the labour market in the different countries are making a positive and significant contribution to greater economic growth and to promoting the creation of employment and the greater participation of men and women in the labour market.
The broad guidelines of economic policy and the recommendations for employment have never advocated a simple deregulation of the labour market, as the question states.
Together with the reform of certain labour market regulations, they also include, for example, the need to adopt measures which will promote entrepreneurial spirit or active labour market policies - and we state this quite deliberately - to improve employment opportunities.
The measures adopted in each Member State must be adapted to the problems and reality of each of them.
It is also quite normal for the Commission to insist on the need to hold debates and make agreements with social partners so that they may actively participate in the changes to the labour market in each country.
As well as a significant and lasting increase in the levels of employment, one of the key priorities of the employment strategy is to improve the quality of jobs.
The recent Lisbon Summit gave a new impulse to the Union' s economic and social agenda and we have also insisted on this point by talking of more and better employment.
I would also like to highlight, as a fundamental contribution to the consolidation of the progress made until now, the promotion and maintenance of rigorous regulations on health and safety at work, which has been one of the most prominent issues in the debate held in the Commission, which advocates better jobs in Europe.
Labour market reforms directed at improving employment opportunities and workers' ability to adapt to these new opportunities in no way seek to undermine working conditions or health and safety at work.
In accordance with its legal competence as laid down in the Treaty, the Commission has kept up the necessary efforts to implement and propose various legal instruments and monitor the incorporation of the acquis communautaire in this area.
With regard to your specific question and the case of Spain, it is Spain' s responsibility, like the other Members, to apply the Commission' s directives.
It is also the responsibility of the Member States to monitor the application of these directives in all of their regions.
The Commission must guarantee that those directives are transposed into national law correctly and, clearly, to monitor all the issues relating to its application, which is the responsibility of the national authorities.
I am grateful to Mr Solbes for the intention behind his reply, which is to safeguard and show concern for worker' s conditions.
Nevertheless, the political analysis of the Lisbon Summit reveals that there were two proposals: one which was more social, more committed, which came from the French Prime Minister, Mr Jospin, and the other, resulting from a previous agreement between Mr Blair and Mr Aznar, deregulating the labour market and making it more flexible.
The latter proposal won the day.
If we take Spain as an example, it is clear that job instability, temporary employment and work accidents are on the increase.
Do you not therefore believe that it would be appropriate, in the review of the Treaty of Amsterdam, to incorporate the Social Charter with specific instruments and measures, as occurred with the five classic points of the Treaty of Maastricht, in order to guarantee full employment and employment quality and that it therefore not be left to the whim of each of the countries?
By way of clarification, reference has been made to the number of work accidents in Murcia because it has such a sad record within Spain; that is why we are concerned.
I imagined that was the reason for the reference to Murcia, and not the fact that I was born next to that province.
With regard to the basic problem, I would make a different comment.
Our concern has always been not only greater employment but also greater quality of employment.
In the broad guidelines for economic policy for this year, and in the specific recommendation for Spain, we expressly refer to the need for the problems to be analysed, amongst them the cost of dismissal, which may be important with regard to temporary employment, because we believe that a distinction should be made between precariousness and flexibility, which are two very different things.
Nevertheless, you introduced a second element in your supplementary question which, in my opinion, is of great interest: Why do we not establish the objective of full employment in the same way that we established the objectives of the Treaty of Maastricht at the time?
Basically because they are two completely different types of figure.
At Maastricht, what we put in place was compliance with obligations dependent on voluntary decisions adopted by the Member States which form the European Union.
In the case of full employment, the figure is the consequence of measures which are intended to achieve an objective, but which do not have a causal relationship which guarantees its objective.
What we can consider is what is being done in the various employment programmes, and that is the implementation of certain elements which will allow us to move towards full employment.
When we spoke of full employment in the Commission document which served as a basis for the debate in Lisbon, we expressly said that if we add the development of the economy in accordance with currently available figures to the various determining factors and policies proposed by the Commission, full employment will be achieved.
However, this cannot be a political objective, as in Maastricht, because it does not depend on the will of the different governments or on a specific decision by each one of them.
I would like to say that, in order to judge from afar, it is often necessary to understand the reality.
In the countries of the Southern Mediterranean, and specifically in the region of Murcia, they have, in recent years, stopped managing unemployment and started to manage employment.
They have moved from an extraordinary and terrifying level of unemployment, originating in the great state industries whose economic model was unsustainable, through a crisis and then to a situation involving the growth of small businesses (SMBs) and economic incentives which have generated a new and vibrant model.
However, it is clear that accidents in the workplace - which I am now talking about - are a problem of education and mutual responsibility on the part of businessmen, the state, public administration and, of course, trade unions.
Unless they all work in unison, they will not achieve this objective.
In Spain, back in 1995, a law was adopted in this respect, and they are trying to comply with it, but this cannot be achieved in a day.
Therefore, Commissioner, firstly, what active policies and which economic sectors do you intend to bring into play in order to achieve better education in this particular area, so that a sense of responsibility may be developed?
Secondly and very specifically: is there any programme to educate immigrants in the language of their host country, so that we can educate them to understand the minimum safety standards in this region which is host to many immigrants who do not speak our language?
Thank you for your comments.
With regard to your questions, I will say again that the distribution of responsibilities between the Commission and the Member States dictates that these matters fall to the Member States.
Consequently, both the funding of these immigrant education programmes and the active policies are decisions which logically depend on which social policy the Spanish Government accepts or decides on.
Question No 39 by (H-0352/00):
Subject: Adaptation of the applicant countries Will the Commission indicate the total number of documents that have been sent to the applicant countries as well as the total volume of the 'acquis' and will it consider forms of cooperation that do not require the applicant countries to accept every rule?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the entire Community acquis, i.e. all the legal acts of the European Union without exception were sent to the candidate countries immediately after the resolution of the Luxembourg European Council in December 1997, during the course of screening.
No-one has ever counted them and I cannot therefore tell you how many there are.
We usually talk of just over 20 000 legal acts in this context.
Mr President, there is not very much to thank the Commission for.
I find it completely incomprehensible that there should be an institution which is unable to put together elementary statistics concerning the existing rules, which is unable to add up how much money is being sent to the candidate countries, which is unable to provide some general numerical information so that ordinary people can follow what is happening and which is unable to supply the total acquis on a CD-Rom to anyone who might be interested in it.
It is really quite simple.
I have worked on it for a good many years.
It is completely impossible even for organisations with academic employees to find out how extensive the 'acquis' is, and it is apparently impossible for Mr Vanhengen to give the entire acquis to a Member of the European Parliament who is quite prepared to go through it and distribute the tasks among the different employees in order to see what positions are to be adopted on its various aspects.
So there is nothing to thank the Commission for.
Mr President, Mr Bonde, we have met each other face to face here before, and I personally am having to exercise a great deal of self-control in order to maintain the necessary degree of decorum in the House.
The legal acts which we are talking about here are legal acts passed by the Council, by Parliament, by the Commission and by all the Community institutions.
You, as a member of the most important legislative institution of the European Union know full well that these legal acts have not been numbered consecutively.
I do not know of a single Member State of the European Union whose laws are numbered consecutively.
Even the laws in your country - and I have taken the trouble of finding out - are not numbered consecutively.
If you think that Commission officials are well employed if I sit them down and tell them to spend a week counting the legal acts issued since 1955, then let me tell you that I do not.
I have no intention of arranging for them to be counted.
The information which I have given you is as accurate as possible: i.e. that candidate countries are sent all, I repeat all the legal acts of the European Union without exception.
I am curious to know how it helps if I tell you that this figure is 21334 or 21425.
If you want, you sit down and do it.
You can find the entire Community acquis on-line on the Celex website here in Parliament.
You tell your employees to count these legal acts, because I shall not tell mine to do so.
Mr President, Commissioner, the acquis is, of course, an important basis for accession.
Can you tell us how acquis screening is proceeding in your view?
With which candidate countries has most progress been made?
Which chapters have been completed?
Chancellor Schröder recently stated in a press conference that the first admissions will probably be in 2002.
How do you assess the scenario if the legal inventory is completed in optimum time?
What do you think is the earliest possible date for accession if optimum use is made of all deadlines and options?
I can tell the honourable Member that screening - i.e. legislative adjustment - was of course completed with all candidates some time ago.
It is updated now and again because the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission are not idle and continue to produce legal acts, meaning that the acquis changes.
This amended acquis must, of course, be included in negotiations.
But this happens on a regular basis.
The screening process has therefore been completed with all candidates.
Your question is based on a misunderstanding.
Screening is not the same as negotiation, screening is merely an adjustment process.
Screening is used merely to identify the acquis of the European Union and how much of it already forms part of the candidate country' s legislation and how much does not.
That has been done.
Now you want to know how far negotiations have proceeded overall.
I know that for the Luxembourg group of countries, with which negotiations started in March 1998, between 10 and 15 out of a total of 31 negotiating chapters have been provisionally completed.
A few more will be completed during the Portuguese presidency.
But more important than the number of chapters completed is probably the number of chapters opened.
By the end of the Portuguese presidency, all 29 chapters will be on the negotiating table for the Luxembourg group of countries.
Only the chapters entitled "Institutions" and "Miscellaneous" are still closed for obvious reasons.
They come at the end.
With the Helsinki group of countries, negotiations did not start until February of this year.
Between 5 and 8 chapters will be opened for these countries during the Portuguese presidency.
Indeed, I think that we will be able to provisionally close a whole series of chapters by the end of the Portuguese presidency, but we cannot yet forecast how many with any degree of accuracy.
In all events, the process is proceeding apace.
It is quite impossible to forecast when the negotiating process will be completed and when the first accessions will take place.
There have been intensive discussions on this over recent weeks and months.
The Commission stated quite clearly in Helsinki that an accession scenario could not be developed until all the information needed was available.
We need to clarify if the Union itself is ready for accession, i.e. if the institutional reforms have been completed, how far negotiations have progressed and, most importantly, and this will be the most difficult exercise at the end, if a candidate country is judged to be in a position to really apply and implement the acquis it has adopted.
As things stand today, I am bound to say that we cannot forecast when such a scenario will be ready.
I have said on many occasions that I would like it to be ready by the end of this year, at the Nice summit.
But whether or not that will be possible will only become apparent in the autumn of this year once we have the up-to-date progress reports on preparations for accession for each individual candidate country.
Mr President, Commissioner, my question does not concern the timetable; instead I would like to ask a question regarding a principle of enlargement.
The process of enlargement is expected to be a truly demanding one, in which there is a danger that we either become frustrated by long waiting times or compromise over the criteria by granting overlong transition periods, which will naturally cause displeasure in the old Member States.
An arrangement such as the EEA agreement may be regarded as a solution of the past, but I would nevertheless like to ask, whether the Commission could, even in principle, consider a possible solution along the lines of the EEA agreement - not as it stands but of that nature - to be used as some sort of ' hatchery' or incubator for the new Member States prior to actual membership, instead of the applicant countries having to wait for long periods of time before permanent membership becomes a reality.
I would further like to ask, whether the Commission shares the view that this kind of arrangement, along the lines of the EEA agreement, could considerably reduce the costs of enlargement and promote the economic development of the applicant countries.
I hope this question was not an improper one at this time.
Madam, what you wish to engage in now is a hypothetical discussion.
This discussion was held in the first half of the 1990s and it culminated in resolutions of which you are aware, which were discussed on several occasions in Parliament and which can no longer be made retroactive, namely the resolution of the European Councils of Copenhagen, Essen and Luxembourg to prepare the Central and Eastern European Countries and Cyprus and Malta for full membership.
There is no point today in debating whether or not there might have been an alternative.
In any case, it is my recollection that the candidates were not satisfied with anything less.
They would not have accepted less and would have seen it as discrimination, meaning that, in Luxembourg in 1997, there was no longer any realistic alternative to the resolution taken in any case.
There is not a single country involved in the process which takes the view that we should depart from this objective of full membership.
If there were, I would know about it.
But there is not.
All 12 countries with which we are negotiating are seriously working towards the goal of full membership and I urgently advise you against opening a debate on changing the fundamental objectives of enlargement now that the process has begun.
The candidates will only see it as a serious breach of trust.
Question No 40 by (H-0388/00):
Subject: Eastward enlargement: transitional arrangements regarding the free movement of services Negotiations with the first group of applicant states (the 'Luxembourg group' ) on the free movement of services have reached a provisional conclusion.
What transitional arrangements have been agreed to date?
What effects does the Commission expect these to have on small businesses and self-employed craft workers, particularly in the regions bordering on the applicant states?
Questions to Mr Monti
Mrs Müller, the question is based on an erroneous premise.
The chapter entitled "Free movement of services" has not been provisionally completed with any candidate country.
Nor do I expect this chapter to be completed with any country in the immediate future.
Mr President, it is certainly correct to say, Mr Verheugen, that the chapter has not been completed, but negotiations have started.
However what I am interested in is this: Have transitional arrangements in the area of the free movement of services been applied for during these negotiations?
You know, I am from a border region and I know exactly what the situation is on the ground.
I am convinced that medium-sized companies and the craft industry will face huge problems and enormous challenges when it comes to the free movement of services, because there is a huge wage differential of 1:10 at present.
You yourself know full well which industries are affected.
Is there any intention on the European side to apply for transitional arrangements in the area of the free movement of services?
The Czech Republic has already applied for transition periods for the acquisition of land by foreigners and this will have an impact on services.
What is your position on the transition periods which the Czech Republic has applied for and what is the Commission' s position in general on this point?
Mr President, Mrs Müller, I assume that you know that accession negotiations take the form of a state conference at which the Member States, not the Commission, negotiate and I am not therefore entitled to divulge the content of negotiations which have not yet been completed.
I would gladly do so, but I am not allowed to.
However, I can still answer the question, because the Commission naturally has an opinion on the points which you raised.
First, the Commission takes the view that transition periods should only be considered during the enlargement process if the aim of enlargement cannot otherwise be achieved within the required time or by the required date.
Transition periods must be very, very limited in both scope and duration, especially where the internal market is at stake.
You must know that every transition period, irrespective of whom it benefits, suspends the internal market for that area.
And if a large number of transition periods are agreed, then we can forget the whole idea of the internal market for years to come.
That cannot be the meaning of enlargement.
The question which you actually want answered is the question of how we can prepare for the problems which will arise in certain border regions following enlargement.
The region which you come from and the region which I come from are just such regions.
I have discussed this matter on many occasions in your country, as you know, and so I can be brief.
I think that there may well be transition periods in relation to the free movement of workers, which is the really difficult question.
But we have not yet reached that point.
In the area of the free movement of services, which will lead to stiffer competition in border regions, I think that we need to start preparing an action programme right now, particularly so that small and medium-sized enterprises in border regions will be capable of adapting to and withstanding this new competition.
When, a few weeks ago, I once again read the Commission' s progress report on Lithuania, it occurred to me that the progress reports are being produced as if it were the previous enlargement we were talking about, that is to say the enlargement which took place before the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force.
The Social Chapter is the corollary and counterpart of free movement of services and labour mobility.
My question is about whether the forthcoming progress reports will, to a greater degree than the previous reports, take account of employment and of the Social Chapter, which is now a part of our 'acquis' .
I believe, in fact, that we can succeed in enlarging the Union if we combine these two aspects: firstly, the free movement of services and employees and, secondly, more equal conditions when it comes to the dialogue between employers and employees.
The Social Chapter is, in fact, a part of our common regulations, with which the candidate States must also comply.
I would like to remind MEPs in general that questions during Question Time must be specific questions on specific issues, which lead to specific answers.
Everything else must take place during the normal debates of the parliamentary committees, because, otherwise, the MEPs who are due to follow will not be able to put their questions.
Having given this general warning, I give the floor to the Commissioner.
Mr President, to be honest, the underlying question was how many legal acts does the European Union have.
Now I am being asked to answer a supplementary question which very specifically concerns one candidate country.
I really cannot see the connection between these two questions, except that both relate to enlargement.
However, if you take the view that there is a connection, then I am prepared to answer the question and am able to do so.
All the acquis is taken into consideration in the progress reports on the candidate countries.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights cannot be taken into consideration because it is not yet ready.
It is only now being drafted and its legal status has not yet been recognised.
I know no better than you if this Charter will become part of the Treaty or if it will be no more than a solemn declaration.
If this Charter should become part of the Treaty, it will of course be taken into account in future progress reports and we shall report on how the details of this Charter are being taken into account in the individual countries concerned.
We must also report in the progress reports - as you will have noticed - as to whether a country is complying with the Copenhagen criteria.
That basically answers the questions, because the political criteria of Copenhagen basically cover everything which will appear in this Charter of Fundamental Rights and these questions have also been answered in relation to Lithuania and will be answered in the next progress report on Lithuania.
Mrs Thors is raising a point of order.
I wish to point out that I was not earlier referring to Mrs Thors, but to all MEPs, but you have the floor.
I would ask you not to enter into a debate with the Commissioner.
Commissioner, I just want to clarify matters as there seems to be very bad interpretation - I was not talking about the Charter of Fundamental Rights but about the Social Charter including the rights of workers.
These include working conditions which I think are a corollary to the movement of services.
What are the conditions under which services are provided?
What are the conditions under which people are working?
That is the corollary of free movement.
Mr President, I did indeed hear the words Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Of course, the Social Charter forms part of the Treaty and is therefore negotiated with all candidate countries.
It forms part of the Community acquis.
We report on how the individual candidate countries are preparing to apply the acquis, i.e. to apply the Social Charter.
I am not at the moment in a position to tell you exactly how things stand with Lithuania in particular, but I would be more than happy to give you a written reply specifically on Lithuania and the Social Charter.
Commissioner, we were in fact discussing the matter of transition periods.
I should like to ask what your position is on the wishes of Poland and the Czech Republic to introduce long transition periods for two areas of concern to them, namely the free acquisition of land, including farmland, and the freedom of establishment.
These are two very fundamental points and I should like to know what the Commission or your position is on this.
I also wanted to ask you what you think about linking transition periods in the Member States and the candidate countries in the sort of package deal that is constantly being discussed.
On the first question, I should like to say that the Member States still have no negotiating position on this question, nor is there any Commission draft on it.
My own personal opinion is irrelevant.
In any case, I cannot explain it to the European Parliament until the institutions have formed their own opinion.
As far as linking transition periods is concerned, this happens automatically.
We shall have a so-called "play off" at the end of the negotiations between the wishes which the Member States still have and the wishes which the candidates have.
Basically their wishes concern transition periods.
Irrespective of whether or not that is what it is formally called, you can imagine how this sort of negotiation process proceeds.
It will be a negotiation and one of the principles of negotiation is that one side makes a concession so that the other side also makes a concession and an overall compromise must be found in the end which takes accounts of the wishes of both sides.
Highly specific packages - if that was your question - whereby we also say: we are linking the wish for transition periods on the one side to the wish for transition periods on the other side are not feasible in my opinion.
I should draw your attention to the fact that the question of transition periods in relation to the free movement of workers, for example, only gives cause for concern in two of the fifteen Member States.
It is a German problem and it is an Austrian problem.
It is not a problem for the other thirteen which is why I cannot predict exactly how this issue will be handled in the final stage of negotiations.
Thank you very much, Mr Commissioner, for your replies.
Questions Nos 41 and 42 will be replied to in writing.
Mr Titley has the floor for a point of order.
- Mr President, you realise this is the second month running you have done this to me - cut me off as my question was coming up.
Yet you have allowed speakers to speak for over one minute including a rather long and pointless dialogue about the merits of Murcia.
Also in the rules as I recall, you are only allowed to take one supplementary question per political group and these rules are being broken and as a consequence, for the second week running, I miss out on a question.
I think it is absolutely outrageous and I will be writing to the President to complain.
Mr Titley, I will reply briefly so as not to inconvenience the other MEPs.
I am not getting at you.
What has happened is that the 20 minutes devoted to Mr Verheugen have run out and it is now Mr Monti' s turn to reply, and he has been waiting some time.
With regard to the Rules of Procedure, I must tell you that there are two supplementary questions, not one.
Please read the Rules of Procedure.
There are two questions.
I am not going to get into a debate.
You may write the letter you mentioned and you will receive a polite and full reply, but please do not worry since my intention was to give you the floor within the time allotted.
Question No 43 by (H-0354/00):
Subject: Applications by Member States regarding state aids Is the Commission happy about the speed with which it deals with applications by Member States to provide state aids?
The time-limits for the Commission to take a decision on aid projects notified by a Member State are laid down in Council Regulation 659/1999.
In most cases the Commission can close the examination of the notified aid project after the preliminary examination, that is without opening a formal investigation.
Such decisions must be taken within two months following the receipt of a complete notification.
In practice, notifications are frequently incomplete so that the Commission is forced to request additional information before it can take a decision.
In order to further reduce this type of unnecessary delay, the Commission has prepared detailed standard notification forms for certain types of aid - regional, training, R&D, etc. and will continue to do so where appropriate.
When doubts are raised about the compatibility of an aid project with the common market, the Commission must open a formal investigation for which the regulation provides an indicative time-limit of 18 months.
The Commission would certainly prefer to be able to reduce this time-limit.
However, this seems at present not feasible for different reasons.
Firstly, considerable time is needed for translation and publication of the decision, for third parties to submit observations and for the Member States to comment on these observations.
Secondly, the cases for which a formal investigation is opened are usually very complex and therefore require a longer period of examination, often also involving meetings with the Member State concerned and modifications to the original project.
Nevertheless, the Commission considers that given the absence of any time-limit for the formal investigation procedure before the regulation, the regulation has already brought some progress.
The Commission is also considering new ways of improving the efficiency and speed of state aid procedures.
In this regard, the group exemption regulations, which are currently being prepared for aid to SMEs - training aid and de minimis aid - should be mentioned.
Once they are in force, Member States will no longer need to notify aid projects complying with the conditions of the exemption regulations but can grant the aid immediately.
This will considerably simplify state aid procedures.
I wish to thank the Commissioner for that very full answer and, in particular, for the last part where he indicates that the Commission is looking at speeding up and, where possible, giving fast-track approval for state aids.
However, in some Member States there is still a serious problem created by delays in decision-taking on state aids.
I am convinced that some jobs have been lost because waiting for the decision on state aid has meant that a company has gone out of business in the end because it did not have the approval in time.
In terms of the delay, is the Commission of the opinion that the reorganisation that is currently going on will provide new resources and assistance to him in his attempts to speed up the processing of state aids, or does the problem lie, as he partly indicated, with the Member States in the inadequate information provided by some of them when they make an application?
As you know, Mr Martin, we are working in a number of directions concerning state aid and in order to make state aid control more stringent.
As to time limits, there are no plans to change the time limits in the near future.
The deadlines are laid down in a Council regulation, which for the first time codifies state aid procedures, and since that regulation was only adopted in 1999 it is not likely to be modified in the near future.
However, we are prepared and indeed willing to try to speed up certain aspects of the decision-making wherever possible, for example preparing the standard notification forms.
You mentioned the problem of resources.
Of course, this is a key problem for the whole of the competition policy activities and that includes state aid.
The better the quality of information provided to begin with by Member States in their notifications, the more likely it is that the process will be smooth and conducted in a relatively short time scale.
Question No 44 by (H-0355/00):
Subject: State aids to nuclear power Given that the electricity market came into effect in February last, subjecting all electricity production to the rules of the internal market, and that the nuclear common market under Article 92 of the Euratom Treaty does not include electricity as a product, does the Commission agree that electricity generated using nuclear energy is now subject to the same internal market rules as all other forms of electricity?
Does the Commission therefore consider that all state aids to the nuclear industry are prohibited by the EC Treaty, given that no derogation is specified, and that Article 98 of the Euratom Treaty does not provide for a subsidised accident insurance scheme for nuclear risks?
In this context what proposals, if any, has the Commission made to the UK Government concerning their NFFO system under Article 87 of the EC Treaty?
Can the Commission now confirm that it is investigating state aids to the nuclear industry as requested by the Green/EFA Group in its letter to Commissioner Monti of 10 March?
Mr President, the Commission shares the opinion of the honourable Member to the effect that the liberalisation of the electricity market affects all types of electricity, including electricity generated using nuclear energy.
The Commission considers that there are no grounds for interpreting the EC or the Euratom Treaty as necessarily prohibiting all state aids to the nuclear industry.
The Euratom Treaty does not include any clauses specifically prohibiting state aid.
Moreover, while Articles 87 and 88 of the EC Treaty do provide for a general principle prohibiting state aids, they also authorise specific categories of state aid.
It would only be possible to determine the incompatibility of aid following specific investigation of each case.
The Commission has not made any proposals to the UK Government on the subject of the NFFO system in application of Article 88 of the EC Treaty.
As regards any existing aid to the nuclear industry, the Commission is not undertaking any systematic investigation.
If, however, cases of incompatible aid are brought to the attention of the Commission, such cases will be dealt with in compliance with the terms of the relevant articles of the EC and Euratom Treaties.
Commissioner, thank you for your response, but I must admit I find it hard to grasp the logic of it.
On the one hand, regarding state aid to the environment, you expect to implement a very thorough analysis of the subsidies to renewable energies even though it is clear that, for the time being, this sector is at a disadvantage due to the internalisation of costs.
In other words, the market share of renewable energies within the current electricity market is barely 5%.
Alongside that, nuclear energy amounts to 30% of the market but in this case you do not plan any systematic investigation.
I do not therefore see how we can possibly understand this, if the logic of your energy policy is supposed to be fair, treating all forms of electricity production alike.
I must therefore ask you to justify your position since, as far as I am concerned, and also many others, most especially the renewable energy industry, it is a position which is extremely difficult to comprehend.
Thank you, Mr Turmes.
I am very aware of environmental requirements, as I was even in the previous Commission, when I proposed the directive on the taxation of energy products, and I try to adopt the same approach in my activities within the Prodi Commission.
I very clearly understand your concern, but permit me some observations.
The proposed new framework for state aid to the environment is very flexible with regard to the granting of aid to renewable energies.
It authorises aid of at least 40% of eligible costs in the case of investment, and for operational aid the Member States are entitled to adopt a system authorising aid up to 100% of eligible costs.
I do not think, therefore, that you can accuse the Commission of banning aid to renewable energies.
There is some competition, again permit me the observation, not only between renewable energies as opposed to conventional energies, but also between the various forms of renewable energies.
Aid to these forms of energy may, moreover, vary according to the Member States.
Unregulated aid would therefore engender distortions of competition, which could have an adverse impact primarily on certain forms of renewable energy.
The Commission recognises that renewable energies may need support in order to be able to develop but, at the same time, it is also important for these forms of energy to adapt gradually to competitive markets in order to ensure their long-term development.
Question No 45 by (H-0383/00):
Subject: Financial aid given to the European nuclear industry What assessment has been made by the Commission of the financial aid given to the European nuclear industry - in the form of support for Euratom and the Joint Research Centres - in respect of competition policy on electricity production in the European Union?
Community action within the context of the Euratom Treaty complies with the provisions of the Treaty and relates, in particular, to the financing of the Commission's tasks: protection against radiation, monitoring safety and research.
As far as the latter is concerned, Community programmes for nuclear research are established by the Council which, pursuant to Article 7 of the Euratom Treaty, acts unanimously on Commission proposals.
In this context, the activities of the JRCs are intended, in conformance with its mission, to increase protection and nuclear safety, and in particular, provide scientific and technical assistance to the competent directorates-general.
Article 305 (ex Article 232) of the EC Treaty establishes that the provisions of this Treaty do not derogate from the Euratom Treaty.
This is particularly true in the case of the competition rules, which do not derogate from the framework established by the Euratom Treaty regarding Community nuclear research.
Therefore, the Community research policy under the Euratom Treaty does not contradict the competition rules laid down by the EC Treaty.
Commissioner, you have failed to answer my question.
I want to know what assessments you are making on financial aid.
This relates to the previous question by Mr Turmes as well and the answer you gave to that in respect of competition policy on electricity production in the EU.
I conclude from your answers both to my question and the previous one that here we have not just a white elephant in the nuclear industry in Europe but a holy cow.
You can provide state aids that are untouchable, even by a Commissioner as powerful as yourself!
But let me ask you what exactly is the situation?
You said that under the Treaties there are derogations - and you quoted the Euratom Treaty.
There is clearly a distortion between Member States because of the state aids.
Where exactly in the Treaty are the written permissions for these state aids?
Could you elaborate on that please?
I shall try, Mrs Ahern.
First of all, if you allow me, I have here a note in French.
I should like to emphasise that the Commission does not rule out applying the rules of Community law on competition to public interventions in favour of nuclear electricity producers.
In its illustrative nuclear programme according to Article 40 of the Euratom Treaty, in particular, the Commission very clearly indicated that "Developments towards the liberalisation of the Community internal electricity market will mean that nuclear energy will have to compete in the same framework and under the same conditions as all other energy sources."
A full implementation of the internal market and a rigorous application of the relevant state aid and competition rules implies a level playing field for all energy sources.
Once this principle has been established, it is up to the Commission to investigate on an individual basis any allegations according to which the nuclear sector is in receipt of subsidies engendering unfair competition.
I may add that the services I am directly responsible for within the Commission are of the opinion that it is necessary to keep to a strict interpretation of the Treaty.
Competition rules are applicable to all electricity producers, including the nuclear sector, insofar as they do not depart from the terms of the Euratom Treaty.
I consider this position to be all the more justifiable since the directive liberalising the internal electricity market does not stipulate any specific rule for nuclear producers and does not make any distinctions on the grounds of the source of the electricity produced.
Commissioner, you say that neither the Treaty nor the directive on the internal electricity market stipulate any exemptions regarding subsidies to the nuclear sector.
On what part of the Treaty, then, is the exemption that you are still allowing the nuclear industry based?
Articles 87 and 88 make no reference to nuclear energy.
So it is not very clear what your legal basis is for exemptions for electricity generated using nuclear energy.
I believe I have given you all the information available to the Commission on the subject.
I can add that, on the operational level, as indeed I think I said in response to your own question, Mr Turmes, on existing aid to the nuclear industry, the Commission is not undertaking a comprehensive investigation.
If, however, cases of incompatible aid are brought to our attention, then these cases will be dealt with in accordance with the terms of the two treaties.
I would further like to add that in the logical overall construction of the EC Treaty, the articles governing state aid, i.e. Articles 87 and 88, are not restricted to specific sectors.
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed, Questions Nos 46 to 83 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes Questions to the Commission.
(The sitting was suspended at 7.25 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.)
Carbon dioxide emissions from new cars
The next item is the report (A5-0128/2000) by Mr González Alvarez, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing a scheme to monitor the average specific emissions of CO2 from new passenger cars.
Mr President, there are few of us here at this time in the evening, but it is also true that this is the third time we have debated this report in the European Parliament.
On the first occasion, in December 1998, this report on the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions from new passenger cars was approved at first reading with 48 amendments.
Of those 48 amendments, the Council and Commission accepted some in their entirety and others only in part.
The report therefore returned for a second reading.
The Council had accepted certain amendments which we considered to be important, but there remained certain aspects of the report and the amendments approved unanimously in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy - and by a large majority in plenary session - which we also considered to be important and which had not been accepted.
We are basically talking about the inclusion, in this scheme to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from new cars, of lightweight industrial cars, which are used widely within cities and whose carbon dioxide emissions also pollute.
It also seemed to us that they had not included a guarantee of the quality of data.
For a scheme of this nature, rigour and comparability, in terms of the data collected by the governments, are essential.
It also seemed very important that we maintained something that was traditional in the positions of the Committee on the Environment: a certain degree of precaution in relation to voluntary agreements.
If we bear in mind that Community Law - directives and regulations - is often not complied with, it seems to us all the more unlikely that voluntary agreements will be complied with.
The Committee on the Environment had little faith in these voluntary agreements and another amendment asked for the establishment of a clear legal framework which would come into play in the event that the voluntary agreements failed.
They also finally accepted our concern that one of the paragraphs should not only mention the stabilisation of emissions, but also their reduction.
Another amendment which we felt was important concerned the dimensions of vehicles.
Mr President, in total, 10 amendments were approved by a substantial majority in this House and then not accepted by the Council, and we therefore had to embark on this conciliation procedure, which I must point out has been neither difficult nor controversial.
As its very name indicates, the conciliation procedures require each of the parties to give some ground so that a final agreement can be reached.
In this final agreement, our main concerns have been addressed.
It includes a study of the future inclusion of lightweight industrial vehicles, the possibility of shortly presenting a proposed legal framework and reviewing the data with a view to making them more rigorous and more or less equivalent in each of the countries.
In short, Parliament' s main concerns have been taken up, if not in an immediate and radical manner, at least to the extent that a commitment has been given to adopt decisions on this issue in the future.
The only amendment which was not accepted was the one relating to dimensions of vehicles.
Parliament continued to insist that this was very important because the more powerful and larger the vehicle, the greater its level of emissions, and we considered it important that this be included in one of the annexes.
However, bearing in mind that another six issues relating to the capacities and conditions of the vehicles have been accepted, we felt that we could not prolong the conciliation process any longer, particularly considering that we want this study on the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions from new passenger cars to be implemented immediately in each of the countries.
Finally, I believe that this is a reasonable agreement, which is neither Parliament' s nor the Council' s initial proposal.
Mr President, I believe that we will have no problem ensuring that this agreement is approved.
Mrs González Álvarez, conciliation processes vary in difficulty, I can assure you.
I am glad that this one has gone smoothly.
Mr President, Commissioner, allow me to start by congratulating Mrs González Álvarez.
She really is most persistent, because we had a very good report at second reading as it was, but she was determined to incorporate more proposed amendments and I really must congratulate her on succeeding in doing so.
Parliament has asserted itself against the Council once again.
The introduction of this sort of monitoring scheme is just one of the many steps on the path towards compliance with the Kyoto protocol.
Reducing greenhouse gases by 8% in comparison with 1990 is therefore the main objective between now and the year 2012.
The dramatic change in the climate has been noticeable here in Strasbourg over the past two days and is far greater than we assumed.
It will therefore come as no surprise if we adopt this report unanimously tomorrow, as will certainly be the case, and that the Council and Parliament have been able to find a common position so quickly.
This joint monitoring scheme is the first of its kind and I think that its success or failure will decide whether or not we opt to introduce other similar schemes.
We have taken recourse to a three-part strategy in order to reduce CO2 emissions and fuel consumption: environmental agreements with the car industry, a system of tax incentives and a system of labelling for fuel consumption and CO2 emissions.
But despite all these efforts, directives and joint measuring schemes, we should not delude ourselves: we are unlikely to achieve the target objective of reducing greenhouse gases to 1990 levels.
Some experts are advising us to try and stabilise emissions at present levels.
That may well be pessimistic but if we consider that the number of cars on the road is continuing to rise in the 14 Member States, oh excuse me, I meant 15; we Austrians often have to stop and ask ourselves if there are 14 or 15 Member States, but there are in fact still 15, and if we consider enlargement to the east and if we consider that people in China and India also want to live as we do, then we should make no mistake: it will be difficult to achieve a reduction in greenhouse gases or CO2 and we should therefore make every effort to stabilise them at the very least.
Despite all the pessimism, introducing a pan-European monitoring system for CO2 emissions will not do any harm.
Let us try yet again with one small step at a time and perhaps the House will sit in 2005, when we need to examine the initial results, and complain that perhaps we did not do enough today.
Mr President, Commissioner, trust is good, control is even better, as the Head of State of a now defunct system used to say.
Nonetheless, once in a while these words of wisdom fit the bill because our CO2 strategy for cars is of course a new departure in that we are trusting in the willingness of car manufacturers in Europe, Korea and Japan to take voluntary technical measures to reduce CO2 emissions from their cars to 140g by 2008, which will represent a reduction of around 25%.
But we do still need a control mechanism so that we can intervene if necessary.
Hence: trust is good, control is even better.
We want a statistically perfect control instrument at our disposal and in this respect I thank the rapporteur for her persistence in establishing a reasonable control instrument for CO2 emissions from cars in Europe which applies to all Member States, which clearly shows which vehicles are registered where and what their CO2 emissions are, so that we can see clearly in 2003 if the manufacturers' undertakings are being respected or not.
And if they are not, then we must take legislative measures.
I should like to refer to another two pillars in our strategy: the question of labelling, which has been dealt with and the question of additional tax incentives for low-consumption vehicles, which is still a somewhat weak point.
I think that all of us, especially of course the Member States, need to give clear additional incentives, so that we really can achieve our objective of 120 g in 2005.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to congratulate our rapporteur on the excellent results that she has achieved and to begin by placing this report in the broader context of climate change.
Since the Rio de Janeiro Conference and then Kyoto, the European Union has always led the political side of the debate on climate change.
Nevertheless, although Europe continues to lead the debate in terms of rhetoric, it is beginning to lose the legitimacy to do so in a credible way.
It is rather pointless for the European Union to try to alarm the whole world with this problem when, in reality, the European greenhouse gas bubble, in particular the carbon dioxide bubble, is more likely to increase by 6% to 8% than to decrease by the 8% that we agreed in Kyoto.
It is therefore time to take internal action in order to lend credibility to our external efforts.
In terms of political action, the transport sector must be our priority for the following two fundamental reasons.
Firstly, because, according to the Green Paper published by the European Commission, this sector will not be part of the European trading system for carbon dioxide emissions, and all greenhouse gas reductions will therefore have to be achieved exclusively through national and Community policies and measures.
Secondly, because transport is the sector that is contributing most to Europe' s falling short of the levels set in Kyoto.
According to a study recently published by the European Environment Agency, transport is responsible for almost 30% of the European Union' s total emissions, and it predicts that the level of carbon dioxide emissions generated by this sector will increase by 39% of the 1990 level by 2010.
Given this extremely disturbing picture, which shows that road transport is responsible for 85% of total carbon dioxide emissions in the transport sector, and given the overwhelming need for action, the agreement reached in the Conciliation Committee on this system for monitoring CO2 emissions from light passenger vehicles is to be welcomed.
This system is a crucial aspect in the implementation of the Kyoto protocol and will ensure rigorous control of the voluntary commitment made by the car industry to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in new passenger vehicles by 25%.
I regret the fact that it has not been possible to include light commercial vehicles in this system.
In any event, I congratulate Mrs González Álvarez once again on the results she has achieved.
Mr President, Commissioner, I intend to be as brief as our successful rapporteur in the conciliation procedure.
However, let me just offer her my hearty congratulations on her excellent report and brilliant success, as some of the previous speakers have done.
Contrary to some previous speakers, I think it is most important that the report should seek not just to stabilise concentrations of greenhouse gases but to reduce them, especially given the fact that we need to achieve a demonstrable success by 2005 under the terms of the Kyoto protocol.
I think it is fundamental, given the reservation which this Parliament has always expressed in connection with voluntary obligations in environmental agreements, that we have managed to include the passage stating that data will be used from 2003 onwards to monitor the voluntary obligations of the car industry.
I also think that it is fundamental - and the scope is not extended by this decision - that we have managed to bring the Commission so far down the line that it is looking into implementing harmonised measurements for the specific CO2 emissions from class N1 vehicles and presenting proposals to this effect.
I think that is a huge success.
I should like once again to congratulate the rapporteur and vote in favour of this report.
Mr President, I welcome the excellent result reached by the European Parliament and the Council on this dossier.
I congratulate the co-legislators on their efforts in finding a swift and satisfactory agreement.
The process leading to the approval of this proposal constitutes a prime example of how the two arms of the European legislature can settle their differences and work together towards adoption of sound and effective environmental law.
I should like to seize the opportunity to thank the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection and, in particular, the rapporteur, Mrs González Álvarez, for its constructive approach.
The adoption of this decision will allow the effectiveness of the Community strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars to be monitored and, more specifically, it will provide credible data to monitor the implementation of the voluntary agreements with car manufacturers.
This strategy is one of the most concrete activities of the Community on CO2 emissions and reductions from the transport sector.
Therefore it represents an important milestone in the achievement of the Kyoto target.
Mr President, unforgivably, I have forgotten something.
It will take me just 20 seconds to express my gratitude to all the members of the Conciliation Committee: to Mr Provan, to Mrs Jackson, who also participated, and to the members of the Commission and the Council with whom we worked in order to reach an agreement on the report.
Furthermore, I would like to thank all the MEPs for their support.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Interoperability of the trans-European rail systems
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports, tabled by Mr Savary on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism:
(A5-0112/2000) on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation and effects of Directive 96/48/EC concerning the interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system;
(A5-0113/2000) on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system.
Mr President, I hope that the two members due to speak before me were not travelling by train and have been delayed.
I think they are in the House and will arrive in time.
Unfortunately, the fact of the matter is that we are fighting numerous problems on the railways which are a legacy from the past.
For example, in 1970, the railways' share of the freight traffic market was 21%, compared with just 8.5% now.
The railways have lost out massively in freight traffic and their share of the passenger traffic market has fallen from 10 to 6%.
The winner has been road freight traffic, which is increasing constantly and winning market shares: 16% per annum on the eastern borders of Austria, for example.
It is now 2.4 times higher than in 1990.
If you take lorries and buses from eastern Europe on the A1 motorway, which is the most important east-west route, traffic increased sixfold between 1995 and the year 2000.
In other words, freight traffic, especially transit freight traffic, is growing massively.
According to forecasts, it will rise by more than 100% between 1995 and 2015.
That is why it is important and urgent that we concern ourselves with the European rail network.
It totals 156 000 kilometres in length, of which 78 000 km are accounted for by the TEN network.
12 600 km of new lines for speeds of over 250 km/h should be constructed by 2010, with at least 16 300 km of lines due to be upgraded for speeds of over 200 km/h.
The total costs - and they are huge - are estimated at EUR 186 billion between now and 2010.
So it is obvious how important this investment is for the European Union and that is why we are being called on here to set the priorities quickly.
I think that it is high time we adapted the railways to the market economy, so as to ensure that the railways invest more money more often in customer requirements and that we can jointly set the priorities and draw up a tight, efficient timetable.
The main requirements are, of course, to harmonise the gauge throughout Europe, especially where more than two countries cooperate.
At the moment, we still have five different gauges.
We need uniform electrification, especially in relation to voltage and frequency.
In other words, the technical properties of the electricity must be brought into line so that extra electricity can be bought from the national grids and fed into the national grids without any significant losses.
The third, and I think the most important point is the safety of trains.
We really do need external inspection and certification agencies.
We cannot have a situation in which the agency operating the railway is also responsible for inspecting it.
No-one questions the fact that cars and lorries are inspected by external certification agencies.
I think there is an urgent need, given the recent train crashes, for external inspection agencies to look after the safety of passengers in Europe.
Mr President, first of all I should like to thank all the Members who supported the rapporteur in his work in presenting these two reports which are, I believe, absolutely crucial to the future of the railways.
What is the subject matter?
The first report analyses the application of the 1996 Directive on the interoperability of the high-speed rail system, drawing the lessons of this for the future.
Next, and this is the substance of the second report, we must discuss and vote on a proposed directive on the interoperability of the trans-European conventional rail system.
Ladies and gentlemen, we must appreciate the full importance of this subject.
There is today an unacceptable contradiction between what is said in speeches and the reality of European transport systems.
As might have been expected, the creation of the internal market has, logically, considerably developed the trade in goods and the mobility of persons within the Union, which have shown an increase of 21% and 15% respectively between 1990 and 1997.
The bulk of the traffic from this explosive growth in internal mobility, which is expected to be consolidated in the next few decades, has been acquired by road systems and, secondarily, maritime cabotage via the North Sea.
At a time when we have right here, in most of the countries of the Union, a rail network and technology unparalleled in the world, with a recent study evaluating the external costs of road transport in terms of public health, infrastructure and pollution at some EUR 480 billion, even though the objective of sustainable mobility and respect for quality of life are now shared by all Europeans, it can be noted that rail has only an 8.6% market share for freight, and 5.8% for passenger transport.
There is more than one explanation for this paradox: rail' s reduced level of competitiveness due to a social differential in relation to the road sector, but also the distortions of competition engendered by the considerable external costs of road transport, the priority which most major railway companies in recent years have given exclusively to prestigious high-speed passenger transport, but also excessive national characteristics in terms of railway traditions, techniques and protocols, thereby compromising the flow of continental rail traffic.
Today, the situation of the European transport network situation is simple to the point of caricature: there is only one common area in transport and that is the road network.
There is no longer any single airspace or European maritime area, nor especially a continuous railway area within the countries of the Union.
The issue at stake in railway interoperability is, of course, doing away with the technical frontiers that have been inherited from the national railway structures set in place gradually since the nineteenth century.
Today, the Europe of the Fifteen has no less than sixteen electric signalling systems, six electrical voltages, five track gauges and several equipment and therefore infrastructure gauges.
Of course, the new high-speed train infrastructures offer a prime area for the introduction of interoperability, since they are new or recent networks devoted to very similar technology.
Directive 96/48 was adopted for this purpose.
The report on its application, four years on, referred to Parliament to express an opinion, delivers contrasting results, but results that are in the end more positive than they may seem.
In the first place, significant delay is observed in the transposition of laws and regulations since, to date, only two countries have transposed it and the first technical specifications for interoperability are on the point of being completed and published.
The conclusion is therefore that the time limits for transposition and publication must be more stringent in future.
This delay in transposing into law has not, however, hindered the development of interoperable cross-border lines, although Thalys is the only example of true interoperability, more so than even Eurostar, despite its attempts to solve the gauge problem.
These two international lines have established a precedent which can serve as a model for future developments.
More than that, however, in anticipation of tangible results in future, the directive on the interoperability of high-speed routes has primarily made it possible to define and iron out working methods.
For the first time, the railway industry, rail companies and infrastructure managers have started up a joint project to define the technical specifications for interoperability.
They have worked on the basis of the most general studies by the International Union of Railways.
Within the European Association for Railway Interoperability (EARI) they have set up a working group which now has methods and experience available for transposition to conventional systems.
Finally, the Committee established by Article 21, bringing together representatives of the Member States and the Commission, enables political and technical monitoring of interoperability projects and intervention at the discretion of states to direct such projects.
In other words, while the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism felt bound to remind the Member States of their obligations in terms of time limits and transposition, it must be admitted that the high-speed systems have provided a first-rate testing ground for the vast worksite of interoperability.
In this respect, we have to bear in mind that the network and the conventional stock present problems for harmonisation that are formidable in other ways, due to the national and historical characteristics of networks, the great diversity of the stock, and the considerable extent of the networks.
It must be made quite clear at this point that there is no question of insisting that rail companies and infrastructure managers immediately proceed to replace their equipment comprehensively.
This is totally out of reach, economically.
In the first place, if the goal is to achieve interoperability, this must entail using the fastest and least costly means to achieve decisive progress.
In this respect, interoperability may be achieved by methods other than the harmonisation of equipment, since it is possible to adapt equipment to operate in different configurations, following the example of the quadruple-system locomotives.
This is a proposal for a pragmatic and realistic approach which would not detract from railways' competitiveness in relation to other modes of transport by imposing additional costs.
The key principles of this proposed directive are as follows: restriction of the geographical area covered by conventional system interoperability to the trans-European network as defined by the 1996 European Parliament and Council Decision; a policy of gradual convergence rather than systematic renewal, taking the form of phasing in priorities and interoperability, establishing a hierarchy for subsystems to enable the fastest and cheapest access, with priority only to new investment for creating, extending, renewing, maintaining and operating systems; establishing a hierarchy of objectives, distinguishing across-the-board objectives to be included in all standards: safety, reliability, health, environmental protection and technical compatibility; the objectives inherent in each technical subsystem: infrastructure, energy, rolling stock, etc.; the separation of the technical task of framing the TSIs assigned to a joint representative body, from the standardisation work entrusted to the European standards institutes, and the inspection and certification entrusted to notified bodies; a policy of user consultation, as suggested by the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism which cannot be envisaged, ladies and gentlemen, without concomitant consultation of staff representatives, the subject of an amendment that we shall be discussing tomorrow; finally, ongoing monitoring of these projects by the Member States and the Commission through the Committee established under Article 21, implemented by the high-speed directive, enabling states to request exemptions, to include special cases in the technical specifications for purely historic or regional networks, as well as certain types of equipment originating from third countries, and also instruments for authorising commissioning operations notified by Member States to the Commission.
In other words, there are safety valves for countries with a high level of special characteristics, and, within the institutions stipulated by the directive, they still have the opportunity to argue the case for these special characteristics and to have them included in the studies and in the TSI publications.
Finally, during the transition period, it is important to prevent the networks from growing further apart.
To this end, new investments, between now and the publication of the TSIs, shall have to comply with authorised technical references.
A Union rolling-stock register will be set up, making it possible to identify the rolling stock, its renewal and ageing, in the same way that this is still carried out, albeit imperfectly, for the maritime fleet.
Furthermore, we have to look to the future and, therefore, both the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy have proposed involving candidate country representatives in the projects at this early stage, so that they can anticipate this future acquis communautaire.
Similarly, and this is a recommendation that we make, we should already be planning conditions of interoperability between the various modes of transport, in accordance with our general objective of developing intermodal interoperability.
It would, of course, be presumptuous to expect everything to be achieved by this directive and the long-term upgrading work it requires from railway operators.
Quite clearly Europe is proposing to undertake a long-term and very large-scale project throughout its vast railway network.
It cannot single-handedly solve the problem of distortions of competition or of network access or charges which would represent crucial progress towards a new golden age of rail in Europe.
All the same, the technical interoperability of our old national networks is indeed an essential condition for the recovery of rail, which this balanced, reasonable and flexible text should make possible to achieve in gradual phases under acceptable economic and social conditions.
To the many of you who contributed to this, let me reiterate my gratitude and my appreciation.
Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members, I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Savary, and all the members involved for their excellent and constructive cooperation on this difficult, purely technical subject.
The number of proposed amendments tabled, including here in plenary, shows how important this issue is for Europe, which is why I can also praise the Commission for addressing the subject of the interoperability of conventional trains as well as of high-speed trains.
I think it is a pity that few Member States have transposed the interoperability directive with regard to high-speed trains and I call on the Commission to exert pressure to prevent the loss of valuable time which is costing the railways in terms of market shares and competition.
The directive is even more important where conventional trains are concerned.
The aim of the directive - as with high-speed trains - is to harmonise technical provisions in order to ensure that conventional rail traffic within the Union runs as smoothly as possible and to give candidate countries really exact specifications so that through traffic is also guaranteed after enlargement.
Interoperability will also have many advantages for both passengers and freight transport.
Better services, greater comfort, less travelling time, increased safety and possibly also lower prices.
The harmonisation of technical standards is also needed for the long overdue liberalisation of the railways.
Both together, interoperability and liberalisation, are most important if the railways are to survive in the internal market.
I am delighted that we have succeeded with the rapporteur and numerous other members in finding a good, common line on most aspects of this very demanding subject and would like to thank them for that.
This applies above all to the initially highly disputed derogations from the TSIs, but also to the social dimension of this directive, where we were finally able to achieve a compromise.
Nonetheless, - and we in the group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats continue to believe that we are right here - generally-worded social aspects do not belong in this purely technical directive, even if the Commission and the Council may think otherwise.
We are likewise opposed to involving passengers in working out TSIs.
Including these aspects will only result in the directive being difficult or impossible to manage.
Finally, a few other proposed amendments have been tabled, which we consider are quite simply too bureaucratic and have no positive aspects to boot.
In short, our group is against any elements which are counterproductive when it comes to achieving the important objective of an efficient European railway, as outlined above.
Allow me in closing to highlight the excellent cooperation once again;
I am optimistic that together we shall achieve the objective of creating as smooth a railway system as possible.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I should like to congratulate my colleague, Mr Savary, on the excellent reports that he has produced on rail transport, which is a crucial issue for the European Union.
It is crucial for the consolidation of the internal market and for more sustainable development, and is an essential factor in improving economic and social cohesion.
I would also like to congratulate him because this is a very complex issue that he has addressed with great clarity and depth and also for the open-mindedness and negotiating skills that he has demonstrated in including many of the amendments that were tabled.
For a long time, the European Parliament has been advocating a transport policy that promotes rail transport, as it is the form of transport that causes the least pollution, and in many situations it is the most comfortable for passengers and adapts most easily to long distance goods transport.
What we have seen, however, is exactly the opposite: the volume of rail transport of passengers and goods has been steadily decreasing, as has the number of people working in companies in those areas which nevertheless, still stands at around one million.
There are two fundamental reasons for this situation.
Firstly, there are still borders between the fifteen Member States as far as rail transport is concerned, as well as the applicable national legislation in each country.
Secondly, rail transport is considered to be a great deal more expensive than road transport.
As to this second aspect, some measures have already been adopted, with the construction and management of transport infrastructures themselves being separated in most countries of the European Union.
If the manufacturers and owners of cars and lorries were directly responsible for paying for infrastructures and their maintenance - as is the case in the rail sector - we would certainly not have made as rapid progress in this area as we have.
The amendments that have now been tabled to establish rules for cross-border interoperability in the European Union clearly show the direction we should take in this matter.
The interest demonstrated by the Portuguese Presidency in taking these dossiers forward as quickly as possible gives us hope that, with the contribution of the European Parliament, this situation will finally change, to the benefit of rail transport.
With regard to the high-speed rail system, I shall just highlight two aspects, which I think are crucial: the interconnection and interoperability of high-speed infrastructures with rolling stock and additional services are crucial for facilitating the mobility of persons and goods and for promoting a high-speed trans-European rail system that is efficient and able to respond to the needs of the public.
The other aspect that I would like to highlight concerns the need to standardise the professional qualifications, training programmes and working conditions of those working in this sector.
In conclusion, I must emphasise that we Socialists feel that economic and social cohesion is one of the European Union' s fundamental aims, and that, in the rail transport sector, support must be provided for Europe' s northern and southern peripheral regions and for specific and historical cases where costs of adaptation are very high but are absolutely essential, because their different track gauges have to be changed.
This is the case in Spain and Portugal, where the aim of providing a high-speed rail service, particularly on an Atlantic line, is a legitimate ambition of the governments and citizens of those countries
) Mr President, I would first like to congratulate Mr Savary on his drafting of such excellent reports.
This is an important topic, but also an extremely complicated one.
Mr Savary has taken good account of the views of others.
My group supports improvement of the competitiveness of railways and liberalisation of competition.
The first stage is to create the conditions for uninterrupted movement of trains over the entire region of the European Union.
Technical Specifications for Interoperability (TSIs) and common standards are a sine qua non for the development of railway interoperability.
The rapporteur has quite rightly adopted a gradual approach.
Technical solutions can vary a great deal.
The competitiveness of railways should not be undermined by the imposition of additional economic burdens, even though common standards will lower costs in the longer term.
Existing differences between national railway systems will make necessary some exceptions in the harmonisation of railway systems, so that no Member State shall have to face inordinate difficulties and so that current railway transport will not be jeopardised.
This report outlines a course of action by which these exceptions can be accepted without jeopardising the principal objective.
There is one further matter which would require fine tuning; this was outlined in Amendment No 35 by my Group.
It applies to Finland in particular, but some of the applicant countries will be faced with the same problem in connection with enlargement of the Union.
The matter referred to concerns Russian freight wagons, where technical solutions are applied which differ from those of the Member States, inter alia in the area of couplings and brakes.
They are not necessarily inferior, but different.
Russia is hardly about to change its standards in order to comply with the requirements of the Union.
For Finland, this is an exceptionally major issue.
Due to historical reasons, the track gauge in Finland and Russia is the same, but it is different from that in Europe in general.
Russian wagons account for approximately 40 % - almost a half - of Finnish freight transport.
The reason for this high percentage is that we do not want to take the risk of sending Finnish wagons to Russia, since experience shows that they are so very rarely returned.
Russia, of course, is a country which leans heavily on rail transport, with a rolling stock which must equal that of the entire region of the EU put together
In the review concerning point 5 of Article 5, Mr Savary proposes that when considering special cases, particular attention should be paid to the rolling stock of third countries.
This proposal is very good, but the solution remains half-finished, as far as Finland is concerned.
It will lead to unnecessary and laborious inspections of Russian wagons and to massive bureaucracy.
There is no certainty either that Russian wagons in all instances would be regarded as special cases.
This is why we have tabled an amendment of Article 7, which simply aims at making it possible to use third country freight wagons for traffic, as long as they do not cross the border between two Member States.
This is the addition referred to as point f in the Committee' s amendment.
Implementation of this proposal would give assurance that rail traffic in Finland could continue without becoming drastically reduced.
Mr President, Environment Commissioner, I am pleased that you are here because we can now address this matter straight away.
We are evidently debating a highly technical subject matter, namely the interoperability of both high-speed and conventional rail systems.
This gives me the opportunity to make a few comments on the environmental dimension to this proposal.
Today, we are essentially witnessing one of many historic moments which those who work in the sector, as well as those who are in favour of trains, have waited for for a long time, because at the end of the day, all this is, of course, meant to culminate in technological harmonisation, which entails the harmonisation of international rail, labour organisations, train drivers who have to make international rail journeys, etc.
This also means that employers' organisations and trade unions will have an entirely different role and outlook with respect to this work.
In short, the proposal has a knock-on effect on many other areas and it will be some time before it is a reality.
Certainly if I look at the high-speed link and its technical specifications, I share Mr Savary' s view - who has drawn up an excellent report - that it is scandalous that three, nearly four years after the previous directive on interoperability of the high-speed link, we are still waiting for technical specifications for interoperability.
This does not bode well at all for the future.
What we are aiming for in the long run with this rail proposal is to attempt to cut down on traffic jams but also, more importantly, to benefit the environment, safety and a number of other aspects.
It has to be said, and I have already mentioned this several times within other fora, that the rail system is gradually losing its environmental edge, not so much because it does not take any initiatives itself, but more so because we ourselves prescribe few, if any, specifications for example, regarding the use of diesel-electric locomotives, the type of electricity used, etc.
What we would like, and this is why we welcome with open arms the dual speed for technical specification requirements, is for this technical specification to at least take account of energy consumption and air pollution, something which will require a great deal of hard work.
The second important point is of course the social dimension, as I touched upon a moment ago.
I regret that we are confining ourselves to the bare minimum, i.e. working conditions.
We refer to a social dialogue but we should really take it one step further, because this affects the entire labour organisation of railways.
I would urge you to look into the positive experiences which certain countries have had in changing the labour organisation of the rail system, in order to bring about a more efficient rail system and to set up exchange programmes, so that we can learn from experiences in countries which have struggled in the past, and which are often still struggling where other elements of the rail dossier are concerned, such as liberalisation or fair pricing.
Mr President, despite European integration, the rail system is disintegrating.
It is increasingly hard to obtain international rail timetables and it is often the case that train tickets to remote destinations have to be bought outside the country of departure.
Not so long ago, it was possible to take a direct train from Cologne to Athens, from Paris to Lisbon or from Amsterdam to Copenhagen.
This is now a thing of the past.
Meanwhile, railways are, however, in the process of being re-discovered.
The times when trains were seen as a burden inherited from the nineteenth century, something that can be neglected and dismantled, are fortunately over.
Almost everyone admits that trains should once again play a key role in European long-haul transport for people and goods alike.
This is not just necessary to meet the increasing demand for transport options, but mainly to curb the tide of cars and aeroplanes which form a threat to the environment.
The views on how to modernise the rail system are strongly divided.
For a long time, it was fashionable to apply everything that had contributed to the emergence of cars and aeroplanes to trains.
According to this line of thinking, everything should come down in price and should become flexible, so that price-based competition has a less detrimental effect on trains.
Some people still advocate that everything should be privatised and liberalised, that the influence of trade unions must be restrained and that railway personnel should perform more work for lower wages.
According to the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, these remedies are worse than the disease.
These would reportedly lead to further decay of the railway business and deterioration in the quality of services, and would force personnel to strike more, for reasons of self-preservation.
The real solutions must be sought in a completely different direction.
For starters, there should be better cooperation between the existing national railway companies in the management of frequent and fast cross-border routes.
In the case of the conventional railway system, the routes Brussels to Amsterdam, Hamburg to Copenhagen and Dublin to Belfast are good examples of this.
The passengers are unaware that it is two companies who are responsible for this one joint and frequent link.
This could also apply to the extensions of the French high-speed links in England, Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany which are running under the names "Eurostar" and "Thalys".
To guarantee success, it is important not to bring in a whole ream of new commercial businesses, which would lead to bad connections and variable pricing.
Furthermore, the money to finance such a high-speed network should not be found through cutting down services on short-haul routes in the individual Member States, as many people are indignant - and rightly so - about the huge amount of funding being ploughed into fast connections for the benefit of a small, privileged minority.
The construction of new high-speed links will continue to meet with protest if the ordinary domestic train user only ever experiences higher prices and fewer facilities and if they do not solve the environmental problems caused by cars and aeroplanes.
Needless to say, technology should be better harmonised by means of common mains voltage, joint equipment, fewer changes for passengers at borders and uniform safety requirements.
Privatisation and fragmentation according to the British model offer no guarantee whatsoever that those improvements could be better accommodated than if we were to keep the present state enterprises.
The position of the one million employees in the European rail system must be protected.
They are people who offer useful services to each and every one of us.
This is why they should not come at the bottom of the list in our railway policy, as is sometimes advocated, I regret to say, by those in favour of a commercial approach.
My group would like to see trade-union rights, participation, working conditions and work pressure given a more prominent role.
Luckily, the rapporteur is not yielding under the pressure to consider personnel as a cost factor alone.
I am pleased that Mr Savary' s proposals help strike a happy balance.
Mr President, Mr Savary' s reports raise a matter of crucial importance to European railways.
Given the alarming position rail finds itself in in most Member States, intervention is vital.
It is of utmost importance to drastically reduce the obstacles created for international traffic by inconsistencies in the different types of equipment and networks used.
The harmonisation of the physical networks for the conventional rail system is a step in the right direction and certainly deserves support.
Nobody can deny its importance.
Despite this, I am of the opinion that a great deal of the work done by Members is superfluous.
Most of their wishes have already been incorporated in some shape or form in the text of the directive.
This should not be done again.
Furthermore, we are dealing with a directive here, which means that it makes little sense to include too detailed and intricate specific cases.
This directive is extremely technical in nature and its main objective is to facilitate the use of all kinds of trains using all kinds of networks.
This is why comments concerning personnel do not really seem to fit in here.
Only clear agreements on qualifications for personnel who will be deployed on cross-border routes are necessary.
The curbing of the freedom of enterprise should not go further than strictly necessary.
In short, Mr President, I will certainly support the idea contained in the reports, even if certain proposed elements are not appropriate in this context.
A very good evening Mr President, Commissioner.
It is unusual, but you know that I have the highest personal regard for you and am therefore delighted to see you here this evening.
Interoperability is a fundamental issue and, if we take it seriously, the time has come to admit that the European Union has failed over recent years.
We have made no progress whatsoever with interoperability.
I think it is extremely important that we again inform the Council, where everything is diligently recorded, that 40 years after the creation of the European common market, we have made no progress in the railway sector.
I hope that the draft report by Mr Savary, whom I should like once again to thank for his draft, and I should also like to thank my colleague Mrs Jeggle for her shadow report - I hope that if we manage to persuade the Commission and Council to accept the draft report, we shall be reasonably well placed for the future.
I also hope that the Council will accept our proposed amendments.
We have taken a great deal of trouble and Mr Savary has also tabled umpteen proposed amendments for the plenary sitting, which we support, in order to achieve a report which the Council can accept, thereby avoiding a conciliation procedure and second reading.
I hope that the Council will do so and I call on it to act responsibly.
Having made no progress whatsoever with interoperability for years now, the Council should accept our decision tomorrow so that we can make some progress and avoid yet another second reading and conciliation procedure.
The difficulty which must be acknowledged is, of course, that the internal market can only function if we have uniform systems in the long term and we must ensure that we really do make progress here.
I also call on industry in Europe to abandon the policy it has pursued over recent years of separating off its national market by deliberately not manufacturing rolling stock which can be used in other countries.
Everyone has staked out their own market, which is why we have this fragmented railway market in Europe - and this is unacceptable.
Allow me one more closing comment.
Mr Swoboda, who is about to speak, and I shall soon be discussing the Railway Pact here in the House.
We are opening the markets but we need interoperability in order to do so.
These are two aspects of the overall complex and I therefore hope that the Council really is wise and clever enough to accept the proposed amendments which we shall probably adopt by a large majority tomorrow.
Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members, we are, in fact, in a situation in which we are building up a European railway system, albeit somewhat late.
Mr Jarzembowski and I hold such similar views that I should like to begin where he left off.
In a few weeks' time, we shall propose to Parliament at second reading and by a large majority - there are still a few differences of opinion here and there - what framework market conditions and operating regulations are needed in order to create a European railway system.
All this, as the previous speaker has already said, will not produce a European railway system unless there is also a degree of interoperability on the technical and social side.
It is grotesque: every private company, even small private companies, think European nowadays.
It is only on the railways that we have not managed to achieve this and we are now endeavouring to bring about a European attitude.
The comment about industry is correct.
We always look spellbound at America, at the United States, where industry and, of course, the free market economy are also promoted by the state.
Except that, when it comes to American companies, the situation is quite different.
In Europe, uniting in a common European market is proving to be an arduous task.
How can we expect European products to be used throughout the world, when we are cannot even agree on certain technical conditions and interoperability in Europe?
In this sense I should like to offer the rapporteur, Mr Savary, my full and unequivocal support and congratulate him on his excellent report.
What we need is technical interoperability.
That has already been said.
Industry has its part to play here, but of course clients, i.e. the European construction companies, must also do what they can to force industry to cooperate.
This also applies, and here I disagree with a number of previous speakers, to social comparability and alignment.
Of course, that does not mean that everything will become identical, because we do not want a situation with one side more or less exploiting the other; we want a situation in which we look together to see how we can bring about a European railway system.
Safety is also, without doubt, an issue.
The huge advantage of the railway is that it is safe and environmentally-friendly.
Just as it is a pity that the transport Commissioner cannot be here, it is a good sign that the Commissioner for the environment is here, because, in the final analysis, traffic, and railway traffic in particular, is a means to an end and not an end in itself and it should help to improve our environmental situation.
Mr Savary has also highlighted a very important point; namely that we must ensure during the enlargement of the European Union that the European railway system does not stop at the current borders of the European Union but covers the whole of Europe so that it can help to improve the environment and increase traffic safety throughout Europe.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, these reports make it quite clear that we are flying the flag for the transfer of traffic from road to rail in vain.
If there is no technical follow-up, then our demands will obviously remain a dead letter.
Actual observations today point to the fact that rail in Europe is not matching up to its ambitions and, I would add, it is falling far short of our ambitions.
It is true that in a good number of European policies we put forward the need to transfer passenger transport, but most especially freight transport, from road to rail in order, on the one hand, to comply with our international commitments but, on the other hand, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, to reduce environmental pollution in general, to relieve congestion on the roads and to reduce the social costs of road transport, which are borne indirectly by the community as a whole.
For all these reasons, none of them new ones, the European Union must make it possible to take up the challenge.
In relation to the reports on interoperability it must be noted that the train was not considered to be the transport of the future which was going to provide the solution to a number of problems, particularly environmental problems.
In transport policies within the European Union, rail was overlooked.
As evidence of this I would cite the considerable amounts of Structural Fund, trans-European network and Cohesion Fund aid allocated to roads and motorways, which for far too long have had more than their due.
Only rarely was there a question of allocating aid to conventional rail systems in order to modernise them and so that they might compete, particularly with heavy goods vehicles on the roads.
The declining figures for rail transport, particularly for freight, bear witness to the lack of investment at this level.
In the race to develop infrastructures, rail has been the great forgotten area.
Fortunately, there are now crucial studies which make it possible to justify the urgent need and the relevance of investing in rail.
Moreover, we would point out that it is essential that the European Parliament should incorporate staff training and health and safety conditions into this directive.
Indeed, many of us still remember the conditions in which the transportation of radioactive waste between Germany and France was carried out for many years.
Because they did not know about radioactivity, and were not informed about it, some members of staff at the Woippy marshalling yard, in the Lorraine region, used to gather round these heat-generating carriages to keep warm in winter.
The chemical containers which we would also like to see transported by rail also require specific training in order to guarantee general safety as well as to prevent exposure and handling which may prove dangerous to the health of the operators involved.
In general, then, we consider this report to be a well-balanced one, and we also wish to congratulate the rapporteur, but we have nonetheless tabled a number of amendments in order to improve it still more.
These are to do with taking account of social dialogue, which we deem essential.
I would urge you to support the amendments to this effect.
Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members present in the House, Mr Savary' s report is an excellent piece of work and he deserves both thanks and recognition.
I should like to focus in my speech on three aspects and I am sorry that Mrs Jeggle and Mr van Dam take the opposite view on two of these aspects.
First, liberalisation of the railway networks in the Member States and the establishment of a common market for railway services is addressed from the point of view of free access and transit rights for the infrastructures of the Member States in cross-border traffic, especially freight traffic.
And new technical specifications for interoperability are at the forefront here.
In my view, the proposed extension to the concept of interoperability, by including questions such as the professional qualifications of staff and the need for health and safety regulations at the workplace, is of paramount importance and a vote in favour of the report by my group depends on it.
Most national railway systems in the Member States have comprehensive rules governing the aforementioned social aspects and rather than lose them in the process of liberalisation at European level, we must harmonise them at the highest possible level.
At this point I should like to support the call for more authority to be given to the merely advisory voice of the social partners in the sectoral committee and for the European social partners to be granted equal decision-making powers similar to those in many national regulations, when resolutions are passed.
Secondly, in addition to agreeing to the minimum level of technical harmonisation proposed in the report, the preparation of ex ante cost-benefit analyses and the order of priorities for drawing up TSIs, my group sets particular store by including the social partners, associations and organisations, passengers and users in the work of drafting and checking technical specifications for interoperability.
Thirdly, we also support the proposal to allow representatives from the candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe to attend committee meetings from the outset.
The plan to involve them in the process of discussing and setting TSIs from the outset is important if the technical standards and specifications of future candidate countries to are to be brought into line early on with current developments in the EU.
This will allow us to ensure ahead of time that the infrastructure in these countries can keep pace, thereby helping to minimise the separate costs which the European Union would otherwise incur.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Savary report follows the rationale of sustainable development.
As we consider interoperability to be essential, we support this report, and offer our congratulations to Mr Savary for the pertinence of his observations.
The road-rail balance must be adjusted by means of a carefully calculated interoperability.
In the long term, the increase in heavy goods transport will cause enormous problems, such as congestion, the construction of new routes, and problems of safety and pollution.
It is absolutely essential, in this eventuality, to have recourse to rail transport.
The problem is even greater for countries located at strategic crossroads, such as France, where the saturation of the road networks is yet another argument for the crucial need to put interoperability into practice.
The models of Thalys and Eurostar must be extended and intensified with the new high-speed train routes: TGV-East to Germany, Southern Europe-Atlantic to Madrid and Lisbon, and South-Mediterranean to Barcelona.
As for conventional rail networks, it is time that interoperability was made compulsory, reinforced by considerable amounts of European aid which would, moreover, enable Member States to safeguard their conventional local networks.
Interoperability is all the more necessary as rail transport is profitable over long distances.
So border stops, changes in equipment and staff and, more importantly, transhipment operations should be limited to avoid putting a strain on reliability in terms of the time and service provided.
Airfreight manages perfectly well without border stops.
So let us adapt.
We shall not be able to upgrade the competitiveness of rail unless we bring in stringent constraints.
Interoperability must be made compulsory, particularly for the new networks that are being built, even if the TSIs have not been finalised.
We cannot afford to delay any longer before actually implementing this measure which will acquire even greater significance with the enlargement of our Community.
Mr President, Commissioner, a great deal has been said in today' s discussion.
In my view, the most important points to be borne in mind are two figures, which are really quite shocking.
The first is that in 1970, the railways had a 20% share of the freight market, whereas today they have just 8.5%.
The second figure concerns the average hourly speed of railways in Europe, which is 16 kilometres per hour.
And all this in the year 2000!
Evidently, we need an immediate political response from the 15 Member States of the European Union.
Before such a response can be given, we first need to understand the problem and we need the corresponding political will.
In my view, and of course this is the view of all those who have spoken today, we need to take steps as regards network compatibility and interoperability, because we have different technical specifications, different standards and different management systems.
And of course, we all endorse the report by Mr Savary, whom I would once again like to commend on his work.
However, it is not enough for us just to forge ahead with interoperability.
We need to consider the entire railway liberalisation package and combine this with interoperability.
In this context, I would like to say that the Helsinki Council resolutions may well be satisfactory, but they are inadequate.
If we want to make headway, then we need to adopt the opinion expressed by the European Parliament at first reading, because it deals more fully with the problem which, as is already quite clear I think, is a particularly acute problem.
We should all realise that a common market without a unified transport network is simply will-o' -the wisp.
So if we want to examine the problem in its entirety, we need to have, and to provide, the necessary responses.
I would like to add two separate issues concerning my country, Greece, since my capacity as chairman of the Transport Committee does not, I imagine, deny me the right to raise problems of this kind.
The first problem is that Greece has no main cross-border rail links, especially with other Member States.
On the contrary, it has important cross-border rail links with third, non-EU countries, which are not bound by Community legislation and, consequently, employ their own national standards and systems and will no doubt continue to do so in the shorter or longer term.
This is certainly an issue which merits special mention and regulation so that the European harmonisation we are working for does not prove to be detrimental to the cross-border rail networks of countries such as Greece.
Another issue I would like to touch upon is that special provision should be made for peculiarities and differences caused by the geographical location and topography of various Member States such as Greece, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Finland, etc., whose remote or island nature causes particular problems.
Mr President, I too regret the absence of the Commissioner here this evening.
Perhaps she is stuck at Brussels airport.
Perhaps she should have taken the train.
I begin by welcoming the Commission's proposal to integrate Europe's convention on a high-speed rail network.
I thank the rapporteur for his patience, his skill and, above all, his commitment to the cause of Europe's railways.
I would also like to thank the Portuguese presidency for its skilful handling of this very complex dossier - an example of Europeans working together to solve common problems.
This problem, I believe, can only be solved satisfactorily at EU-level.
What is the problem?
As we have heard already this evening, in 1970 the railways had a 21% share of the freight market, today just 8.5%.
In 1970 the railways had a 10% share of the passenger market, today just 6%.
If these trends continue just 4% of travellers will go by train at the end of the decade and rail freight will all but disappear.
The sad fact is that the railways have lost ground even where there are well placed, for example, in long distance freight.
The very future of our railways is at stake, together with the jobs of one million people employed in the industry.
A key reason for this decline is that, in contrast to aviation and road haulage, a single market does not exist in this sector.
For 150 years, the railways have been organised along national lines.
Even the opportunity of electrification further divided Europe's railways because there are now five different systems in operation.
More recently the railways have adopted 16 different and incompatible electronic signalling systems.
That all adds costs and it means railways cannot compete.
Differences have also contributed to the fragmentation of the market for railway equipment.
This proposal being considered here tonight, together with other proposals from the Commission, aims to create an internal market in rail services.
It will help achieve a harmonisation of technical standards for equipment and rolling stock and the integration of national networks to boost cross-border traffic.
That will make the railways more efficient, reliable and more competitive.
It would also boost the railway equipment industry in countries such as my own.
It will contribute to the fulfilment of our aim of switching freight from the congested and polluted roads to Europe's railways and encouraging the development of more high-speed rail services to take the place of short-haul flights.
The revitalisation of the railways is crucial to the future of Europe's transport system, our environment and our economy.
That is why Mr Savary's report deserves our full support.
Mr President, Commissioner, like aviation, the present issue is reminiscent of air traffic control.
It is high time that the Member States forsook their national stances in favour of a European stance because it is national stances that have prevented the rail system from being vital and from retaining its passengers and freight.
Instead, we are now faced with the opposite.
Mr Savary' s excellent report is the first in a whole series of reports which will deal with the rail system and its liberalisation, which is essential, in my view.
Trains should not be confined to internal borders within a large European market.
I think that is important.
Liberalisation and competition should be introduced within this large European market.
That, in my view, is the best solution for customers and services.
If the best solution had been cooperation between national companies, then they would have done this a long time ago and we would not be faced with this long-standing problem, namely that rail transport is on the wane.
For a country like mine, and several other Members have spoken about their own countries, it is, of course, essential that we have one European market with technical unity or 'interoperability' , to use a buzz word.
Indeed, a small country is vulnerable in that respect, but a country which lies at major intersections is even more vulnerable to this.
I think that we need to take sound steps and take them fast.
A difficult issue was that of personnel.
Mr Savary, I welcome the compromise that we were able to reach in that respect.
It is, of course, important for health and safety to be regulated and not compromised over, and this is also true, of course, of training.
We should be very clear about this too, so as to ensure that these issues are brought into line.
I am left with one question, namely I wonder whether we are sufficiently ambitious, as indeed, we are only referring to trans-European rail systems.
In my opinion, however, if we harmonise trans-European rail systems, we should also do the same for national rail systems.
This is especially important for those people who manufacture trains and train equipment.
We need, as a matter of urgency, to create a European single market in that respect too, and this will only be possible if we harmonise trans-European, i.e. international, as well as national traffic.
As such, we need to ensure as soon as we can that we create rail systems modelled on the HST, such as Thalys and Eurostar, which do not stop at borders but which carry on.
This should also be possible for ordinary trains because if not, Mr President, we are heading for a traffic nightmare.
Indeed, if we do not breathe new life into the railway sector, we will always have that traffic nightmare hanging over us and it is absolutely essential that we resolve this matter.
Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to begin, as some previous speakers have done, by thanking Mr Savary - the author of these two reports - for his work on achieving harmonisation, which has been difficult, but which has looked to the future.
His task has certainly been difficult, and this has been demonstrated by the conflicting interests expressed during tonight' s speeches.
As a Spanish MEP, I would have preferred the task to have been achieved with greater flexibility and certain technical specifications which affect structural issues within the railway system not to have been applied.
I am referring specifically to the Spanish rail gauge, which, since this is a problem affecting the basic railway structure, we believe would involve a costly and slow renovation, and its particular circumstances need to be taken into account.
This means that it should not be regulated by means of the so-called 'specific cases' , subject to committee decisions, but that, on the contrary, we should consider the possibility that automatic derogations should apply depending on the incompatibility of these technical specifications with existing lines.
We therefore hope that you will be receptive to this request because, otherwise, we should bear in mind that all the projects, all the development plans for the rail networks affected by these specifications, would be subject to difficult conditions, and this would have a negative effect, since it would create uncertainty in relation to the planned investment programmes themselves.
Mr President, Commissioner, I recently visited the newly constructed Öresund Bridge which links Sweden and Denmark and which is, of course, a part of the European transport network.
It means that a fixed link is being created between Scandinavia and the continent.
The bridge will make it considerably easier to convey people and goods from Sweden and Finland to the rest of Europe.
However, we have a problem, at present, with different voltage systems.
In fact, the power has to be taken away from a portion of the track so that the trains are able to alternate between the different voltage systems in Sweden and Denmark.
We have different gauges in Sweden and Finland.
The only railway linking the two countries is that between Haparanda and Torneå.
Gauge switches are now being tested there to make it easier to cross the border.
However, there are also some extremely good examples of other systems.
The ore trains which travel from northern Sweden to northern Norway have just the one driver to take the train across the border.
This works well because the countries concerned have cooperated with the employers and employees.
Within the EU, we now have fifteen different and separate railway systems which are often incompatible with one another.
This means that, within the railways sector, we have neither free movement nor a common market.
If we are serious about creating an international, competitive railway, we must also create a common railways structure within Europe.
Coordination of the railway systems is especially important for those countries and regions which are not situated in the centre of Europe.
In order to be able to travel right through the EU, Swedish trains, for example, must be able to pass through several countries and, thus, several national railway systems.
At present, this involves an obvious competitive disadvantage and means that the centrally situated countries within the EU should be urged to coordinate their various systems.
For the same reason, it is also important for those countries bordering the EU to be able to be involved in the work on harmonisation so that there are no restrictions upon transport to and from third countries.
If compatibility is to be achieved, the specifications of a range of technical components need to be brought into line with one another.
What, however, is at least as important in terms of this change is that coordination should also be achieved within the operational and administrative systems, that staff should be duly trained and that there should be agreements in place to enable drivers to take trains across the national borders.
Road traffic in Europe is increasing each year.
It creates problems in the form of environmental damage, noise, overcrowding and accidents.
In order to be able to cope with this trend, methods of transport must become cleaner, quieter, safer and more efficient.
Railways are the means of transport which now best meets these requirements.
Rail transport must therefore become more attractive and competitive.
In order to reach that point, however, the railways must be able to compete on the same conditions as other forms of transport.
The Savary report is therefore very important and one step along the road.
It is now just a question of all the Member States turning it into a reality.
Mr President, Commissioner, honourable Members, literature has a few well-known words for what we are discussing in the two Savary reports this evening: "You are late, but at least you are here" , was how Friedrich Schiller put it, words which also apply to our work here in the European Parliament.
To discuss the interoperability of the conventional trans-European railway system at the end of the 20th century, just as everyone is getting ready to leave, looks bad, even if, admittedly, interoperability has increased.
But still!
It has taken more than 100 years for us to pluck up the courage here and give the railways another chance.
And yet the facts do not look very promising.
The rapporteur has included figures in his report which are all the more significant for being so thin on the ground.
Mr Hatzidakis has already told us that the railways had a 21% share of the freight traffic market in 1970 and now have a mere 8.5%; in passenger transport, their share has fallen from 10% in 1970 to 6%.
The prospects for high-speed trains are somewhat more encouraging, although here too, not everything in the garden is rosy.
It is true that we have at least got something on the rails in western Europe, namely Thalys and Eurostar.
But where we want to network Europe in the long term, especially with the future Member States of the Union, things do not look any better.
Yet it is vital to win over Eastern Europe, which still makes relatively good use of the railway network, to interoperability with Europe before everything switches to the roads.
Incidentally, this must be done through dialogue with the candidate countries, as the Savary report rightly stresses.
On one point, there is a need for nostalgia: we want to maintain a small part of the history of Europe and keep historic railway lines in their original state.
We shall leave them out of the scope of our directive and the friends of the railway will thank us.
Interoperability is rightly not required where regional demands and solutions need to maintain their own legislation within the framework of subsidiarity.
In this context, a word to my Austrian Minister of Transport.
The southern railway in Austria is an old stretch of line and is of regional importance.
But, more importantly, it is the north-south link in the east of the present Union.
If we do not invest in it, the east of Austria will run the risk of economic exclusion in the future.
That is in nobody' s interest.
Austria is excluded from the Union at present more than enough as it is.
Let us end all forms of isolation and ensure that we have comprehensive interoperability in the Union.
(Applause from various quarters)
Mr Rack, I repeat what I said to Mrs Flemming at the start of the night sitting: from an institutional and legal point of view, under the Treaty, Austria has every right to be in the European Union.
Therefore, let us deal with this issue when other points are under discussion.
Mr President, I believe that Gilles Savary has done magnificent work with these two reports.
The routes of the railway structures on our continent were set a long time before Schuman made his famous speech on the Quai d'Orsay.
In those days, military factors were given priority over the transport of people and goods.
In my country, Spain, as in Russia, a different gauge to the rest of Europe was chosen in order to make a possible military invasion more difficult, which proves that European construction was not the priority for those people who took the decisions on railway routes.
Furthermore - as others have said - almost every country has constructed its network in a radial manner, around its capital, which is a serious obstacle to all those who want to create a different kind of route, such as from Spain to Germany or Italy to the UK without passing, for example, through Paris.
Paris and many other capitals and almost all intra-European borders act as barriers for through rail routes.
For this reason, the transport of passengers and goods by rail has been suffering for decades.
We have managed to harmonise the European economy, but the current rail network is not a useful instrument for the single market.
Therefore, we resort to road transport, despite the fact that it creates pollution and is dangerous.
We must free the citizens of Europe from the road monopoly by offering them working railways throughout the Union which are competitive in relation to other modes of transport.
The inclusion of a social clause seems to me to be an excellent idea.
The railway workers are going to play an important role in interoperability and their interests must be addressed in the text of the directive.
These workers have already paid the price for our forgetfulness.
Their number has decreased by 500 000 in the last 15 years.
It is possible to revitalise the railway, as certain projects that have already been undertaken demonstrate.
A Community which is undergoing a rapid process of integration and which is facing imminent enlargement needs to improve the efficiency and quality of the railway services it offers to customers.
As Mr Savary says, this would contribute to achieving the objective of sustainable mobility and greater social and economic cohesion in Europe.
Mr President, one of the European Union' s key goals was the creation of the internal market, but this market has created a volume of traffic which is growing at an alarming rate.
Despite this, we need to ensure that goods and people arrive at their destinations faster, more efficiently, at cheaper rates and in cleaner conditions than before.
Rail transport is not really a great help in this respect, quite the reverse, in fact.
Let us be honest, the train has remained stuck in the nineteenth century.
In percentage terms, trains have certainly not retained their share in transport.
We can only hope that they have retained it in real terms.
Trains have proved the European Union right: more competition keeps you alert and on the ball.
Well, due to a lack of competition as a result of excessively protectionist behaviour on the part of the Member States - and I am not ashamed to admit this - the train has been condemned to a second-class position even in this century, also in terms of technology and even durability, which certain Members have emphasised.
Trains are not durable and they are no longer clean, especially the diesel locomotives.
We have finally reached a point in Europe where we are about to try to bring about a change in mentality.
This is desperately needed, and about time too, for the sake of both the people and mobility within the European Union.
We can no longer rely on road transport alone for it is fraught with problems, pollution, traffic jams, increased risk of accidents, as well as the problems which an increasing number of people are facing with the swelling flow of through traffic zooming past their doors.
If the rail systems can overcome the obstacles facing cross-border transport, i.e. by using each other' s rail infrastructure and if they make their equipment more durable, then this will relieve the pressure on road transport.
Rail systems develop extremely slowly.
In France, for example, this is because the government protects its own market and in the Netherlands, it is because we never manage to bring a procedure to a close and to start doing the groundwork.
As a result of this, planes are still used in Europe for short-haul distances.
Naturally, high-speed links such as those from Paris to Brussels should have superseded the plane a long time ago, but because of the vulnerability and sluggishness of the present trains, many prefer to take the plane.
It is not just manufacturers and governments that should be represented during the decision-making process pertaining to rail systems - in respect of which, incidentally, there is much room for improvement - but also the railway companies themselves.
This is already the case in the technical field, in the form of the European Association for Railway Interoperability.
This should also be the case for railway legislation, right across the board.
After all, railway companies have the necessary in-house expertise and need to be involved in the entire process.
The requirements for admission to the railway network and cooperation between the railway companies and the EU leaves a great deal to be desired.
Take, for example, the night train from Amsterdam to Milan which will be introduced from 28 May.
This route covers Germany, Geneva and Italy.
Each country has its own set of rules regarding speed, safety and travelling comfort.
Only if these requirements are met can access be gained to the railway network.
This beggars belief, especially if the rules change and are adapted virtually by the day, as has been the case.
This makes the interoperability of the European rail systems almost impossible in practice.
What we need are harmonisation and standardisation as soon as possible, if we want to create a true internal market for rail systems.
Mr President, the vast majority of investments that have been made in the EU' s infrastructure have been made at national level.
As a result, a lot of things work well within our countries.
However, the deficiencies become apparent as soon as it is a question of crossing a border.
In spite of the fact that there have been several attempts to solve the problems, partly within the International Railway Union, this is especially the case in the area we are discussing here this evening, namely that of Europe' s railway networks.
As long as we have obstacles of this kind, there will also be clear limitations of at least two different kinds.
Firstly, there will be a deterioration in the prior conditions of Europe' s being able to compete with other markets where these problems have perhaps already been solved.
Secondly, there will be a deterioration in the prior conditions of the railways' being able to compete with other types of transport.
There is no doubt that the railways have been the big losers in recent decades, and remain so.
From a position, thirty years ago, when it had a more than twenty per cent share of the goods transport market in the EU, the railways are now down to having a share of less than ten per cent.
At the same time, the market share for passenger transport has almost halved.
It is just not an option to force goods or passengers back onto the railways.
The railways will become winners in the market if they become efficient and are given the opportunity to develop by their own efforts.
Otherwise, there is an obvious risk that Europe' s railway network, at least where goods transport is concerned, will no longer exist within a few decades.
For this reason, it is a step in the right direction when the Commission seeks so-called operational compatibility within the railways sector.
The next step is to help extend the EU' s internal market to embrace the countries of Eastern and Central Europe, too.
Common operating systems and businesslike pricing should benefit Europe' s railway networks but, if the railways are to survive in the long-term, at least two additional things are required.
Firstly, a diversity of operators is required.
Just as there are many haulage contractors on Europe' s roads, there ought also to be many competing railway companies.
Secondly, a distinction needs to be drawn between the national operator and whoever owns the track.
That is the model we have in Sweden, and I believe in fact that it would be marvellous if similar systems could be introduced in all the EU' s Member States.
Otherwise, the confusion between public authority and operator will continue to be an obstacle to the development of Europe' s railway networks.
In general, this means that an awful lot remains to be done even after the decisions which the European Parliament is making in conjunction with the present report.
These nonetheless constitute extraordinarily important steps in the right direction.
I would like to speak on this particular subject but from a regional aspect.
I cannot speak about high-speed railways in Northern Ireland, never mind the island of Ireland, because the railways do not go at any great speed in that particular part of the world.
It is extremely important that we recognise the importance of a railway system.
One thing that has concerned me recently in my region is that, in Europe, we talk about how important to regions it is that we should have the most environmentally friendly type of transport.
At the same time within my area people are talking about doing away even with parts of our present minute railway system.
I find that totally atrocious.
We have one of the main links between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland between Dublin and Belfast.
This is a very important link and one that has been upgraded recently.
Probably that would be up to at least half the standard of the rest of continental Europe, but it is very welcome to those of us who live in that area.
Then we have the link between Belfast and Larne which links us to the rest of the United Kingdom.
Parts of this have had to be closed down because there is not enough money to keep it in repair and upgraded.
We have also recently had Northern Ireland Railways tell us that they are going to close the link between Coleraine and Londonderry which is absolutely unbelievable and totally unacceptable.
This is the one commuting area from the Northwest and it takes in part of the Republic of Ireland and the inner shore and peninsula.
They need that railway system as a link for those who want to get to Belfast to reach airports and everywhere else.
So we have to take a really serious look at what we are talking about here.
For too often within Europe we have talked about trans-European networks - be they road-rail, air or sea - but at the end of the day we are not prepared to put in the finance at either European level or national level.
We have to take on board the challenges that come before us and we have to ensure that we have a very highly established rail link.
I certainly want it within my region because that is important.
There should be no more closures and we should make more finance available to improve the present railway system to have more goods moved by rail and not by road, which is totally unacceptable from an environmental point of view.
It is hurtful when I go back to my region and am told the money is not there.
It is hurtful when you go back and you are told that: "No, we must improve the road system - we must not improve the rail system".
The rail system has a tremendous future.
It is wrong, it is totally unacceptable that it is allowed in any way to be run down.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission wishes to begin by thanking you for this interesting debate and thanking Parliament for the fact that you attach such great importance to the question of the interoperability of the conventional rail transport systems.
I want to highlight the excellent contribution which has been made by the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, especially by MEP Mr Savary who has prepared the report.
The directive must be seen, in the first place, as a technical measure, but the proposal is, of course, also of political significance in so far as it helps implement a common and open market for railway services and railway materials.
As is well known, the Commission has made the railways sector into one of its priority areas for taking action.
This was especially made clear in the 1996 white paper on the revitalisation of the Community' s railways.
As early as the end of last year, the EU took a large step towards revitalising railway transport when it introduced the so-called railway package.
I am convinced that this can contribute to a renaissance for goods transport in the Community.
Above and beyond these measures, further efforts are required if the strategy is to be complete.
By this, I mean primarily measures which integrate the national networks and increase the quality of the public services.
We all know how different the various countries' technical standards and operating regulations are.
This has also emerged clearly in the course of the debate.
This makes international transport both more expensive and more complicated than domestic transport.
These differences affect not only interoperability but also the internal market for railway equipment.
The Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism has adopted an amendment to the report and, in that way, backed our own proposal.
Most of the amendments to the report are acceptable.
A series of amendments entail actual added value, something for which we wish to thank Parliament.
As you know, the Council too has examined the proposal and, thanks to contacts between Parliament' s rapporteur, the Presidency of the Council and the Commission' s officials, it is entirely possible that the proposal may be adopted as early as at first reading.
A prerequisite for its becoming a reality is the desire to pursue a genuine convergence policy even where an essentially technical document is concerned.
When it comes to the amendments, I only wish therefore to deal with those which are unacceptable.
First of all, Amendment 9, Article 1(3).
The area of applicability is established in Annex I and cannot be limited in the way proposed.
Those cases which are mentioned may be dealt with as special categories, as special cases or, at worst, as exceptions.
Amendment 28, Article 22(3).
The proposed change is incompatible with the idea that the technical qualifications for interoperability are to be introduced gradually.
Nor does it fall in with the need to prioritise those measures which provide the greatest benefits in terms of cost.
Amendment 29, Article 24(1).
Where this is concerned, there are legal obstacles to acceptance.
Amendment 32, Annex I, together with Amendment 35 on exempting passenger carriages from third countries.
The proposed wording is unacceptable because it means a fundamental change to the rolling stock referred to in the directive.
The principle which the Commission upheld before the Council and the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism and upon which the proposal is based is that the directive must embrace all rolling stock used on the trans-European railway network.
This is important for the purpose of promoting the internal market for rolling stock and also for the purpose of guaranteeing a minimum level of safety the length of the trans-European railway network.
In order to achieve this minimum level of safety, all rolling stock must fulfil certain minimum specifications.
Amendment 39, Article 18(3) and Amendment 40, Annex VII.
The proposed measures are incompatible with Article 14(2) which specifies that it is the Member States' responsibility to make sure that the system complies with the STI, or spécification technique interopérationnelle, regulations.
This proposal could be introduced into the framework directive concerning railway safety which the Commission will be introducing later this year.
Clearly, however, exceptional instances of transportation or, for example, locomotives involved in track maintenance do not need to fulfil the same requirements as passenger trains.
The proposal therefore mentions a number of special cases (cf.
Article 2 K and Article 5(5)) where special, suitably adjusted regulations may be applied.
Allow me to leave the other amendments, because they all have our support.
They help make the directive clearer, especially the special cases.
Otherwise, they involve acceptable supplementary provisions, for example certain cases exempted from the technical specifications.
I would conclude my intervention concerning the interoperability of the conventional rail systems by thanking Parliament for its efforts.
We must hope that it will be possible to adopt the directive as early as at first reading.
The directive will take on a key role when it comes to revitalising railway transport.
I now move on to the second report, which concerns the interoperability of high-speed trains.
In this case, too, Mr Savary has prepared an interesting report containing a number of constructive observations and proposals.
The Commission will examine them in detail and, as far as possible, take account of them in planning its activities.
The Commission' s report was more concerned with the implementation and effects of Directive 96/48 than with the actual progress made towards the interoperability of high-speed trains.
This has to do with the fact that the railway network in question is still at an early stage of development.
Parliament' s proposal for carrying out an assessment of how much progress really has been made on interoperability is therefore very interesting.
Where the conventional railway network is concerned, the Commission proposed that a common representative body should provide, and regularly update, a facility to help monitor progress.
At the request of a Member State or of the Commission, this would provide a picture of the trans-European rail system for conventional trains.
The Commission has examined all the proposals in the report on the interoperability of high-speed trains, and they constitute a welcome contribution to the Commission' s ongoing deliberations in this area which continues, of course, to be given high priority.
It is generally known that the railway sector is of crucial importance in terms of Europe' s future transport needs and a more sustainable European transport system.
Increased interoperability is a key factor in our endeavours in this area.
It is very pleasing to have it confirmed through today' s discussion that the European Parliament and the Commission see the issue in much the same way.
Mr President, Commissioner, we and the rapporteur, Mr Savary, have gone a long way towards accommodating the Council by including umpteen proposed amendments here in plenary in order to reconcile the two versions.
The Council should accept our opinion and the Commission should support us, not the Council, Commissioner.
Secondly, please be so kind as to point out to your employees that the report is not from the Committee on Regional Policy, but from the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, because we are devising a transport policy for the whole Community, not just for the regions.
Mr Jarzembowski, the name of the committee is the "Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism".
The joint debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
British Nuclear Fuels at Sellafield
The next item is the oral question (B5-0223/2000) by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, to the Commission, on the installation of the MOX demonstration facility at the British Nuclear Fuels site at Sellafield.
Mr President, the report on safety at Sellafield, published by the UK Nuclear Installations Inspectorate, is a damning indictment of safety at the plant and falsification of safety checks there.
In mid-February Chief Inspector Laurence Williams said that he himself would pull the plug on the THORP reprocessing plant if his safety recommendations were not acted on.
However, it is clear from his own report that BNFL cannot be trusted.
The response to previous recommendations by the NII was to ignore them.
Indeed, I have documents showing this to be the case as far back as 1981.
This shows arrogance, even when they are called to account.
What are we to make of the fact that this investigation by the UK Nuclear Inspectorate resulted from a press report in the UK Independent, following which the UK Government sent in a posse, as it were - the Nuclear Inspectorate.
Surely it should have been the other way around.
We received continuous reassurance regarding the safety of EU nuclear installations, so why does it need a press investigation to alert Member State governments to serious safety issues?
It is time that the citizens of Europe received detailed answers to the questions of the effect on safety and the environment of the falsification of data in the MOX facility at the BNFL Sellafield site - falsification that has been ongoing for some years - because of the seriousness of the questions it raises for the safety of MOX fuel in use and for the nuclear installation's safety generally.
It also raises questions for the transport of nuclear material such as MOX fuel and, indeed, for nuclear safeguards because of the production of plutonium stockpiles.
Indeed, I would ask what level of Euratom safeguard efforts, personalities, site visits etc. has been deployed on that site since 1996 since when, we are told, reprocessing in the UK has been performed under Euratom safeguards?
I questioned Chief Inspector Laurence Williams in committee on whether the inspectorate staff in the UK were going native and imbibing the cultures that they are there to control.
He gave me a serious answer.
However, what about Euratom inspectors?
Can we trust them?
Do they also imbibe the cultures that they are there to control?
I would also ask you to deal seriously with the harmonisation of minimum standards, because here we received conflicting answers in committee.
I am also directly concerned with the effects of reprocessing on neighbouring states, such as my own, where radioactive contamination from Sellafield has been found on the east coast beaches, in particular Carlingford Lough, where I grew up.
Local people often ask me what the EU is going to do about it.
I can give them very short answers.
Denmark and other Nordic states are also concerned at the radioactive contamination of their seas and fishing grounds from reprocessing at Sellafield.
I believe the scandal of abuse of safety at Sellafield is a European question.
In particular, the high-level waste tanks pose a serious, on-going risk to the east coast of Ireland because of the risk of a release of large amounts of radiation should the cooling tanks overheat.
The Nuclear Inspectorate's report stressed that the amount of high-level liquid waste continues to increase faster than BNFL can deal with it.
The THORP reprocessing plant produces continually more waste.
It is this plant that the inspectorate threatened with legal sanctions if the backlog is not cleared.
Reprocessing by its nature produces large quantities of liquid waste.
For more than 40 years high-level liquid waste has been stored in tanks at Sellafield under constant cooling.
It is now urgent that we cease reprocessing and that the high-level waste tanks be shifted to passive containment such as vitrification.
Even then, they will still be highly radioactive for more than 50 years.
The problem for BNFL is that the amount of high-level liquid waste produced by reprocessing continues to increase faster than it can deal with it.
The NII would like to see the minimisation of the amount of high-level liquid waste stored in order to reduce the potential hazard.
I would suggest that this could be done by ending reprocessing now.
In committee I also queried whether a culture of corruption had spread to the independent quality assurance verification by Lloyd's Quality Assurance who verify that BNF procedures comply with health and safety requirements.
Last September it published a report stating that BNFL has high-quality management in terms of health, safety and the environment.
As this was clearly inaccurate, according to the regulator's report, this independent verification now lacks credibility.
I have already talked about going native in regard both to Euratom and the UK inspectorate.
This is the polite euphemism for corruption, and that is what we must control here.
The Chief Inspector recommended that the high-level waste tanks and the serious risk resulting from the inability of BNFL to make them passively safe through vitrification was an urgent issue.
I would ask what does "urgent" mean in this context?
Must we wait for years more of serious risk to the health and environment of people in the British Isles and Europe generally?
The Commission is informed of the events surrounding the falsification of the pellet diameter data at the MOX demonstration facility and the BNFL Sellafield site.
We are closely following the developments and have made direct contact both with the UK authorities and with the company.
The Commission is highly concerned with this event which raises questions in relation to nuclear safety.
Before I refer to the specific aspects raised by Mrs Ahern in her question, I would therefore firstly like to state that we cannot tolerate any negligence in relation to nuclear safety within the present and greater European Union.
The neglect of internationally agreed nuclear safety standards should be openly and firmly condemned.
I am therefore grateful that the European Parliament decided to debate this important issue in plenary tonight and to adopt a resolution later this week.
Let me now turn to the first specific issue which is the implications of the MOX data issue for the safety of nuclear installations.
Let me first remind the honourable Members that under the International Convention on Nuclear Safety the responsibility for nuclear safety rests with the state having jurisdiction over a nuclear installation.
It is also clear that our Member States do not wish to give up this responsibility.
I therefore need to refer to the UK and the NII report on the falsification of the data which states that the nuclear installations inspectorate is satisfied that the fuel manufactured in MDF will be safe in use in spite of the incomplete QA records caused by the falsification of some AQL data by process workers in the facility.
That is a quote from their report.
However, the inspectors' report on the control and supervision of operations at the BNFL Sellafield site also stated its opinion on the deterioration in safety performance at Sellafield.
The company has reacted to the requirement of the NII to produce a programme responding to the recommendations in the report.
We are now awaiting the formal reaction of the inspector to this programme.
Secondly, on nuclear safeguards: according to the investigations carried out by the UK nuclear installations inspectorate, the falsification of data occurred during a secondary manual diameter check of a sub-set of the MOX pellets in the Sellafield MOX demonstration facility.
As far as Euratom nuclear material safeguards are concerned, checks of the diameter of pellets are not covered since operators' declarations for safeguards are based on pellet weights and not on a diameter measurement.
Therefore the verifications performed by Euratom safeguards did not indicate that these declarations had been incorrect.
Thirdly, in relation to the transport of nuclear materials, transport of radioactive material is implemented according to regulations that are elaborated by the IAEA and transposed into national legislation.
Therefore, also for the transport of radioactive material the prime responsibility lies with the Member States.
As such the measurement deviations at Sellafield do not have any consequences on the safe transport of pellets.
However, the Commission welcomes any decision which would increase even further the safe transport of nuclear material.
The Commission has as its objective to promote the harmonisation of the regulations in the field of transport of radioactive material, which would increase safety in the field.
Finally, regarding the concept of proposing a Euratom directive for harmonising minimum standards for nuclear safety in the European Union and its value in discussions of nuclear safety with the accession states: individual EU Member States' safety requirements are more specific and demanding than those of the International Atomic Agency.
Because of different historical background, legal framework, type and numbers of reactors and different approaches to regulation, they cannot easily be harmonised into a set of common rules.
My concern is that any attempt to achieve a consensus on a set of common Euratom safety standards might only result in a very generalised set of rules and principles.
As such they would be unlikely to improve on current nuclear installations' safety standards.
It is therefore unlikely that harmonising minimum standards at an EU-level would have been able to prevent what happened at Sellafield.
There are, however, several activities at Community level where harmonisation would be both beneficial and possible.
These activities are based on common recognition of national requirements and the promotion of best practices.
One area where there is scope for in-depth harmonisation is in relation to new types of facilities.
I do not see any obstacles to future harmonisation of rules in the field of safe management of radioactive waste and decommissioning of nuclear installations.
In the context of enlargement, a directive setting out harmonised minimum safety standards might have facilitated our early discussions on the very sensitive issue of nuclear safety.
As part of the Community's acquis it then would have been routinely screened together with other EU legislation.
However, it is difficult to say if such a directive would be developed quickly enough to play a key role in the ongoing discussions with the accession states.
It is also difficult to prejudge if common minimum standards would give us the level of safety that we wish the accession states to aim for.
We have in fact set our sights and those of the accession states beyond such a level.
We are working to encourage the applicant states to apply the good practices in use in the European Union.
One example of this is the development by the DG-Environment of guidelines for periodic safety reviews of the Soviet-designed light water nuclear reactors.
Another major step forward was taken only last week with the setting up of a European nuclear installation safety group.
It will bring together nuclear power plant operators and nuclear regulators from both Member States and applicant states.
I can assure you that the Commission will do everything it can to pursue the objective of a high level of nuclear safety, both within the present Union and an enlarged one.
I am convinced that more could be done at Community level to achieve this.
However, it is not clear that a directive requiring the harmonisation of safety standards at a European level at this moment in history is the best way forward.
It is very important that we retain a sense of perspective, a sense of proportion about this issue and I welcome the balanced response from Commissioner Wallström.
It is very important that we stick to facts and avoid some of the wilder claims that have been put in the Green motion for a resolution on this issue.
I want to emphasise that safety was not compromised in the incident of record falsification.
I would like to quote also from the NII report that the fuel manufactured in MDF, the MOX Demonstration Facility, will be safe in use in spite of incomplete quality assurance records caused by the falsification of some acceptable quality-level data by process workers in the facility.
The NII takes this view on the basis of the robustness of the fuel manufacturing process and the totality of the checks made on the key parameters.
I would also like to draw colleagues' attention to the positive response by BNFL to the two reports made by the NII, one on the records incident and the other on the control and safety management regime at Sellafield.
I welcome the response and their three key recommendations to improve the safety management system and management structure by implementing a comprehensive overhaul of the safety management system across the company.
To improve resource availability by taking on more monitoring staff, by improved training and further emphasising the safety culture and thirdly, to improve independent inspection, audit and review by appointing independent senior compliance inspectors and the like.
BNFL has responded positively to the 28 recommendations in one report and 15 recommendations in the other, the falsification report.
I do not propose to go through those in great detail.
I have no time.
Let us not lose sight of the fundamentals here.
Regulatory safety mechanisms worked in this instance.
Members of the staff reported the error and then the regulatory procedures took their course.
There was no actual breach of safety, only a breach of record-keeping regulations for one particular customer.
The offence of falsification of records must not negate or obscure the long-term case for reprocessing or MOX fuel assemblies.
Both of these are forms of recycling.
Both of them are effective ways of reducing, of concentrating waste and in the case of MOX manufacture are the best answer known presently to the issue of safe disposal of weapons grade plutonium.
I welcome the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association WENRA which was formed just over a year ago in February 1999.
I welcome their launching of a project aimed at harmonising its members' safety rules and practices.
The regulators themselves are undertaking this job across Member States: who better to undertake that task?
The result will be an enhanced safety culture and that is to be welcomed by all.
Mr President, the vast majority of United Kingdom citizens or indeed EU citizens were deeply shocked and dismayed at the recent events at BNFL.
Let me quote BNFL's own words: "At company level it has been recognised that in the mind of many stake holders quality and safety are inextricably linked.
Failure to comply in one aspect of an accredited quality system has led to a major loss in confidence in BNFL overall."
That is from a management which is now aware of its shortcomings, a management that foolishly engaged in staff reductions, now reversed thank goodness.
The highest standards are required of any nuclear installation.
I have considerable sympathy for the workers at BNFL let down by a sloppy management.
Their livelihoods were endangered.
They will now speak out whenever they see evidence of lack of safety culture.
I do not want to talk at this stage about the viability or wisdom of reprocessing nor about the economics of MOX.
That is not under debate, although those matters should be debated in the UK and elsewhere.
BNFL is now in for a very difficult period and deservedly.
The main reason this is being raised in the European Parliament is to point out the lack of European harmonised standards in the nuclear industry.
There are harmonised standards in almost every other aspect of European industry.
The Euratom Treaty is deficient and that must be rectified so that we can have the sort of directive we need.
We cannot really contemplate enlargement without some sort of acquis communautaire in the nuclear sector.
The Commissioner says she does not feel it advisable to produce a communication.
Please come to our committee Commissioner and we can discuss this further.
I think one is needed in the near future indicating how we could achieve more harmonisation - of course not at the lowest standards in existence but at the most stringent.
If you want public acceptance - and many of you do - of the nuclear industry, you have to ensure that.
Commissioner you say that as far as new facilities are concerned, if there are to be any, you feel that there is a case.
I really do not see the difference, and I urge you to reconsider what you have said this evening to come to our committee, look at this one case as an example of what we need for the public of Europe and for the workers in our nuclear plants.
Mr President, what the investigations into this incident show is what can best be described as a culture of management incompetence and one of complacency.
The report by the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate in February of this year into the safety records found that these records had been systematically falsified.
The processing of spent fuel from 34 plants in 9 different countries was thrown into doubt and, indeed, Japan, Germany and Switzerland stopped sending material - and quite rightly so - to Sellafield.
This whole sorry tale has added to the UK's reputation, as sordid as it is often inaccurate, as the "dirty man of Europe".
I believe that all at Sellafield must accept collective responsibility for the things that have gone wrong and must act to improve them.
A number of improvements have been made: the new chairman of BNFL has undertaken a fundamental review; a number of people have been dismissed.
There is undoubtedly progress.
However, there is a lot yet to be achieved and there is a long way for the UK to go, and for BNFL to go to re-establish its reputation.
I would ally myself with the concerns of Mrs McNally, when she asked the Commissioner to look again at these matters.
The fact is that the Commissioner telling us that the rules of individual Member States are more specific is simply not good enough.
We need high minimum standards and, in particular, we need those standards in the light of the accession of candidate countries, many of which are more reliant on nuclear technology than existing members of the Union and have much older generating capacity.
The importance of European Union action in this matter is that it will be a confidence-building measure, and what the public want are confidence-building measures.
I recognise and feel deeply the concern expressed by colleagues in the Republic of Ireland and Denmark.
The fact is that we need legislation to implement what is called for in the motion put forward by the three main political groups tonight: high minimum standards for the safe and reliable design, construction and operation of nuclear and nuclear-related installations, as well as for nuclear-safety management systems.
My group cannot support the Green motion here tonight.
We feel that it treats the matter in too gargantuan terms.
It raises the perfectly legitimate question of whether nuclear reprocessing should continue at Sellafield.
But one cannot conduct this debate in the terms employed by the tabloid newspapers.
We support the motion put forward by the three major political groups because we believe that improvements need to be made, improvements are being made, but that those improvements will be encouraged by an EU-wide approach to this whole matter.
We recognise too the great significance of this plant for employment in west Cumbria and we believe that should the future of the plant be thrown into jeopardy then the European Commission must come forward with special measures to help regenerate other employment in the area.
This is a saga in which nobody, least of all Sellafield, comes out well.
But it is an area where action at European-Union level really can make a difference.
Mr President, I wish to begin by thanking my colleague, Mrs Ahern, for raising this very important issue.
No one in this House could have been anything but appalled at the recent events linked to Sellafield, with the falsification of MOX fuel data and the Nuclear Installation Inspectorate's report on the low level of safety procedures at the plant.
Following the initial defensive response by BNFL, it was only when that report was published that the real scale of the problem emerged, that the falsification of figures had apparently been going on secretly since 1996.
Wales, like Ireland, has suffered from the radioactive contamination in the Irish Sea, due essentially to Sellafield.
There has been a theory about a link between a high incidence of childhood leukaemia, for example, and proximity to the Welsh coastline.
Now, added to that, we have a situation where any confidence the public had in the safety of the plant, and therefore their own health and safety, has been destroyed.
It is this crisis of credibility in the management of British Nuclear Fuels which may actually bring about the end of reprocessing.
BNFL was determined to press ahead with the Sellafield MOX plant to keep reprocessing going.
But one of the reasons why British Energy, which accounted for a third of Sellafield's reprocessing work, decided to shift from that to waste storage was on economic grounds.
It was cheaper for them to store waste, and evidence published recently by the nuclear-free local authorities confirms this view.
So, with the problems of the environmental pollution and the effects on health, as well as the issue of cost and the debate about the cost, what justification is left for nuclear processing?
It is not worth the risks associated with it and, as the resolution states, the Council, the Commission and Parliament must reconsider this whole issue, including the production of MOX fuel, in the light of recent events and in the interests not only of people in Ireland and Wales but also in the whole of Europe.
British Nuclear Fuels has an obligation to deal with the levels of waste that Mrs Ahern mentioned earlier in the safest way possible.
That issue too is one of great concern to me because an area of Wales has been mentioned as a possible site for storing low-level radioactive waste.
This is unacceptable.
A strategic approach is needed.
The nuclear industry has caused enormous damage already and we have to be certain that more and more communities and people's lives are not blighted by its legacy in future.
Mr President, an essential requirement in parliamentary work is rigour.
For the sake of this rigour, I would like to remind you of four facts relating to the case of the falsification of manual measurements of the diameter of MOX fuel pellets at the British Nuclear Fuels installation at Sellafield.
Firstly, we are talking about secondary and superfluous controls at the request of a client, not a safety requirement; secondly, no nuclear safety requirement was violated; thirdly, there was no risk of radiation whatsoever; fourthly, no safeguard clause of the Euratom Treaty was violated since the measurements of the weight of the pellets were correct.
We are therefore talking about a dreadful case of a lack of professional ethics, which has done enormous economic and public relations damage to the company concerned, but this case had no implications whatsoever in terms of the safety of workers or the public.
Nevertheless, a mishap like this reminds us, despite its trivial nature, of the need to give utmost priority to the constant control and improvement of the procedures in an installation such as the Sellafield reprocessing plant.
This is the view of the British regulatory authority.
This is clearly demanded in the resolution supported by our Group and we hope that this will be complied with in the future.
Mr President, we must not be under any illusion that the falsification of quality control data at Sellafield was not a most serious matter.
I suspect that the small number of Members of this House who have kept in touch with the plant, both the management and the workers' representatives there over a good number of years, felt the issue more keenly than most.
It exposed a poor safety culture and an inadequate secondary control procedure in the manufacture of MOX fuel.
However, we should note that the response of BNFL to the nuclear inspectorate report has already resulted in very significant management changes.
These have been welcomed both by the inspectorate and by the minister responsible.
I hope that in that regard they will not be accused of having gone native on this particular issue.
I would suggest that one of the roles of Parliament should be to monitor the ongoing management changes that are taking place.
We should also note that the chief inspector and the Commission made very clear to the industry committee that there were no safety implications at any of the Sellafield installations.
Nuclear safeguards were not an issue, nor were there safety issues in relation to transport of nuclear materials.
I am glad that the Commissioner has reinforced that view this evening.
The fuel can be safely used for the purposes for which it was manufactured.
But to say all this must not lead us to be complacent.
We seek to apply standards to the applicant countries in eastern Europe and, I would suggest, beyond the applicant countries in eastern Europe.
European Union standards applicable to all nuclear installations are still something that most of us want to see.
We know that the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association is seeking harmonisation.
I would hope that the Commissioner, as other colleagues have asked, will reconsider her position and actually support and encourage WENRA in this objective.
I am absolutely convinced, on the basis of my own experience in a number of countries that this is the way to reassure public opinion.
It is the reassurance of public opinion that must be our main objective as a Parliament.
Mr President, I have been a Member of this Parliament now for sixteen years.
I believe I am accurate in saying that literally in every one of those sixteen years the concerns of the Irish Government and the Irish people about the nuclear processing plant in Sellafield have been raised in this Parliament.
I am always conscious, as I look around, that probably every light bulb in this Chamber is lit by nuclear energy, which explains the reluctance among many of the major European nuclear powers to address seriously the concern we have in Ireland.
Our concerns have been expressed by successive governments to the British Government.
They have largely been treated - I regret to say - with indifference and indeed, very often with contempt.
There now exists in Ireland a total absence of any trust in relation to reassurances about the safety of the nuclear plant in Sellafield.
The recent information about the falsification of documents just added to the deep sense of unease that is shared by people throughout our island.
We are a country with all risk and no benefit from this plant.
We are aware that the Germans and the Japanese are sending their nuclear waste for processing to Sellafield because it is politically too uncomfortable for them to do it in their own countries because of concerns about this.
I ask the Commissioner to reconsider her point.
I also ask her another question: are any of the non-nuclear countries on the nuclear safety committee you mentioned?
It is time that we realised that we must count the cost of processing the waste from these nuclear facilities as an intrinsic part of the cost.
It is, generally speaking, more comfortable to leave that out, but this is a matter of extreme concern to the Irish Government, the Irish people and happily, also to the Danish Government.
We are joined in our concerns by them as well.
Mr President, I asked to speak in this debate not just because I am a Member from the north-west region of England where the Sellafield plant is situated, not just because there could be 10 000 livelihoods at risk if Sellafield was closed, and not because I have any vested interest in the nuclear industry.
I do not.
I asked to speak because I want to try and help to get some truth into this debate.
The trouble is, when you talk about nuclear issues - especially Sellafield - it is dominated by a distortion of the truth.
When Mrs Ahern spoke, she spoke of the NII giving a damning indictment of the plant.
No, it did not!
She spoke of the damning indictment on safety checks.
No, it did not!
It made three safety recommendations and the checks were quality assurance checks, as other speakers have said.
She said the report came from a press statement in The Independent.
No, it did not.
The workers at BNFL raised the issue.
They were the ones who discovered it.
BNFL were the ones who told the nuclear installations inspectorate and their customers what had happened.
She spoke of contamination of the seas in Ireland and Denmark.
I quote from The Independent where seven prominent Danish scientists, who actually study as a professional interest the releases of radioactivity from Sellafield, said on 12 May: "There is no scientific basis for the claim that the present release of radioactivity from Sellafield causes an unacceptable contamination in the North Atlantic and Arctic regions".
When your mind is made up facts only confuse the issue!
She spoke of the scandal of abuse of safety.
That is an absolute insult to the people who work there, and more so to their families who live near that site!
Those workers would not work in that plant if they thought it was unsafe.
They would certainly not put their families at risk it that was the case.
That is an absolute indictment of those people who work there.
Then she finished by talking about corruption.
That really is the last throw of the dice.
Finally, I say to the Commissioner: the one thing you should do, apart from listen, is to pay a visit to Sellafield and find out the facts for yourself.
That is the best advice that I can give you and many Members of this Parliament also.
Mr President, as a Cumbrian - born, bred and resident - and one of the representatives of north-west England, there is nobody in this Parliament who has been more affected by the reverberations arising from recent events at Sellafield than me.
Let us be clear.
There have been real lapses in the way in which it has been managed.
Those lapses quite simply are not acceptable.
Speaking as a Cumbrian I know a lot of people in my home county - which I have the privilege to represent - feel let down by British Nuclear Fuels.
But as has already been pointed out, there have been no breaches of the law or of the regulator's rules and guidelines.
In a society subject to the rule of law recent events cannot be used to close the plant.
I know that there are many people who would like to see Sellafield closed down.
In particular I know this is a very strongly held view in parts of Ireland.
In a free society, if that is how people feel, they must be allowed to articulate their opinions.
But that is no reason why the plant should be closed.
There can be no question of any lawfully established enterprise in any part of the European Union being closed by the public authorities without its breaking the law.
This true in Ireland, Denmark, the United Kingdom or any other Member State.
The owners - that is to say the United Kingdom Government - and the employees of Sellafield have legitimate interests which quite simply cannot be swept under the carpet.
This applies in this case just as much as to anybody else.
Finally, just as the recent crisis at Sellafield has been self-inflicted, so the solution to it lies in British Nuclear Fuels' hands, as they themselves understand.
I wish them well.
But words are not enough.
They must be matched by deeds - their deeds.
From an Irish perspective we are witnessing the beginning of the end of reprocessing at Sellafield and we have allies.
The powers of the Commission in this area as the responsible Community institution remain hopelessly inadequate, embarrassingly inadequate.
No uniform standards for safety and discharges, no Community consultation procedure concerning power stations sited near frontiers, no clear Community provisions for the storage and transport of nuclear fuels or nuclear waste, no adequate Community system of information and monitoring in cases of nuclear malfunction.
Nuclear safety in the enlargement process is a major cause for concern.
As there are no prescribed criteria in EU law governing the design or operation of nuclear facilities, how do we judge their safety of operation?
Realists accept and understand that life is full of risks.
Society usually accepts a certain level of risk in return for an advantage and proponents of nuclear energy almost inevitably remind us of the balance of risk and benefit.
What benefit accrues to Ireland for the risk of being exposed to the majority of Britain's nuclear installations?
If nuclear safety and nuclear energy are so safe, why are not the majority of these installations located near the population centres of the south-east of England?
To minimise the risk to these population centres of course.
But seen from an Irish perspective, this stands logic on its head, we have counties Antrim, Down, Louth, Dublin, Wicklow and Wexford where the vast majority of the population of the island of Ireland, about 2 million people, live on or adjacent to the Irish sea where the majority of British nuclear institutions are sited.
Furthermore in recent years, we have all seen how consumer concern about the integrity of the food chain can devastate a once seemingly secure market.
Witness the BSE and dioxin problem.
We can only begin to imagine the effect of any kind of nuclear scare - just a scare - on these sectors of our economy.
Choice about exposure to risk for oneself or for one's children is a very basic human right.
This right to determine, to control, to have any say about the risk of nearby concentrations of nuclear installations is denied to those of us who inhabit the western shores of the Irish sea.
In practice, nuclear decision-making in the UK falls far short of democratic standards.
Often questionable decisions are made behind a wall of secrecy.
I will conclude.
The reality of Sellafield goes beyond the contribution to the Kyoto targets on the dependence of the UK economy on nuclear energy.
It also includes a litany of unreported incidents, falsified quality control checks on MOX fuel rods resulting in the loss of confidence by the Japanese in safety standards at the plant and the cancellation by the Germans and the Swiss of mixed oxide nuclear fuel pellets.
The reality of Sellafield includes incidents last September and early this year of deliberate sabotage, allegedly by members of the staff.
Serious doubts are being raised about the long-term viability of reprocessing.
Their order books are full for a few more years, but no new orders are coming in due to the quality of control lapse at the MOX plant.
Even the new CEO, Mr Norman Askew, is reported as saying that reprocessing is not the big part of the business it once was.
A director has publicly stated the future of the plant is in doubt.
But a nuclear future for Sellafield can be justified: not mixed oxide fuel production, not thermal oxide reprocessing at the MOX and THORP plants.
The skills and the experience of the workforce and the major capital investment could and should be redirected towards waste management and the creation of a centre of excellence for decommissioning and that is what I suggest we concentrate the debate on.
Mr President, thank you very much for an interesting and valuable debate.
I hope that we can all agree on the need for confidence-building because, even though the conclusion is that this incident did not cause substantial damage or serious risks, we see that the price of the loss of confidence is very high.
It is in the interest of all of us to ensure that our citizens have confidence in our safety and security systems.
I am ready to come any time to any committee in Parliament to discuss those issues.
I can say that personally I would very much prefer to have Community rules.
But we must not give the impression that this would mean higher levels of safety in the European Union, because with the unanimity rule on the decisions on these issues, the end-result could be that we have minimum standard rules which would not live up to the expectations of our citizens.
We must be realistic, because we know the discussion and the position and attitude among the Member States: they are not willing to give the European Union more competence in this area.
That is also why the Commission's responsibility in this area is restricted to control radioactivity - but no more than that.
We need European rules.
However, we must not give the impression that this will be achieved very easily and quickly.
I share the view that we ought to discuss it more thoroughly.
In reply to Mrs Banotti's question, this European Nuclear Installation's safety group brings together the power plant operators and nuclear regulators from both Member States and applicant states.
It is not a wider forum but they can cooperate in this specific safety group.
It is not the first time that Sellafield has been discussed and we need to look into the safety issues very closely because, you remember, there was an accident in Japan.
That was because of lax control and some of the staff thought they could make a mix of their own.
So even in highly advanced societies there are serious risks with nuclear and processing techniques.
I should be pleased to come to Parliament at any time to continue this discussion.
However, I do not want to give anyone false hopes about what can be achieved very quickly and with the help of Member States.
That is also why we have restricted competence.
I have received five motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 42 (5) of the Rules of Procedure.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.
(The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m.)