# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
However, a Summit of this type should be an important source of hope, especially if it is not an isolated event but a first step in a process which we must set to work on immediately, in the expectation, furthermore, that relations between the European Union and Africa are going to change shape.
I am not impressed by the current pattern of African partners requesting aid in order to resolve their problems, as a result of which the European partners merely grant a part of that aid and little more.
We must go much further, much further than mere cooperation with development, which, by definition, is an unfair form of cooperation.
We must create platforms for dialogue and cooperation in which Europeans and Africans can discuss common problems and put together joint strategies in order to act in a coordinated fashion within the world order, in which we must all play a principal role, in equality, dignity and responsibility.
Thus, that world order will have to be more egalitarian, shared, cohesive, democratic and compatible with the values which we in the European Union proclaim as our distinguishing marks.
Mr President, taking this approach, we will vote in favour of the good resolution with which this debate will conclude.
Mr President, except for photographs and fine words, the Africa Summit has yielded very little.
Africa asked Europe for more market access and debt repayment, and got vague pledges in return.
Europe asked Africa to respect human rights more, fight corruption and cease violent conflicts, and got vague pledges in return too.
The solemn declaration of Cairo was signed by governments which are anything but generous regarding clearing debts and opening up their own markets.
The document is also signed by countries where human rights are being violated on a massive scale, where women are discriminated against, where the little funding that is available is used to massacre other population groups and where corruption has taken on almost ineradicable proportions.
Wealthy Europe must grant generous aid to Africa in support of democratic institutions, primary education and health care and must substantially lighten the debt burden.
The African countries need to understand that, without proper government, none of their developments will come to fruition, and both continents need to realise that strict population policy is absolutely indispensable.
On the photographs from Cairo, the African and European leaders may be rubbing shoulders with each other but, in reality, there is a yawning chasm separating the two continents.
Mr President, the first EU-Africa summit was an important event and had a great deal of potential for taking meaningful steps to reduce the marginalisation of African countries.
So it is a pity that a number of things prevented that potential from being fully realised.
Firstly, neither the European Parliament nor the EU-ACP Joint Assembly was invited to participate in the summit.
Secondly, it is very sad that civil society was not able to have a greater input into the meeting.
The NGOs from the EU and African countries took this summit very seriously and it was a missed opportunity not to engage in more meaningful dialogue with them.
Civil society has a key role to play in Africa' s development process.
Finally, this meeting could have resulted in a far-reaching action plan of concrete actions.
What we have is a plan full of warm words and good intentions but short on firm commitments, in particular on trade issues.
While it is nice to recall the EU' s important decision to grant duty-free access for essentially all products, it would have been even more significant to have gone beyond the famous "essentially all" to include those products of real importance to the poorest countries, such as agricultural goods.
Finally - sadly - commodity prices were conspicuous by their absence from this agenda.
A majority of African countries are overwhelmingly dependent on just one or two commodities for the bulk of their foreign exchange earnings.
Until action is taken to reverse the fall of commodity prices, poverty in Africa will not be properly addressed.
Mr President, wanting to achieve relations on the basis of partnership between the old continent and Africa means first of all putting a halt to the present system which operates to benefit the great powers and the corrupt elite of the south.
The continent of Africa is ravaged by epidemics such as the AIDS epidemic and by wars that are conspicuous, or sometimes forgotten.
Antipersonnel mines continue to kill innocent people, arms of all kinds proliferate and fall into the hands of child-soldiers.
The number of undernourished people in black Africa rose from 90 million in 1970 to 180 million in 1995.
The figures speak for themselves.
Time seems to have stood still between the Biafra famine thirty years ago and the one which is once again devastating Ethiopia.
Illiteracy and unemployment affect the vast majority of young people on the African continent.
So it would be a mistake to think, today, that three quarters of the planet, three quarters of the human race, are going to carry on living in this sort of poverty without causing some serious instability at world level.
We must also do away with aid policies, which are equivalent to giving fish to people living on the bank of the river, as the saying goes, instead of helping them to make fishing rods.
The result is there is never enough fish and there are increasing numbers of people fighting over the leftovers.
Moreover, the IMF ordered ultraliberal policies, supposedly for structural adjustment.
These are policies that have never worked anywhere.
Quite the opposite.
I do not know of a single example of a country which made any progress by applying their directives.
In all its negotiations, the European Union should also demand fighting against corruption, certainly, and for democracy but, in return, African countries can also demand that the friends of Le Pen, Haider and Martinez should stop making regular racist attacks on their populations resident in Europe.
We agree that we cannot carry on supporting dictators in the name of Realpolitik.
We must support democrats unreservedly.
From this point of view, what has taken place in Senegal sends out a strong message, proving that Africa is not automatically condemned to conflict, coups d' état or tribal warfare.
There is an imperative need for a new policy, based on codevelopment, conflict prevention, and the rejection of the dictates of the financial markets.
Obviously, this necessitates cancelling the 350 billion dollars of debt which is strangling any development in these States.
Finally, Mr President, Europe too made its wealth from colonialism and slavery.
Europe thus has a moral debt towards Africa.
Part of our wealth came from the colonial plundering inflicted on Africa.
Acknowledging that slavery was a crime against humanity would be an important gesture.
Mr President, after months of endless squabbling about agendas and participants, the Cairo Summit did take place eventually.
Only to establish what all of us have known for a long time, namely that the majority of the African population still live in abject poverty and are weighed down by a heavy burden of debt.
There is no doubt that the many informal contacts which the Summit created have been useful.
But I do wonder in all honesty if there can be talk of a Euro-African Summit if civil society is banished to Lisbon and neither the European Parliament nor the ACP-EU Assembly are in any way involved in the Summit.
The European Council gave in to the demand of African dictators not to admit any parliaments to the Summit.
But how much more credible would words such as democracy and the interest of the people have been if those people had actually been represented.
In that sense, Cairo was not a Euro-African Summit but more like a summit of élites.
With his statement that Africa does not need democracy but water pumps, Colonel Gaddafi has undoubtedly put into words what many of his fellow dictators think.
It is evident that our political models cannot simply be transplanted.
Africa has to find meaning for the notion of democracy itself.
But fundamental principles, sound leadership, separation of powers, free and fair elections and respect for human rights are not negotiable.
The European Union' s reaction to violations of these principles is sometimes feeble and often divided.
Take Zimbabwe, for example, where political opponents are being attacked in the run-up to the elections and white farmers are being threatened and illegally evicted from their own land and where Mugabe provokes violence.
What other messages does the Commission need in order to suspend development aid?
In an interview with The Sunday Times last Saturday, Kofi Annan reproached the African leaders with greed, megalomania and failure to create better living conditions in their countries.
Against the background of Kofi Annan' s words, the question arises as to whether the people do not consider the organising of solemn rituals such as those in Cairo as a conspiracy among élites.
The international community should not be tricked into feelings of guilt by the African leaders who do not carry any democratic legitimacy.
It is high time that the European Union told the African dictators where their responsibility lies.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, all too often, Africa is seen by Europe as a lost continent, which is why this EU-Africa summit was long overdue.
This event must not be used as an alibi; it must mark the beginning of a real partnership.
If we are honest, then we must examine our own motives because, the truth is that a sort of Africa summit would also suit the European Parliament, because dealing with this subject usually means extremely topical and highly dramatic incidents, with conceptional discussions and efforts to find the right perspective generally getting the thin edge of the wedge, if you disregard the fact that Africa is a predominant subject at the ACP assembly.
But who notices that here in Europe?
Africa is the continent most seriously affected by the injustices of the international economic and financial system and the consequences of globalisation.
The promise by the German government and by other European countries to write off the debts of the poorest countries in the world will help considerably, because the high level of debt is an obstacle to investments in all forms of infrastructure in the countries in question and is hence one of the biggest obstacles in the fight against poverty.
Governments which have not yet decided to join this move should copy those who have already done so.
Success will only be achieved in the long term by finding points which unite rather than separate us and by endeavouring to reach a mutual understanding and to integrate Africa into the international community of nations.
Nonetheless, it is clear that something may, indeed must be demanded of the governments of Africa when it comes to safeguarding human rights, basic democratic order and the rule of law.
There can be no question of allowing dictatorial rule on the African continent which, as in Zimbabwe now, fosters racism, dispossession and forcible suppression and ousts an operational legal system.
The Lomé Convention offers a suitable framework for consultation, political dialogue and, if necessary, the suspension of cooperation.
Still less can there be any question of allowing financial aid and food aid from the European Union to be misused in order to buy weapons.
Newsreels showing wretched people starving are currently flickering across our television screens from Ethiopia, while the government is siphoning millions into new arms and has even turned down Eritrea' s offer to allow its ports and transport routes to be used for aid for Ethiopia, despite the continuing state of war.
That is immoral and an important chance to make a move towards reconciliation may have been wasted.
Banning the NGO meeting from Cairo was a most unpleasant side effect.
The countries of Africa will have to get used to the fact that non-governmental organisations have an important status as part of the civil society and can act as mediators in the development of an autonomous civil society in these vulnerable countries on the path towards stability and peace.
Mr President, the Cairo Summit has been genuinely significant, an historic milestone.
It has been significant in terms of its meaning but also in terms of its lack of achievement.
It is historically significant because it is the first time that Europe, which was the colonising power and is responsible for the under-development and poverty of Africa, has met with the countries which are the consequence of that, the African countries which are seriously under-developed.
It is also significant insofar as its conclusions could not have been more feeble.
It has been noted that it had been prepared hurriedly, as a cosmetic exercise, without taking responsibility for the past and without preparing comprehensive and solid programmes on the future of relations between the European Union and Africa.
It is truly illogical to lament the constant instability and warfare, when there is a real battle for power and control of resources in Africa which, in turn, increases the cycle of poverty and sends waves of immigrants towards Europe.
It is also contradictory for us to lament the problem of Aids when it has been caused by the instability and precariousness created in those countries by the structural adjustment plans imposed by us, the IMF and the World Bank.
Therefore, Europe owes an enormous historical debt, centuries old, to Africa, and should repay it, not only by means of asking forgiveness, but also by forging social, economic, political and cultural links in order to show an indispensable form of solidarity.
Mr President, the EU/Africa summit was reported in the press under the headline: Kiss and make up!
Unfortunately a unique opportunity to reconcile different ways of looking at current problems and find a solution was wasted.
First, it is astonishing and highly unsatisfactory that the European Parliament was not included in this allegedly forward-looking conference.
The members of the European Council appear to have overlooked the fact here that the people of Europe are represented first and foremost by this Parliament.
Obviously no one was particularly interested in apprising the African states of this fact.
So it was certainly not a mobilisation summit, as the press described it.
As far as the content was concerned, it is perfectly understandable that the developing countries are interested in seeing their debt burden wiped out, but there can be no question of complete remission with no conditions attached.
We found out at the last meeting of our ACP/EU assembly in Abuja that in Nigeria, for example, which has restored democracy, one of the last dictators diverted several billion euros to private accounts.
One can only emphatically advise the developing countries to prosecute these offences, which are also punishable in Africa, and confiscate the money.
Then some, and it is a great deal, of the money would again be available to repay debts.
We would be able to recognise the good intentions of the developing countries and could then negotiate writing off and ignoring the rest of their debts.
In my view, this is all part and parcel of the good governance to which the countries of Africa have committed themselves if they are to receive more development aid.
On the other hand, I totally fail to understand why the German chancellor, for example, is treading a path which goes in the opposite direction of the other EU countries, by saying that the poorest of the poor countries should have all their debts written off first.
This rather flashy and, in fact insubstantial gesture contradicts the resolutions of the G8 summit last year and is in keeping with his departure from the conference.
It does not help matters if, instead of attending working meetings, one prefers to talk to Gadaffi for 10 minutes.
What the topic of conversation was, one may only speculate.
The chancellor of the media, as he is called at home, made his entrance and what came out of the final declaration adopted hours later was obviously a matter of indifference to him.
This is not the way, in my view, to formulate development policy nor is it the way to bring about the urgently needed reconciliation of national development policies.
I think that we, the European Parliament, must continue to denounce these national solo efforts and increase the responsibility of Member States' governments.
Mr President, it appears that some MEPs here are trying to attribute the problems in Africa mainly to the Africans, while others seem to attribute the blame mainly to Europe and the former colonists.
This seems to be the pattern for the Summit in Cairo too.
Some think it is a missed opportunity.
They are extremely disappointed and can think of all sorts of reasons to support this view, while others deem it a unique and historic event.
The fact that, for the first time in history, such a meeting has taken place between the African and European leaders is, of course, an historic event.
The fact that contact has been maintained mainly with Latin America and Asia is indicative of the fact that, evidently, there is something wrong with the normal relations between Africa and Europe.
This is true, of course, because very often it is not the Ministers for Foreign Affairs who travel to Africa but rather the Ministers responsible for emergency aid who then pursue their policy from there.
In connection with the African continent, policy has always been biased towards all kinds of funding for trade, agriculture, foreign affairs and, of course, development cooperation and there has been insufficient room for normal policy.
This is undoubtedly down to our dual approach of pity on the one hand and misericordia on the other, in other words the inability to snap out of the old colonial relations between Europe and Africa.
This is as much our fault as it is Africa' s.
In the light of this, I consider the Summit more as a good opportunity and a new moment to create a new beginning, despite all the attendant misery - inevitably, there are dictators and there is some European policy which is inappropriate.
I would like to praise the Portuguese Presidency, because they could have quite easily opted out, or it could have quite easily dragged on for a while longer, but they took the bull by the horns.
No, I am certainly not expecting tangible, huge successes, but what matters is what happened at a deeper level.
Parliament received a letter from Mr Prodi in which he says, on behalf of the Commission, that he has ordered proposals to be made for granting countless African products access to the European market at a zero rate.
Such a step is significant.
It has been stated that we want to make a large contribution and take part in a much more far-reaching debt burden initiative, provided we can link this in with social development.
Mr Nielson is in favour of a complete overhaul of the development policy in which attention will focus much more on social development and poverty, both within the ACP-EU Treaty and within the EU.
You cannot develop the African people from within Europe.
The African people have their own plans and want to develop themselves, but want help in order to achieve this.
A new framework such as this really creates opportunities.
Within this framework, room must be made for conflict prevention.
Ordinary, regular contacts cannot work miracles.
They will not bring about marvellous new results, but they are necessary.
I am pleased to hear from the Portuguese Presidency that it intends to ensure that a Summit like this will take place again in the foreseeable future.
They should become the norm.
In a normal relationship, we can be tough and businesslike with each other and we can adopt a result-orientated policy.
I would like to add one more point.
I hope that our budget for 2001 - and the Commissioner is only too aware how heavy this weighs on me, because I am the budget rapporteur for that component - will also accommodate some of these promises.
If 45 million children in Africa have never seen a schoolroom before and if we managed to double the education budget next year - not the budget as a whole but if we simply shifted some figures around - then this would be a welcome bonus.
Apart from in this final note, I made my contribution on behalf of the entire Group of the Party of European Socialists.
Thank you very much, Mr President, for allowing me to speak.
This is my maiden speech in this Chamber.
I, too, welcome the initiative of a first EU-Africa summit.
The need for it has been felt and discussed for nigh on 50 years.
However, as a member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, I must express my reservations at the lack of support from the European Parliament.
I also condemn the fact that Agenda 2000 did not tackle the issue of the future responsibilities of the European Union towards developing countries.
There are two sides to the issue: the request from Europe for African countries to respect human rights, good governance and democratic institutions, and the appeal, loud and clear, from the African countries for the cancellation of their debt, which is seen as responsible for stifling the development, economic growth and welfare of the communities.
A balance has to be found, and some common ground.
Parliament has tried to tackle this issue several times in the past, apparently without ever achieving tangible results.
We need a powerful, sincere, widespread initiative; there are calls from several different quarters, including the Holy See during this Jubilee year, for a substantial reduction, if not the total cancellation of the third world debt, by such means as to facilitate the inclusion of the most heavily indebted countries in the world production and trade circuit.
In my view, we need to set up a structure to analyse the situations of the various different countries and assess their political situations, in order to establish by how much to reduce their debts or whether to cancel them.
This would take into consideration the extent to which past financial aid has been put to good use, and therefore involve the governments, civil society, local churches and non-governmental organisations.
Mr President, ordinary people in most African countries are poorer today than when their countries became independent.
Poverty, therefore, is a disease inflicted upon innocent populations by evil dictators, greedy and corrupt politicians.
Natural disasters, including climate change, have aggravated the problem.
The Touareg in the desert in northern Niger, the Makonde in Tanzania or Mozambique take their families and put their meagre possessions in a little basket if they wish to move.
They are poor, insecure and exposed to the elements.
They have no water, sanitation, energy, medicine, education or reliable shelter.
Such desperate people cannot think of democracy and human rights in the way we do from our houses and leafy suburbs in the West.
They have no stake in their village, regional or national economies.
Such rootless people, desperate people, are easy prey to evil political manipulation, and that is why we see so much conflict and civil unrest in those countries.
We here in this Assembly offer these people open and free access to our EU markets.
We invite them to be part of the global economy, so that they can come and sit at the tables in Seattle for the WTO discussions.
What does this mean to these poor people, the majority of whom live in the bush, who have no knowledge, no means of efficient cultivation, harvesting, processing, packaging even what little they grow?
They cannot even market it in their own countries let alone sell it abroad.
So I suggest, let us teach them to be self-reliant and independent, by teaching them the means to grow and harvest what there is in those countries.
Let us give them the technology transfer that makes sense, before we say our markets are open to them.
.
(PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you for your speeches, which will encourage us to pursue this European Union policy on Africa.
I would like to clarify a few points.
Firstly, the question of linking parliamentary bodies, such as the ACP-EU Joint Assembly and the European Parliament.
As you will be aware, this summit was negotiated with another party: it was not imposed on them, nor could it be.
It was not a summit involving the European Union alone.
We had a partner that had to be respected, because the consequence of not respecting our partner would have been to have had neither a dialogue nor a summit.
Well, let it be said that there were even problems in including references to the ACP group in the final conclusions.
Why was this the case?
Firstly, because this was seen as the first major rapprochement between Africa and Europe and not all Africa' s countries are ACP countries.
Secondly, the ACP group is not a purely African group.
It also covers the Caribbean and Asia.
Therefore, you will understand that incorporating the ACP group into the summit, particularly at Joint Assembly level, would not have been at all easy, especially as the ACP group was not involved at any other level.
Secondly, with regard to the European Parliament, we understand how necessary and important it is for the European Parliament to take part in these initiatives and that is why we, the Presidency, have been involved in extensive dialogue with the European Parliament through the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy and here today, in plenary sitting.
My only regret is that attendance is low, but it is nevertheless of an extremely high calibre.
We have held lengthy discussions on this summit and on the fact that its effectiveness rested on two pillars: one is the European Union, and the other is the OAU.
And the OAU, for its part, does not have a parliament.
There was therefore a problem in accommodating within one summit, which I repeat was a summit of equals, not a summit of parties of a different status, an institution which the other co-sponsoring organisation did not have.
When we prepare the next summit, the 2003 summit, we will certainly look at ways of strengthening the European Parliament' s participation in a framework that must take account of the other party, given that the other party exists.
And nobody can understand anything about relations with Africa unless they grasp the fundamental point that Africa is out there and has its own opinions and ideas on issues.
Let us not try to insist that all our ideas should be automatically accepted and included in the negotiations just because they are ours.
Another important point is debt.
I would not be as sceptical as some of you have been in your speeches and I even think that the reaction of the Africans at the summit and afterwards to the way in which the problem of debt was addressed showed a degree of confidence.
We must not forget that there is a qualitative difference.
I would remind you of the commitment given by Member States in relation to the world' s highly indebted poor countries to reduce and even cancel their debt, not forgetting the Union' s EUR 1 000 million contribution to this programme.
I would also draw your attention to the fact that in 2000, the European Union will clearly commit itself to establishing, by 2005, a programme of access to its economy, free of customs duties, for products from less developed countries.
This will make a major contribution to stimulating their economies in the context of uneven trade liberalisation.
This is unprecedented and has never been done by any other group of countries.
It is extremely innovative and is greatly welcomed by these countries.
Confirmation of these principles at the summit was generally well received by the African countries.
The summit is not an international financial organisation.
The problem of reducing or cancelling debt could not be solved at the summit.
The summit has helped to confirm values and commitment, and it was also extremely significant that many European Union countries took this opportunity to announce publicly that they were reducing or cancelling the debts of the poorest highly indebted countries.
This had an important effect in terms of synergy and precedent.
The most important aspect of what took place was in fact consistently highlighted by the Africans: for the first time the European Union has agreed to address the issue of the indebtedness of African countries with the whole of the African continent through the follow-up mechanisms of a summit.
The high-level bi-regional group was charged with preparing a report on African indebtedness which will then be discussed at ministerial level.
This represents a complete U-turn in this area.
It is the first time that the European Union has agreed to discuss the problem of their indebtedness with all the African countries, in an institutional framework outside the international financial organisations.
The African countries considered this to be one of the most important milestones of this summit.
I should tell you that the aim of the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union was to do something for Africa, not just because we had done something for other continents or regions, such as Latin America and Asia, but also because other countries or groups of countries, such as the United States, Japan and even China had begun to do so before us.
It was time to put right this delay.
And therefore, with the cooperation of Commissioner Nielson, the Development Council held in Lisbon in January was, for the first time in history, devoted to EU-Africa relations.
It had never been done before.
It was the first time.
It was an excellent piece of work, which furthermore was reflected, and rightly so, in the results of the summit.
We also finalised negotiation of the ACP agreements for the second Lomé Convention and we finalised the free trade agreement with South Africa.
We are also working very rapidly on the Barcelona Process and on African participation in the framework of association agreements seeking to create a free trade area by 2010.
We are working to review the Mediterranean strategy, to produce a rigorous draft of the Euro-Mediterranean Charter for Peace and Stability and also to review the MEDA II regulation.
We held the Mediterranean Forum in Funchal and we will be holding an informal ministerial meeting in Lisbon on the Barcelona Process, specifically to determine its good and bad points, on what needs to be improved and to prepare the summit which will be held under the French Presidency.
With regard to the Cairo Summit, it was not included in our initial programme, because when we took over the Presidency, it had not been finalised, but we always said that if the problems could be resolved, we would be prepared to hold the summit.
Later, we proposed the summit, we resolved the diplomatic problems and held a summit whose results were greatly welcomed by the African countries.
Of course, we did not resolve all the problems of the African continent overnight, but a step needed to be taken, a step towards including Africa in the European agenda.
It was necessary to hold a summit with this scope, on this scale and which would target these goals.
We took that step.
We must now continue, but I am sure that with the African agenda more rigorously defined in European policies, we are in a position to continue in a sustained and successful way, because the African continent requires it to be so.
The situation of conflict, poverty and disease requires the European Union to boldly accept its responsibility.
It is also essential for the European Union to have an African agenda.
We, that is, Parliament, the Commission and the Council, are all working towards this.
Let me refer to some of the specific points made in the debate.
Mrs Kinnock mentioned the forthcoming meeting in Dakar on basic education.
As part of our preparations for that meeting I have gone through the bulk of what we are doing on primary education in Africa and I am happy to say that I am in a position to express something positive about what I have seen in the Commission.
We are doing much more than I had expected and I would be happy to inform Parliament about the portfolio of primary education activities in which we are involved in Africa.
This is not to say that we could not do more but it is much better than the picture in general.
Secondly, with reference to Mr Rod, who said that the longer we discuss more people will die of AIDS in Africa, I only have five minutes.
I have discussed AIDS in Africa with President Mugabe.
It was quite interesting that he openly admitted to me that they are now pursuing a policy of open, honest information on AIDS and HIV, pretty much parallel to what Uganda has been doing with some success.
This is not to say that the problem is over but I consider it real progress that one of the statesmen in Africa who, in this discussion, was seen for some time as part of the problem rather than the solution, is now openly saying that he knows he has to change his policy.
I am not claiming to portray the whole situation in Zimbabwe but this is an important point.
Mr Miranda reminded us of the indirect effects on the budget for Africa of the concentration on eastern European Balkan problems.
In absolute terms, our focusing on Kosovo and other activities has not meant a reduction in what we actually do in Africa.
In relative terms this is the case, but we have been able to shield Africa from direct reductions in the volume of what we are doing.
I appreciate the support from Parliament to that effect.
Mrs Maij-Weggen mentioned that development aid has progressed over the years.
I wish that were true.
If we look at total official development assistance, globally it has in fact decreased.
We are now down to 0.23% and many governments should and could do more.
Against that background it is a privilege to represent the European Union internationally in this field because we have not been part of that downward trend.
In total numerical terms, it is foreseeable that we will be increasing what we do in the coming years.
This Parliament, our budget, and our activities stand out as a sort of corrective measure to the global trend.
We should be proud of that and we should make the most of it in political relations also.
Mr van den Bos and others talked about debt relief and these problems certainly need a lot of attention.
I will remind you though that most of the EUR 1 billion, which is the EU' s contribution to the HIPC II initiative, will be directed towards Africa.
The EUR 680 million, which is our contribution as a donor, not as a creditor, will all be directed to the African Development Bank earmarked in the special trust fund in the HIPC initiative in order to bail out Africa and make it possible for the African Development Bank to continue servicing the poor countries in Africa.
We are doing quite a lot and the problem now is to what extent the G7 countries - who started up the HIPC II initiative in Cologne last year - will deliver, not just as donors but in their more narrowly defined role as creditors.
We welcome the cancellation of bilateral debt, which is relatively easy to decide politically, the difficult part is multilateral debt.
This is where the EU, as a donor - not directly involved as a creditor - has been able to lend a strong hand.
This is something that should not be forgotten in the on-going discussions.
It may not be enough but it is certainly more than any other group of donors has done so far.
Mr Zimmerling mentioned the problem of Nigeria and getting money back.
We made some last minute changes to the text in Cairo which strengthened the views expressed and I hope that Europe will be able to give a helping hand in identifying some of this money and getting it back where it belongs.
This should be part of international economic governance.
Money should not be able to disappear as has been the case.
It was of real importance that the Heads of State and Governments spent two days together.
They got along quite well.
It was very nice to witness this, which is of considerable importance, not only for the mood between Europe and Africa, but also for the kind of partnership we want to create, which also needs these personal relations.
They certainly developed quite well in those two days.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to express my thanks for the very good cooperation established with the Portuguese presidency during this substantial effort.
It was very successful and it has been a pleasure working with the presidency.
That concludes the debate.
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 (2) of the Rules of Procedure.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
External relations package
The next item is the Commission communication on the external relations package.
Mr President, we discussed a number of issues in the Commission today, including the broad economic policy guidelines which have been the subject of a statement by my colleague Commissioner Solbes elsewhere in Parliament during the course of the afternoon.
But I would like to focus on two issues touching on external relations and one of those issues in particular.
Briefly though, I will first of all mention our communication on election observation and assistance, which we will now be publishing and which I will look forward to discussing with Parliament over the coming weeks and months.
I have to say straight away by way of a confession - and since Dr Paisley is not in the House I can probably make a confession - the paper does not represent a radical new approach, but it does attempt to bring order to an activity, which has become a very real growth area in recent years.
We have spent EUR 150 million on this important activity.
It is now clearly a first- pillar activity following the adoption of the regulations, which provide a legal basis for human rights and democratisation activity.
As Members of Parliament will recognise, the communication invites both Parliament and the Council to work with us on a more coordinated approach.
It invites everyone to try to learn the lessons of the past.
It is a very practical document.
It suggests that we need greater coherence in what we are doing and I am looking forward to hearing the views of Members of Parliament on the document, which I hope they will regard as an important and useful contribution to a debate which is going to become more important, not less important, over the coming years.
Let me turn to a subject on which I would like to address the Parliament at rather greater length.
It is a subject which is very close to my own heart - imperfect a specimen though that may be.
It is the rapid reaction facility, which we have been discussing for some time and on which we have come to some conclusions.
My colleague, Commissioner Nielson, was talking a moment or two ago about the EU-African summit in Cairo just over a week ago.
It is true that the President of the Commission, my colleagues Pascal Lamy and Poul Nielson and myself were all confronted during that summit with a litany of complaints about the slow delivery of European Union assistance.
The people making those complaints were very often justified in doing so - not always - but very often.
It is not a new problem, as Members of Parliament will know - particularly Members who have been on delegation visits to other countries.
I have been frustrated at our slow and cumbersome procedures ever since I have arrived at the Commission last autumn.
I want to say once again that this is not a problem created by our staff, who work extremely hard, thin on the ground as they are.
It is a problem which they have been labouring under for a number of years.
The problems of slow decision-making and delivery are both structural and cultural.
Our procedures are old fashioned, they are as I said 'cumbersome'.
But the traditional legislative approach to Community business is also sometime ill-suited to the fast changing realities in external relations.
This is particularly true for conflict prevention and it is particularly true for crisis management efforts.
Today we are criticised for being slow, today we are criticised for being overtaken too frequently by events, and I think to borrow a cliché 'history is not going to wait for us any longer', nor will our international partners, nor even will the Council, and they are right.
We have to make sure that we are ready and capable of acting when action is needed, not six weeks later, not six months later.
We have to do better and we can do better.
Now we have embarked on an ambitious reform of our external assistance programmes, designed to bring a serious improvement in their effectiveness and in their speed of delivery.
We will present our proposals in the next few weeks.
Some things we can do relatively quickly, others will take longer if, for example, complex legal changes are required.
The rapid reaction facility is something that in our judgement we can do fairly quickly if we have the support of Parliament and if we have the support of the Council.
I hope that support will be forthcoming because we have time to lose.
The Helsinki European Council called on us, in the context of development of the Union's crisis management structures within the ESDP, to set up a mechanism for rapid reaction.
Inertia is only part of our problem today.
We must also be able to combine different tools more effectively and flexibly into a tailor-made mix to suit the particular situation.
The rapid reaction facility responds to these needs.
It is intended to allow us to draw without delay on existing Community resources and expertise to address specific crisis situations, complementing the valuable work already undertaken by ECHO in the humanitarian field.
I am suggesting a mechanism with the following broad characteristics.
First, there are the urgent time-limited operations in situations of crisis or emerging crisis.
Action should not normally last for more than nine months.
Second, where longer-term intervention is necessary, actions under the rapid reaction facility will anticipate operations under existing instruments, which can take over the action using the normal procedures.
Third, as with ECHO, the procedures must be streamlined.
The Commission should mostly be able to act under its own responsibility and if it has to consult Member States it will be on the simplest possible advisory basis.
Fourth, the management of the rapid reaction facility will be the responsibility of a small team, the crisis coordination unit in the Directorate-General for External Relations.
I do not want to build up large structures where people create work while waiting for a crisis to happen.
The added value of the rapid reaction facility is speed and flexibility in Community intervention in crisis situations.
It will help us to overcome procedural hurdles which have slowed us down in the past and it will allow for the combination of several instruments within a single action and for a single purpose.
Now I have heard concerns expressed that we are taking on new responsibilities when we should be focusing our efforts.
I understand that concern, but the rapid reaction facility does not create new responsibilities, it tries to get better mileage out of what we already have.
It builds on existing Community instruments, putting them to concerted use in a new framework.
It can cover action in areas as diverse as human rights work, election monitoring, mediation, institution building and media support, customs and border management, mine action, support for police operations, civil emergency assistance, resettlement and rehabilitation.
There is an inevitable, indeed necessary, area of overlap with existing instruments.
I repeat: the facility does not create a new instrument.
It provides a mechanism for drawing more effectively on the existing ones and the overlap is limited by the procedural nature of the rapid reaction facility and the time limit to its interventions.
The facility is a kind of quick-start package.
It will allow us to react in time and if necessary, to take the initiative in urgent circumstances.
In doing so, we will be better placed to put the wealth of Community experience and resources to optimal use in the interest of the Union as a whole.
But rapid reaction facility action is not meant to last longer than absolutely necessary.
If it needs to be pursued beyond the immediate time frame of the crisis situation, it should be taken over as soon as practicable by the regular geographic or thematic Community instrument most suited to manage it in the longer term.
That is why the Commission proposes a rather modest budget allocation for the rapid reaction facility: about EUR 30 million for this year and EUR 40 million for subsequent years.
We need to have sufficient funding available to get crisis action started quickly, but we do not want to tie up large resources, which could and should be put to better use in regular programmes.
Similarly we do not want to create a large new bureaucracy which would hang around waiting for the next crisis to happen.
I have dealt with that point earlier in my remarks.
In sum, I am convinced that the facility will help us both materially - I would have loved to have had it in hand when we launched the Energy for Democracy scheme last autumn - and institutionally by providing a concrete Commission contribution to the evolving ESDP.
It is not an ideal solution.
My own favourite economist and guru, Jane Jacobs, points out that everything is disappointing in practice.
There are rarely ideal solutions, but I do think that it is a very workable solution and if, when we review the programme in three years, we find we no longer need it because we have integrated similar rapid reaction mechanisms in the regular programmes for external assistance, no one would be happier than me.
Mr President, I would first of all like to extend warm thanks to Commissioner Patten for his extensive clarification.
I have a question pertaining to his first point.
As I understand - and I am delighted to hear it - the European Commission intends to provide more structure to the way third-country elections are observed within the European Union.
My question is: will this be a structure similar to that employed in the United States?
I have always noticed that it is the Carter Institute which is responsible for election observation over there, and it always acquits itself of this task in a very professional and very transparent manner.
The European Union, which may be present on a massive scale, is really lacking such an image.
Could you explain whether you will use this American model as a gauge, because I think this is an excellent example of how things could be done and how they could be done properly?
The honourable Member has, as ever, made an extremely shrewd observation.
There is an image problem.
It is one we address in the communication.
We want to ensure that what the Union does is more recognisable: it is not just a question of logos or armbands but of the whole presentation of what we are doing.
I think Members of this House will have sometimes been frustrated to discover that, on the basis of European Union funding, people from other countries, even North America, and some other countries are getting all the credit and none is coming to the European taxpayer who pays for all these things.
There is no such thing as European funds, there are European Union taxpayer funds, and it is an important point to remember.
Image is important and we have addressed it in this document.
I hope that if the honourable Member thinks we have not done so adequately, she will let us know.
Part of the purpose of this document is to try to generate more ideas from Members of this Parliament who, of course, are so familiar with the important activity which we are addressing.
Mr President, Commissioner.
I concur with Mrs Maij-Weggen' s question.
I have taken part in several election observation exercises and, according to the principle of "do good and be seen to do good" , we, and I do not mean just I, have often remarked that visibility was often lacking.
Now I am all in favour of our continuing to work together with the OSCE and the Council of Europe.
However, it is a poor show that we, the European Union bear all the costs, as is often the case, and yet nobody even notices that the European Parliament is present to observe the elections.
I think that we should take reasonable account of visibility in this context.
Secondly, Commissioner, I should like to ask you when you intend to have at least the basic structure of your rapid reaction facility up and running, because it is also important for Parliament' s work?
What sort of timetable should we be working towards?
Thirdly, Commissioner, not all, but many crises to which we must react can be prevented.
Are you satisfied with the state and development of crisis prevention or do you want to couple crisis prevention to the rapid reaction facility?
Firstly, on visibility: there is an early paragraph in this pretty lengthy communication which, in my judgement, sums up the problem rather well.
It states that EU visibility is not as ever-present as one would like because of a number of factors.
The first is the lack of a clear EU policy and the necessary instruments to implement it.
The adoption of a CFSP joint action is no guarantee of increased visibility, as people found in Nigeria last year.
Another factor is the participation of the European Union under the umbrella of other international actors.
That has often been a problem in the Balkans, and one with which the honourable Member will be familiar.
In other cases, like Palestine, the lack of visibility was due to insufficient effort with the media.
Then we finish perhaps a shade provocatively: "Unlike the United States the European Union does not appoint retired high-level politicians for this kind of job."
We have politicians who are actually still in the kitchen feeling the heat.
Maybe we should learn something from that, though I agree that there are some important high-level retired politicians whom one would not want to see necessarily supervising elections.
At which point discretion is the better part of valour.
Secondly, as far as the rapid reaction facility is concerned, I want to see this up and running as quickly as possible.
I have enough anecdotes to justify my impatience.
I have no doubt at all that our "energy for democracy" programme, which I mentioned in my remarks, has been an extraordinary success.
The mayor of one of the towns which has benefited wrote last week to his colleagues in the Serbian opposition making that point.
We are now looking at what we can do during the summer, now the winter emergency is over, to build on it.
Nor have I any doubt at all that the tortures of the damned which our officials had to go through to get the scheme launched would have been much easier to cope with had we had a facility like this.
Anybody who thinks that we do not need one should just try talking to our officials who were operating pillar 4 in UNMIK in Kosovo.
Again, there is a legion of almost unbelievable stories which underline the importance of a facility like this - a facility that is not a cop-out, not a way of getting round budgetary procedures but one that allows us within our existing budget to do things more effectively and more flexibly.
Of course, if you can act more rapidly, you make a contribution to crisis prevention.
It is one of the oldest saws in the book that it is incomparably more expensive to fight a war than to keep the peace.
Very often what is required to keep the peace or to prevent a crisis is not just doing things generously but doing them quickly and generously.
We are, as the honourable Member knows because he has been in this business much longer than I, actively involved in trying to develop an intellectually respectable case for preventative diplomacy, trying to pull together all the various non-military capacity headline goals which we think are required.
There are a number of things we will be doing.
I look forward to coming to Parliament with some further ideas over the coming months.
Mr President, Commissioner, you have spoken of the lengthy payment procedures which have an adverse effect on the image of the European Union in the various actions it takes.
We are currently in the middle of a conciliation procedure for the late payment directive, in other words, this is not just a problem in external relations; it is also a problem within Europe.
I think that it would make sense if you as Commissioner supported the view that the late payment directive should also apply to the European institutions, because then payment could be made, if there was a legal basis, within a certain period of time, namely between 21 and 30 days or, we hope, even sooner.
The idea is that the late payment directive could also be applied in these areas.
That is an interesting and important point, which I shall follow up.
It is an extremely valuable contribution.
I am also concerned about an even larger issue, which is the amount of time between our commitments and our contracting.
This is a serious issue and I hope we will be able to offer some helpful thoughts about that in the course of the next few weeks and months.
Mr President, I wish to congratulate the Commissioner on the progress he has made on the rapid reaction unit.
I should like to ask the Commissioner a couple of questions.
Firstly, although I recognise that he wants to keep the budget small and use existing instruments, is he satisfied that the budget in category 4 is sufficient for the special rapid reaction unit to be able to carry out its objectives over the course of a financial year?
Secondly, concerning coordination: what will the relationship be between this unit and the European Union special envoys?
One of the problems we had with Kosovo was not just coordination within the Commission but also coordination among the Member States of the actions they took as individual governments.
What relationship will you be able to have with Member States in order to ensure coordination of their independent activities?
As the honourable Member knows, because a paper which the High Representative and I wrote for the European Council miraculously found its way into the newspapers, the question of better coordination of Member States' activities is one that both Javier Solana and I feel strongly about.
For a start, it would be nice always to know what Member States are doing.
The High Representative and his colleagues in the secretariat are bending their best efforts to try to achieve that at the moment.
They are trying to explain, for example, to the United States the full scale of what Europe is doing in the Balkans.
We have had problems which should not have arisen because we have not always known in sufficient detail exactly what Member States, as well as the European Commission, are up to.
So we need to work more closely and in a more coordinated way.
That is an issue which the High Representative and I are attempting to take on more positively.
I hope that the Stability Pact conference a couple of weeks ago was a help along that road but we will certainly continue to pursue that issue.
On the relationship between the rapid reaction facility and the special envoys who are, of course, responsible to the Council - even though we are responsible for the budget - we will want to work closely with them.
There are some in particular whose activities bear on the sort of things we might find ourselves wanting to support through the rapid reaction facility, like the work being done by one of our special envoys in the Great Lakes region in Africa.
We will keep in touch with them.
I do not think that the sums of money that we are talking about are going to give us budgetary problems.
We can manage EUR 30 or 40 million.
I am sure I shall have other opportunities to come back to Parliament and explain some of the pressures we have with much bigger items of expenditure in category 4.One of my continuing obsessions is the gap between the language of our communiqués and what is agreed when finance ministers meet to discuss these things.
I am looking forward to what is called a full and frank exchange with Parliament on those issues.
I should like to begin by thanking the Commissioner for an excellent exposition of the rapid reaction facility.
It is much needed.
I should like to ask him how he envisages disaster relief of the kind that was needed in Mozambique recently - how would this rapid reaction facility liaise and collaborate with Member States' armies and navies?
Would he also consider whether he would extend the call for help - if the need arises - to beyond the European Union countries?
For example, in Mozambique I found it quite extraordinary that the Indian navy was on the other side of the Indian Ocean and could have come to Mozambique very quickly, but nobody ever involved them in disaster relief in Mozambique, while people were hanging on trees.
There are different sorts of crises and different sorts of disaster.
The appalling floods in Mozambique were a classic case for intervention by ECHO as a humanitarian intervention.
The growing food crisis in the Horn of Africa is a classic case for the deployment of traditional food aid, albeit with emergency shipment and emergency on-movement through lorries, etc.
It is very difficult to compartmentalise these crises.
Very often you need to use a number of instruments.
For example, we discovered very early on in the Mozambique crisis the requirement for helicopters and the importance of using some military capacities in support of civil-power operations.
What we have to ensure is that there are not any "Chinese walls" between these various operations.
There need to be "Chinese walls" only in the budgetary sense.
We need to make it absolutely clear that we are not using the rapid reaction facility to cut corners in our budgetary practices, which are not justified by an emergency on the spot.
But the honourable Member is entirely right to say that Mozambique was a demonstration of the extent to which the various forms of intervention are interwoven and that it is very difficult to make precise categories out of different forms of support.
Commissioner, thank you very much for your statement.
I strongly welcome this rapid reaction facility.
It responds to long-held concerns which many of us have had.
You are to be congratulated on the work that you have done.
I should like to elaborate on the point which my colleague Nirj Deva mentioned.
We are not just talking about urgency, we are not just talking about effectiveness of action.
The question of coherence is very important.
You have the overall responsibility for external relations from the Commission's point of view.
I am thinking again of the role of ECHO.
Do you not foresee an opportunity here to bring ECHO under your policy-making umbrella so that we have a more cohesive approach to emergencies when they arise; so that we do not have this problem of different instruments; so that we are addressing the problem with one mind and can then deliver with urgency and efficiency?
I recognise the case for coherence.
It would be challenging politically, to get up and make a speech in favour of incoherence.
The honourable Member is entirely right about that.
But one has to bear in mind two important facts about ECHO.
ECHO is justifiably jealous of its reputation for delivering humanitarian assistance without political strings being attached and without any political infusion.
For example, you can distinguish very well between the humanitarian assistance which ECHO has given in Serbia and the assistance we have given through the Energy through Democracy programme.
They both help to improve people's lives made miserable by Mr Milosevic but they clearly have different triggers and slightly different purposes.
Secondly, it is very often the case that what marketing managers would call the deliverables are different.
Very often with ECHO one is talking about food, medicine and blankets.
With our rapid reaction facility one is very often talking about advisors, mediators, observers, customs officials, police officers, and so on.
There are differences.
But I totally accept that there is a need for more cohesion.
It is a considerable advantage that in this Commission the external relations commissioners work together as a team.
We are about to start sharing all the programming decisions together.
I very much hope that, without breaking down some important distinctions, we can ensure that the Community's various instruments, which involve the expenditure of quite substantial amounts of assistance, are moving together in the same direction.
It has not always been the case in the past.
Mr President, I am sure the Commissioner would agree that writing the report is the easy bit.
The practical implementation is the difficult bit.
When this rapid reaction force actually comes together, will it work in certain cases at a regional basis as well as an individual nation basis?
There are situations, such as that in the Horn of Africa, which cover more than one state.
The problems in the Great Lakes region cover a number of countries.
It would be useful if you could link these problems on a regional basis and act from that point.
Would the Commissioner agree with that?
I agree with the honourable Member on that point.
I believe that we should be looking much more constructively at regional solutions in a lot of other areas as well, not least some of our trade relationships with other countries.
This facility has to be used not just on a bilateral basis but in helping groups of countries with what are often common political problems, as well as environmental and other problems.
I just wish to congratulate the Commissioner on his replies.
I am a little upset and worried about his talk of rapid reaction and the refusal of a political infusion into ECHO.
Quite honestly, ECHO needs more than a political infusion: it needs somebody to see what is going on there.
When Mr Deva asked Commissioner Nielson a question on Mozambique and about the delay in getting helicopters there, it was dismissed out of hand by Commissioner Nielson.
That is unacceptable.
We have a situation in Ethiopia where we knew for the past three years that there was a famine coming.
The stores down there are empty.
Where was ECHO?
Commissioner, why did ECHO not foresee this and foresee that food was needed there when so many people were threatened?
The Committee on Development and Cooperation and myself have time and time again warned ECHO and the Commission that something should be done about this.
Absolutely nothing has been done.
If the honourable Member, who has made some serious points, does not have anything else on tomorrow morning, he might come to the debate on Ethiopia in which I shall be taking part myself because my colleague has to be elsewhere.
I shall be setting out the figures for our actual disbursements of food aid in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
I just wish to add two points.
Firstly, I do not share the honourable Member's views on ECHO: it does a very good job in difficult circumstances.
I want to make this point about the Horn of Africa.
I was a development minister from 1986 to 1989 and I spent much of my time trying to deal with the food crisis then in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
I feel rather strongly that we have managed over the years, despite problems from time to time, to increase our ability to get food and other assistance to people in the most appallingly difficult circumstances.
We have managed to increase our ability to deliver humanitarian assistance.
What we have not done is to increase our ability to make that humanitarian assistance unnecessary in the first place.
There is a food crisis in the Horn of Africa.
There are two large armies dug into trenches, buying expensive military equipment from other countries with money which should be going to agricultural extension, to improving water schemes and the life chances of babies and young mothers.
So I hope I catch your eye tomorrow in the debate and make some of these points.
I have great sympathy for the problems being faced by Ethiopia and Eritrea.
However, I have to say that I was dealing with these problems 13 or 14 years ago and, alas, much less has happened to the good than one would have liked.
Mr President, on a point of order.
Could you let us know exactly how Question Time is going to be organised now?
Will questions to the Commission - ostensibly due between 6.30 p.m. and 7 p.m. be taken?
I can inform you that Question Time will last an hour.
Therefore, we will be working from seven until eight.
The first part, Questions to the Commission, will last 30 minutes.
We will dedicate 10 minutes to each Commissioner, instead of the usual 20 minutes.
Question Time (Commission)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0216/2000).
We will examine questions to the Commission.
At the request of the Commission, we will begin with the third question so that Mr Patten can answer it.
First part
Question No 34 by (H-0306/00):
Subject: Commission participation in the Council's military committee Does the Commission agree that its participation in meetings of the Council and all its bodies is an established part of the acquis communautaire and an essential element of the institutional equilibrium of the European Union?
Can the Commission comment on rumours to the effect that it is not participating in the work of the new military committee?
Can the Commission explain the reasons for this non-participation?
Will the Commission insist on its right to participate?
The Commission shares the view that its participation in meetings of the Council and all its bodies is part of the EU acquis and an essential element of the European Union institutional framework.
Commission participation is expressly provided for in the Council's Rules of Procedure, which state that the Commission takes part in all Council meetings, and in meetings of all its preparatory bodies.
Only in exceptional circumstances and on a case-by-case basis can the Commission be excluded from these meetings.
In Helsinki, it was confirmed that the development of ESDP should take place within the existing institutional framework.
This reflects the Commission's full association with the common, foreign and security policy and its shared responsibility with the Council for ensuring consistency in the Union's external relations.
Excluding the Commission from work in this area would be tantamount to accepting the emergence of a fourth pillar in the Treaty, contrary to the Helsinki conclusions.
But although the Commission has a right to attend all working structures in the Council, it does not have an obligation to do so.
There are instances where the Commission decides not to participate in a particular meeting, usually because it considers that the items to be dealt with are not of direct concern to it or to Community affairs.
We have agreed arrangements without difficulty to take part in all the post-Helsinki structures, such as the interim Political and Security Committee, with one exception.
We are still discussing arrangements for the interim military body.
We would plainly have nothing to contribute to the interim military body when it deals with purely military business but there will equally be occasions from time to time when it discusses issues which straddle civil and military cooperation.
In cases like these, I think that it is not only natural but in everyone's interests that the Commission should participate in the meeting in order to contribute to the overall coherence and effectiveness of European Union policies and actions.
Mr President, may I thank the Commissioner for that excellent and comprehensive answer, which goes a long way to reassuring me.
May I ask him to confirm that the Commission's choice not to participate in certain meetings will be taken, as he put it, on a 'meeting by meeting' basis, not a structure by structure basis, depending on what is being discussed.
To take a decision structure by structure would indeed create an unfortunate precedent, undermining the acquis communautaire, which is that the Commission takes part in all Council meetings and preparatory meetings.
Indeed it would be counter to the Treaty, which states that the Commission is "fully associated", not partially associated, with the CFSP and that it will remain the Commission's choice whether to participate or not.
I realise that the honourable Member is a greater expert on these institutional issues than I am.
It is not therefore surprising that he is holed in one.
The question is whether the choice is meeting by meeting or structure by structure and we have made it gently and courteously but firmly clear what our view is of the matter.
I very much hope that it can be resolved satisfactorily over the coming weeks.
Mr President, if the Council does not agree with the Commission, does that mean the Commission will have to take the Council to the European Court in order to participate in the military committee?
Secondly, has the Commission drawn any conclusions as to the security implications of its participation in the military committee?
On the second point, if I may be slightly irrelevant, the history of the last fifty years does not suggest that it is bodies like the Commission which usually are a problem in that regard.
I certainly do not think that is an issue.
There is a general issue about security, which I know the High Representative is addressing and rightly so.
As for the first point, I very much hope that we can resolve these things amicably, and I am sure that if both honourable gentlemen put the case that they have put to me with equal force to their first cousins in the United Kingdom Government, that will very much help to resolve these issues without it taking too long.
I hope that we do not have to resort to the sort of measures suggested by the honourable gentleman.
I hope that we can solve this in a civilised and sensible way.
I repeat, we do not have - to borrow a phrase - "ideas above our station".
We are trying to follow the terms of the Treaty and to do so only when it is helpful to the overall implementation of a common foreign and security policy.
Thank you very much, Mr Patten.
I believe we have asked you all the questions we were going to ask you today.
We therefore wish you a good afternoon.
Question No 32 by (H-0293/00):
Subject: Ability of dialysis-dependent people to travel in the EU The free movement of Member States' citizens in the EU is a fundamental right.
One group of people that cannot make use of that right are those who require regular haemodialysis because of malfunctioning kidneys.
When travelling, they rely on being able to obtain treatment at dialysis units other than those they normally use.
This poses a major problem especially during the European holiday period, when virtually all dialysis units scale down their activities and frequently turn away 'guests' who are passing through or visiting their area.
This severely restricts the ability of families with dialysis-dependent members to travel.
Does the Commission intend to take any steps before the next summer holiday period begins to make it easier for dialysis-dependent people to travel within the EU, without having to forego the treatment they need?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should first like to refer Mr Arvidsson to Community legislation on the coordination of individual national social security systems.
According to this legislation, persons temporarily resident in a Member State other than that in which they are insured are entitled to health care services if their condition is such that they require emergency treatment.
The persons in question need to obtain an E111 form from their insurance agency and submit it to the institution in the Member States in which they are temporarily resident as proof of insurance.
In order to ease the situation of temporarily resident dialysis patients and rectify the possible lack of clarity in the definition of emergency treatment, the Member States have agreed on special rules which are laid down in Decision No 163 of the Administrative Commission of the European Communities on Social Security for Migrant Workers of 31 May 1996.
According to these rules, dialysis qualifies as emergency treatment, provided that the purpose of the visit is non-medical.
However, as the availability of dialysis treatment may differ from one Member State to another, the patients in question are of course invited to make the necessary arrangements in advance with the hospital which is to supply the service in order to ensure that they can receive dialysis treatment while temporarily resident in the Member State in question.
As to the question of whether the Commission will take any initiatives in order to increase the availability of dialysis during the holiday period, I should like to say that there is no standardised social security system in the Community and that it is up to each individual Member State to configure its own social security system and to decide what services will be supplied, who is entitled to them and to what extent they are to be provided.
It is not therefore up to the Commission to intervene here and to influence national rules on the modus operandi of hospitals and clinics in the Member States.
Many hospitals do not regard chronic dialysis treatment as an emergency form of treatment and may therefore deny dialysis-dependent travellers the opportunity to undergo such treatment at their dialysis units.
Children, parents or young people in families where someone is dialysis-dependent are often very keen to travel.
They work and are given holiday-time, but they are unable to go on ordinary tours.
For such people, going abroad is an international issue and, if the national authorities do not do anything to help, their hopes lie with the EU as an organisation.
Even if it is not possible to intervene on a purely legal level, there may be other options for calling attention to the need to increase the provision of dialysis facilities during holiday periods in the Member States.
For example, more prominence could be given to hospitals which make efforts to provide such facilities, or attractive European prizes could perhaps be announced for those which take the relevant measures.
Perhaps my first explanation struck you as overly legal, Mr Arvidsson, and I should perhaps repeat myself in simpler terms: as far as Community law is concerned, the relevant committee has clarified that dialysis during temporary residence qualifies as emergency treatment.
It has nothing to do with whether someone is chronically ill or an acute case.
The decisive question is whether or not this is emergency treatment and the answer to this question is yes.
On the other hand, the Commission, as I have explained, can only propose or make certain information available here.
The Commission departments have made such information available.
But in individual cases and in relation to a specific holiday resort - and you will probably agree with me here - it would be advisable in that case to check in advance if the hospital or institution in question has dialysis facilities.
Question No 33 by (H-0298/00):
Subject: Measures to protect chocolate As part of its policy to ensure the quality of agricultural products and foodstuffs, the Union has set up a system to protect traditional products of specific character, under which chocolate is eligible for recognition.
Council Regulation No 2088/92 provides for the Commission to set up and administer a register of certificates of specific character.
Under this regulation, producers of chocolate without the addition of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter can apply for a certificate of specific character (guaranteed traditional speciality) so that it can be recognised as a food product made from traditional raw materials.
Has the Commission already received from the Member States applications by producers for chocolate of this kind to be included in the register of certificates of specific character?
Will the Commission take all necessary steps to give effect to the provisions laid down in the regulation and include chocolate without the addition of vegetable fats among the foodstuffs recognised as guaranteed traditional specialities?
.
(DE) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen.
The Commission has received no applications from producers for a so-called certificate of special character for chocolate without the addition of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter.
However, if such an application is submitted, it will be examined in accordance with the procedure provided for in Regulation No 2082/92 on certificates of special character for agricultural products and foodstuffs.
The name of the special character registered on the certificate allows the words - and I quote - 'guaranteed traditional speciality' , 'gts' for short, to be added, together with a Community symbol reserved for them.
If I am not mistaken, the Commission is not considering this option.
I would like to insist on this point because I feel that there is concern among consumers that the creation of the single market is resulting in less importance being attached to product quality.
We must endeavour to allay this concern, and I therefore feel, should the manufacturers of a Member State so request, of course, that within the White Paper on food safety and in other ways, the Commission should consider protecting chocolate which is produced according to traditional methods without additional vegetable oil as a high quality European product, and refuse to set the lowest level as the standard, for this may be permitted by the market, but it is not acceptable in terms of the quality of the produce and the lives of our consumers.
Mr President, Mr Napoletano, as I said, no chocolate producer has yet demonstrated any interest in this form of protection.
No applications have been filed.
However, in order to clarify matters somewhat as you have requested, I should point out to you that the Regulation which I quoted makes provision for two possible forms of legal protection for names.
One possibility is that a name can only be protected if it is connected with the Community name 'gts' and the corresponding Community symbol, in which case it is possible to find other products on the market which have the same name as the registered product, but which are manufactured using a different process and consequently are not entitled to use the Community name and the Community symbol.
That is the drawback with this variation.
The second possibility is to protect the name per se if it corresponds to a single type of manufacture, namely the type registered, in which case there will be no products with the same name which are manufactured under different conditions on the market.
It would only be possible to register the name "chocolate" and issue a certificate of special character under the first procedure referred to.
Registration using the second procedure would run counter to the future chocolate directive, because chocolate is redefined and may contain a certain proportion of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter.
The Commissioner actually answered my question in the second part of his answer.
As a long-time passionate lover of chocolate for more years than I care to remember, I am sure the Commissioner will agree that, if for sixty years people have been eating a product called "chocolate", they are entitled to continue to eat the product called "chocolate".
I am very glad that we finally put this directive to bed in the last session.
We take note of your statement in favour of good chocolate, Mrs Banotti.
Question No 35 by (H-0307/00):
Subject: Children's rights Given the reports of sexual abuse, of child prostitution and the high number of young children living on the streets of the candidate countries from Eastern Europe, what measures are being taken by the Commission to ensure within the framework of the present accession negotiations, that children's rights and child protection are a priority and that the welfare of children is taken into account when preparing these countries for future membership of the European Union?
Mr President, I should like to start by saying that I share the concern behind the honourable Member' s question.
It is particularly depressing to see that, in a number of Central and Eastern European countries, children are suffering from the consequences or, to be more precise, the uncontrolled consequences of social change.
However, before answering your question with the standard legal arguments, I should like to get a political point out of the way first.
This is not a problem specific to the candidate countries of the European Union.
Unfortunately, as you well know, I am sure, the problem encompasses many, perhaps even the majority of countries in the world.
It is quite clearly a development problem, a problem which stems from poverty, a problem which stems from social neglect and, I believe, a problem which stems from the indifference or lack of decisiveness in our societies to really do something to fight this terrible manifestation of child abuse.
Allow me to tell you what we can do within the framework of accession negotiations.
To get straight to the point, it is not much, but the fact remains that countries wishing to join the European Union have of course undertaken to adopt the Community acquis.
That includes the legally binding regulations for the protection of children.
The most important of these is the joint action to fight the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children, on which a decision was reached on 24 February 1997.
The Commission also intends to submit a proposal to the Council in the year 2000, i.e. this year, whereby the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children, taking special account of child pornography on the Internet, will be declared to be punishable offences.
If this proposal is accepted, it will become part of the Community acquis which applies in candidate countries.
The Member States and countries seeking to join the European Union are working together comprehensively in the fight against all forms of organised and other serious crime within the framework of the pre-accession agreements on the fight against organised crime concluded by the Member States of the European Union, the Central and Eastern European countries wishing to join the Union and Cyprus on 28 May 1998.
Programmes such as PHARE and MEDA and the relevant specific programmes relating to justice and internal affairs such as GROTIUS, STOP, ODYSSEUS and FALCONE also offer the opportunity to support countries seeking to join the Union in this respect and support is indeed given.
The following programmes are relevant to child protection: first the DAPHNE programme approved on 24 January 2000.
This relates to the period from 2000 to 2003 and includes preventive measures to fight violence against children, young people and women and allows funds to be provided to governmental and non-governmental organisations active in this area.
The countries seeking to join the Union can also join this programme.
Then there is the STOP programme for the period from 1996 to 2000.
This is a promotion and exchange programme for people responsible for measures to fight the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children.
This programme helps to develop coordinated initiatives to fight the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children.
The Commission will draft a proposal for a new edition of the STOP programme during the course of this year, which will then also be open to countries seeking to join the Union.
The Commissioner showed us where his heart was in the opening remarks.
I should like to ask him if he is aware that, notwithstanding the implementation of many of the Community programmes, in a recent BBC television programme Newsnight there was clear evidence that there is a systematic breeding programme in Romania in particular, where children are being bred for export and sale.
It was a totally horrendous programme, although I agree social exclusion is a major factor in these dreadful occurrences.
There were children who were being bred specifically to be put into an institution from which they were subsequently sold to people coming into that country to buy babies.
There is also the question of Internet pornography.
Poland is one of the significant countries from which much of this is being broadcast.
It is not enough that we have these small, under-funded programmes.
What are we actually doing in terms of the accession discussions with these countries to make our opinion abundantly clear that this is unacceptable?
I should like to explain to the honourable Member what my feelings are in this matter, not just the legal aspects.
The whole problem could not have arisen and would not exist were there no demand for this horrendous supply in our rich societies, including in the Member States of the European Union.
The entire problem has only arisen because there are people in our societies who will pay money for it.
In Romania there are no people paying for it.
These people are in this country, the country in which we live, in all the neighbouring countries, in all the countries of the European Union.
I would be most grateful to the honourable Member if, before representing one of the poorest countries of Europe in her question here, she were also to point out that the real responsibility for this terrible crime lies with those who pay for and demand it.
Now let me come to Romania.
The subject of children in Romania is, as you know, one of the subjects on which the Commission is most intensively employed, including me personally.
There is no single topic in the context of accession negotiations, apart perhaps from the safety of nuclear power stations, to which I personally have addressed myself more intensively than the situation of children in Romania, including the problem to which you referred.
I cannot confirm the accuracy of the BBC television report.
The fact that something has been broadcast on the BBC does not automatically mean that it is true.
Not that I am saying that it is untrue.
Simply that we cannot confirm it.
It is therefore difficult for me to answer your specific question as to whether children are being bred in Romania for the purpose of sexual abuse with a clear yes or no.
What I can say is that, as Parliament' s hearing on the subject of children in Romania has demonstrated over recent weeks in Brussels, the Commission is doing absolutely everything in its power to improve the lot of children in Romania.
I assure the honourable Member that we are doing far more than is our duty and, in fact, far more that what is actually politically permissible within the framework of accession negotiations.
I do, however, admit that we are doing so because, in my view, it is also a human rights issue which must be considered in accordance with the political criteria governing accession.
But I must again expressly state that I would guard against representing this problem - although I do not think the honourable Member intended to do so - as a problem specific to the accession or candidate countries.
It is a problem that should be a cause for concern to everyone in Europe.
While we address the question of what we are doing in Romania or in other countries to fight the supply, I would also ask Parliament to address the question of what we are doing to fight the demand.
Question No 36 by (H-0289/00):
Subject: Albanian prostitution rings in Europe The French newspaper 'Le Monde' recently featured a report stating that Albanian 'white-slavers' had taken advantage of the war in Kosovo and the illegal immigration networks operating between Albania and Italy and were sexually exploiting some three hundred thousand women - mostly from Kosovo, but also from Moldavia, Romania and Bosnia - in France, Germany and Belgium.
The women are forced into prostitution by threats and violence, and the Albanian pimps often pretend to be Kosovars in order to acquire refugee status.
Will the Commission say what measures it is taking and what policies it is promoting to combat this phenomenon, whether it has any data on the increased movement of women from Eastern European countries, what results have been achieved by various programmes and what is being done to promote the harmonisation of the penal legislation of the Member States and to coordinate efforts to combat the trade in women?
Second part
Questions to Mrs Schreyer
.
(PT) Mr President, the Commission is perfectly aware, as it demonstrated exhaustively in the two communications it transmitted to the European Parliament on this matter, the first in November 1997 and the second in December 1998, of the need for coordinated and multidisciplinary action at European level, for both preventing and combating trafficking in women.
The Commission has been supporting and will continue to support various non-governmental organisations involved in this field in various applicant countries, and recently financed two prevention campaigns which we feel were very successful, one in Poland and one in Hungary.
At the same time, the same type of campaign has been funded by the American government, as part of the transatlantic agenda, concerning trafficking in women for exploitation in Ukraine and Bulgaria.
In the area of police cooperation, the Commission wishes to remind honourable Members that in 1996 Europol was given a mandate by the Council to combat trafficking in human beings, with the basic aim of ensuring that all networks of traffickers working in Europe would be closed down.
With regard to criminal issues, the Council would like to repeat that it intends to present a set of legislative proposals to the Council and the European Parliament by the end of the current presidency.
The aim of these proposals is to go beyond the February 1997 joint action and to comply with the provisions of Paragraph 48 of the Tampere European Summit conclusions, with a view to adopting a framework decision leading to the joint definition of trafficking in human beings and the prosecution and punishment of those involved.
Finally, the Commission also wishes to emphasise that through the STOP and Daphne programmes, it has already funded numerous cooperation and training projects in the area of combating trafficking in human beings, specifically against the trafficking of women for sexual exploitation, and through these programmes has brought together the relevant bodies, namely police and judicial authorities, non-governmental organisations and social services.
The Commission intends in the course of 2000 to present the European Parliament with a new legal basis for the STOP programme for the period 2001-2005.
Under this new legal basis for STOP, we will also be able to fund projects for combating trafficking in human beings submitted by non-governmental organisations and by public authorities from the applicant countries themselves.
Lastly, concerning the specific situation in Albania, the Commission acknowledges that networks trafficking in human beings originating in the Balkans represent a major concern, due to the increasing number of cases being seen in European countries.
We therefore acknowledge the fact that under the Stability Pact for the Balkans, priority must be given to combating trafficking in human beings.
I can even answer the honourable Member by saying that a group of experts is already working on identifying the best actions for combating the networks of traffickers in human beings and that I myself had an opportunity recently, on a mission to Greece, to exchange ideas with the Greek Minister for Home Affairs, in order enlist the cooperation of his government in establishing these actions and priorities, bearing in mind the action that Greece is already developing bilaterally on the trafficking of human beings in the Balkans.
Commissioner, thank you for your answer, which I find partially satisfactory as I am well aware of your personal interest in the matter and of the initiatives you have undertaken to combat prostitution rings.
However, we must admit that we have not been very successful so far, since the number of rings has increased and we have recently received reports of abuse, particularly of Albanian and Kosovar women.
Of course, this issue is bound up with the economic, social and political conditions which prevail in the Balkans and which have resulted in the poverty and overexploitation of vulnerable sections of the population, such as women.
However, Commissioner, we must also admit that the intervention of the EU' s institutions has been both inadequate and ineffective.
Are you aware, Commissioner, that concentration camps still exist where women are raped before being forced into prostitution?
European women are particularly concerned as to whether there is any political will to dismantle these prostitution rings, whether there is any police or judicial cooperation and whether any victim support measures are in place.
.
(PT) I share the honourable Member' s view that much still remains to be done in the fight in this area and I therefore think that what I said here earlier today is important: the Commission acknowledges the fact that under the Stability Pact for the Balkans, priority must be given to the fight against trafficking in human beings.
In fact, establishing normal economic and social conditions throughout the Balkans is an essential instrument in combating social exclusion and thus combating trafficking in human beings.
In any event, the Commission acknowledges that there are no completely reliable statistics on the volume of the annual traffic in human beings, and I can tell you that we have been working very hard on improving the coordination and circulation of information between the Member States' police forces and Europol so that we have a more accurate and realistic picture of the size of the problem.
The future Swedish Presidency has given a commitment to proposing to the Justice and Home Affairs Council, at the beginning of next year, a set of measures for harmonising crime statistics, so that we can make a more accurate and exact assessment of the scale of this activity.
With regard to campaigns, I must tell the honourable Member that the Commission' s assessment is that the prevention campaigns have been successful in the sense that they have significantly not only raised awareness of the risks and the dangers of trafficking in human beings in the countries of origin, but they have also enjoyed the cooperation and commitment of the police and judicial authorities in the applicant countries.
I admit, however, that there is a problem that is very difficult to resolve, which is that many of these countries are today not the countries of origin, but are merely countries of transit for thousands of women who are the victims of this trafficking.
This requires an improvement in Europol' s cooperation with police forces in the applicant countries.
Only last month, the Council gave the director of Europol a mandate to develop this bilateral cooperation between that institution and police forces in the applicant countries.
I think that this means that we are on the right track.
I am going to ask you to be brief and I am going to be brief.
This is the Rule in this House.
For your information, in Annex IIB(3) of the Rules of Procedure, there are some recommendations for cases such as this when there is no time for questions.
Therefore, in application of the said recommendations, we will allow just one supplementary question per subject and only 30 seconds, which may extend to 35, but no more, in order to reformulate the questions.
Question No 37 by (H-0272/00):
Subject: Agricultural budget for foreign policy activities in Kosovo With regard to the budgetary forecasts, will agricultural funds be used to foot the bill for Kosovo?
Are EUR 300m to be deducted from the items earmarked for agriculture funding to cover the costs of Kosovo?
Mr President, Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, reconstruction in Kosovo and the stabilisation of South-Eastern Europe are among the most important tasks facing the European Union over the next few years.
This has been emphasised in numerous Council and Parliament resolutions, most recently in Lisbon, and for the Commission, this task does, without doubt, have the top priority which it requires.
The funds required for this task need to be anchored in the budget accordingly.
This task was not included in the Council resolution on the financial perspectives for 2000-2006 at the Berlin summit last spring.
The resolution on Agenda 2000 was taken, I would remind you, on the same day that the war in Kosovo broke out.
In the interinstitutional agreement on the financial perspectives concluded between Parliament, the Council and the Commission in May 1999, Parliament and the Council decided to call on the Commission, in view of developments in the Balkans, to submit the necessary budgetary proposals, if necessary in the form of a proposal to revise the financial perspectives.
It is precisely this call that the Commission is addressing.
It has proceeded by taking the following steps: first by estimating the sum in aid needed from the EU budget; secondly, by setting new priorities within foreign policy activities, so that funds can be redeployed for South-Eastern Europe and, thirdly, by proposing a redeployment between categories, i.e. between the various political areas.
One of the reasons for the proposal to redeploy EUR 300 billion from the expenditure budgeted as maximum expenditure for agriculture was as follows: the financial perspectives make provision for an increase of EUR 2.8 billion for agricultural expenditure from 2000 to 2001.
Because the Council reduced the budget estimates by EUR 400 million for the year 2000 in comparison with the maximum amount or ceiling set for 2000, the maximum rate of increase for next year would have been as high as EUR 3.2 billion.
In the external aid area, on the other hand, the figures in the financial perspectives would have resulted in a reduction in expenditure next year in comparison with this year and I think that everyone is agreed that this does not really reflect the actual situation and actual requirements.
The Commission therefore decided to propose a redeployment of EUR 300 billion to the budgetary authority so that the increase in agricultural expenditure would be correspondingly lower.
I hope that, when faced with these realities, Parliament will support the Commission proposal.
The Commissioner confirms our suspicions that Commissioner Fischler is hiding things from us and hiding himself as well.
I am not surprised that he left the chamber hardly ten minutes ago because this proposal is shameful.
It takes from agriculture an amount to pay for a United Nations mission in Kosovo, in European Union resources and agricultural policy resources.
And then we have a Commissioner who is denying farmers subsidies for nuts, whose production they are going to lose, and who is denying European agriculture the aid to deal with the effects of the drought.
All of this demonstrates that Agenda 2000 has been nothing but a great firework display.
This is a disgrace for European agriculture.
It does not surprise me that given this outrage the Commissioner responsible...
This is a disgrace!
A disgrace!
Mr President, I hope I can risk Mrs Izquierdo's wrath by saying that I agree with the Commissioner.
I want to put it to her that it is far better to reduce the rate of growth in agriculture in order to protect the money that is currently going to the very poor in this world, because the alternative would be to squeeze further the budget lines in category 4.
It would be unacceptable to find money for Kosovo - which I support - at the expense of the very poor in the world.
Does the Commissioner agree with that?
I should like to thank the honourable Member for his remarks.
I should also like to clarify that it is really not in the nature of my colleague, Mr Fischler, to run off and hide.
Clearly there are new priorities and new tasks and everyone here in this House must suggest how these new priorities can be funded.
The Commission has taken the step for which provision is made in the interinstitutional agreement, i.e. to examine the extent to which funds can be redeployed in the relevant categories and then make another proposal.
We have examined this carefully.
Mr Patten and Mr Nielson have come to the conclusion that a total of EUR 1.6 billion could be redeployed in the external aid area for south-eastern Europe and I think that we really must acknowledge that this step has been taken.
In addition, there is a further funding requirement and I should like to emphasise once again that the growth rate in the agricultural policy area is extraordinarily high for next year and my colleague Mr Fischler has accurately calculated the extent to which a reduction in agricultural expenditure by what is a small amount for the agricultural budget is feasible.
I should like to state clearly at this point that this redeployment will not of course have any effect on income support for farmers.
I should also point out that the Commission will propose that even the expenditure budgeted for promoting and developing the countryside be increased to its ceiling next year.
But I think that it is our common responsibility to find an answer, including a financial answer, as far as the important obligation that the European Union has in south-eastern Europe is concerned.
Question No 38 by (H-0287/00):
Subject: Structural measures to overcome delays in payments The EU budget is failing in that commitment authorisations are not being adequately matched by payments.
Payments as a proportion of total commitments have fallen over many years and barely 80 per cent of commitments, reportedly, are paid out.
One of the reasons for this situation is the delays in implementing the Union's projects.
The absurdity of this system is becoming increasingly apparent.
The Member States undertake to fund operations under the supervision of the Union, while there are delays in implementing projects which have long lost any legitimate purpose and which, under this system, preposterously, continue to receive funding.
Such a situation is untenable, particularly in view of the negative public opinion prevalent in some Member States?
In the Commission's view, what structural measures are required to overcome the delays in payments?
Questions to Mr Kinnock
Mr President, the Commission is doing its utmost to settle proper payment applications within 60 days.
The large majority of invoices can be paid within this period and the number of overdue payments is falling satisfactorily.
However, the honourable Member' s question obviously refers not only to settlements in the narrow sense of the word, but to the question of how many commitments from previous budget years have yet to be paid.
So what we are talking about is the period of time between the first promise of funds for a project and a specific contract and the period of time between the commitment and the actual payment of funds.
The Commission submitted a working paper to the budgetary authority last year in which it made a comprehensive analysis of developments, broken down by sector and underlying factors, and suggested remedies.
The Commission is currently updating this analysis.
In terms of volume, commitments, i.e. sums that will need to be converted to payments in later years, were around EUR 71 billion at the end of 1999.
Developments in these old cases are influenced, de facto, by several factors and I think that it is important to make that clear here.
The first factor is the ratio between commitment appropriations and payment appropriations which the budgetary authority applies to the budget every year.
For the year 2000, for example, the budget contained approximately EUR 4 billion more in commitment appropriations than in funds for payments.
The second factor relates to the take-up of these budgetary funds, i.e. both commitment appropriations and payment appropriations.
Finally, the release of commitments for which no more payment applications are expected, so-called sleeping commitments, a somewhat misleading term meaning commitments which obviously will no longer be converted to specific commitments and specific payment commitments, also plays a not inconsiderable role.
However, the Commission is unable to subscribe to the honourable Member' s view that delays in implementing Community projects robs them of any legitimate purpose; on the contrary.
As soon as the Commission comes to the conclusion that no more substantiated payment applications are expected for a project, for example because the project has been suspended or abandoned, it orders the corresponding commitments to be released.
This applied to a sum of around EUR 1 billion in 1999.
I should stress that the time lag between overall commitment appropriations and their conversion to specific projects is a feature of many Union programmes.
This applies, for example, to multiannual programmes and the most important in quantitative terms are the Structural Funds, which are subject to shared administration, with the Commission making commitment appropriations which are then converted into specific projects at Member State level.
In order to reduce the time lag between promises, specific projects and payment, the budgetary authorities need to decide on a balanced ratio between commitment and payment appropriations and there needs to be real pressure to speed up the implementation of programmes.
The Commission has discussed precisely this today as part of the debate on the revision of the financial regulation and I can assure you that we intend to change the rules in order to tighten up the time scale.
I hope that we can count on your support.
Thank you for your answer.
I am pleased that the Commission really has taken note of the problem and intends doing what it can to ensure that the payments are made more quickly.
Commissioner Patten pointed out a while ago in the Committee on Budgets that, within category 4, there are eight and a half year-old commitments which have still not been paid out.
This state of affairs indicates either that we have major problems in implementing the budget efficiently or that we ought, in fact, to have some kind of deadline or time limit which would be much tougher when it came to writing off old commitments.
Perhaps both these matters are problems which the Commission ought, in that case, to do something about.
I should like to inform the honourable Member that an analysis has shown that it takes approximately one and a half years to convert commitment appropriations into specific contracts.
That is all well and good, but there are also old, sleeping commitments and you may be interested to know that another 20 posts were recently made available, in addition to the 60 posts decided for the SCR last December, in order to see which commitments no longer apply and can be cleared up.
I should like to offer my warmest thanks for your suggestion.
That is exactly the approach which the Commission will take during the revision of the financial regulation and I am therefore sure of at least one person' s support in Parliament.
Mr President, what I would like to know is, do you think that prompt payment by the European institutions, as set out in the late payment directive currently in the pipeline, might result in a clear improvement to the image of the European Union?
Do you intend to use benchmarking or best practice methods?
The honourable Member is right; it is in fact fundamental if the Union' s reputation is to be enhanced that both the time lag which I mentioned between promises, to call a spade a spade, and specific contracts must be reduced and payments must be made when invoices, i.e. substantiated payment applications are filed.
Of course benchmarking means that no more than 60 days should lapse and, as I said, more and more payments are being settled within this period.
Of course the aim is to have few, if any exceptions.
Thank you very much, Mrs Schreyer.
Since the time allotted to Mrs Schreyer has elapsed, Question No 39 will be replied to in writing.
Question No 40 by (H-0332/00):
Subject: Institutional reform In the Action Plan on Reform it is stated that an 'external legal expert' should sit in an advisory capacity on Disciplinary boards.
What is the excact definition of this 'external legal expert' , and what legal expertise will this person be required to have?
The Commission is at present implementing, or preparing legal grounds for implementing, the different actions set out in the White Paper on reforming the Commission.
In his question the honourable Member is probably referring to actions 57 and 58 of the Reform Strategy Action Plan which, amongst other things, specifies commitment to making proposals for the establishment of an interinstitutional disciplinary board.
The Action Plan does not, however, specify that an external legal expert should sit on the board.
The Commission will be presenting detailed proposals for the modernisation of disciplinary procedures and related arrangements in a consultative document which is scheduled for publication in October.
The document will include recommendations for improving administrative procedures and for making relevant amendments to the Staff Regulations.
Consultation on those proposals is a legal requirement and the views of Parliament and Member States, as well as those of the staff, will naturally be taken into account on all relevant matters, including the possible use of external expertise on the interinstitutional disciplinary board.
I thank the Commissioner for his reply.
Following on from the Van Buitenen affair and the Commission's fairly lamentable reaction to it, is there not a case that these disciplinary boards - and especially those called for whistle-blowers - should be independent of the Commission altogether?
.
I am grateful to the honourable Member for his question.
The affair of Mr van Buitenen was conducted completely in compliance with the existing Staff Regulations and however tested, I am sure that any fair-minded person is bound to come to that conclusion.
So far as whistle-blowing is concerned, and as the honourable Member may know, we will be putting forward very comprehensive proposals for radical change in current arrangements which will, when they are implemented - hopefully with the assistance of this Parliament as a legislature - provide the European Union institutions with the best, fairest and most effective system for ensuring that the duty of officials to report their suspicions of wrong-doing will be fully accessible and made totally effective.
Question No 41 by (H-0342/00):
Subject: Institutional reform At present, 'whistle-blowing' means that a member of the Commission staff has to breach Articles 12 and 17 of the Staff Regulations, accordingly, if someone does come forward as a whistle-blower, he/she will almost certainly be disciplined.
Point 47 of your action plan makes reference to this situation but offers no remedy for it.
How do you plan to address this?
Are your staff currently examining this problem and, if so, which members of your Cabinet or Directorate-General are actively involved in finding a solution to this contradiction?
Questions to Mr Byrne
.
Mr President, the honourable Member's question refers to the Commission's proposals on whistle-blowing in the consultative document on reform adopted by the Commission on 18 January 2000.
Following that, more detailed orientations were set out in the White Paper on reforming the Commission which was adopted, published and presented to this Parliament on 1 March.
In specific response to the honourable Member's question, Articles 12 and 17 of the current Staff Regulations do not prevent members of staff from reporting wrong-doing within the Commission and it is consequently not the case that officials have to breach the regulations in order to properly report suspicions or concerns.
In addition, last June the Commission decision implementing the regulation establishing the anti-fraud office, OLAF, explicitly made the provision that officials and servants of the Commission, and I quote, "who become aware of evidence which gives rise to the presumption of the existence of possible cases of fraud, corruption or any other illegal activities detrimental to the interest of the Communities" are obliged to inform their hierarchy or the Secretary-General or the Director of the European anti-fraud office, OLAF.
That legal text also specifically guarantees that officials and other servants of the Commission shall, and I quote, "in no way suffer inequitable or discriminatory treatment as a result of having communicated such information".
It follows that Articles 12 and 17 of the Staff Regulations do not prevent staff from reporting wrong-doing either within the Commission or to OLAF.
In neither case would disciplinary action result from making such reports.
In the White Paper on reform and elsewhere, the Commission has made direct commitments to reforms which will further improve rules related to the reporting of suspected wrong-doing.
More precise rules on the rights and obligations of officials to report wrong-doing through internal channels and to OLAF are required, and rules defining external channels for the reporting of alleged wrong-doing need to be compiled and proposed, as they will be.
These rules on whistle-blowing will be put forward for introduction into the amended Staff Regulations and officials who follow them would not be subject to disciplinary action.
The Commission will present detailed proposals in a document scheduled for October of this year.
As the law requires, consultations on those proposals will be undertaken with staff and with the other European Union institutions.
Preparatory work on the proposals is progressing under the Director-General for Administration.
One member of my cabinet has specialist responsibility for reform of personnel policy, including whistle-blowing, and others are naturally actively involved in the overall issue.
Further to my question, as the Commissioner has just stated, the Commission is now drawing up its "whistle-blowing" charter to a certain extent.
Will this be framed, for example, along the lines of the Swedish Government's or the British Government's rules on whistle-blowing?
Could the Commissioner inform Parliament as to the exact circumstances in which Paul van Buitenen now finds himself?
Is he still being disciplined by the Commission and has any of his pay which was docked in the past been refunded to him?
I am grateful to the honourable Member for his question.
Firstly, the development of the proposals relating to whistle-blowing will take full account of best practice in several of the Member States.
The Commission is acutely aware of the provision long established in Nordic democracies, recently developed also in the Public Disclosure Act in the United Kingdom, and several other comparable pieces of legislation.
As the honourable Member would expect, this institution will take account of the breadth of provision and seek to ensure that in terms of accessibility, usability and career security we provide the best possible attainable system to ensure effective whistle-blowing because we believe it to be appropriate as a complement to good conduct in an international publicly accountable administration.
As far as Mr van Buitenen is concerned, he took up employment on 1 April in the Directorate-General for Health and Consumer Protection in Luxembourg in a very responsible job, as the House would expect.
He is not currently the subject of any disciplinary procedure and the honourable Member should be aware that immediately after he ended his period of suspension last April Mr van Buitenen's full pay, conditions, status and pension rights were restored, as were his rights in all other respects.
I reported to this House previously that Mr van Buitenen, a short time after ending his period of suspension, was informed that he had a right to seek employment in any of the European Union institutions in a job for which he was qualified.
He made a couple of applications, one of which was for a job in the Commission.
He was successful in that application and I am pleased to say that he was duly appointed.
We thank Vice-President Kinnock for his replies.
Since the time allotted to Mr Kinnock has elapsed, Questions Nos 42 and 43 will be replied to in writing.
As the authors are not present, Questions Nos 44 to 48 lapse.
Question No 49 by (H-0284/00):
Subject: Møllergårdens Vivaldi - a Shetland pony The Committee on Petitions decided on 15 May 1997 to examine a case concerning the Shetland pony, Møllergårdens Vivaldi, from Denmark, which the Swedish authorities refused to register as a stallion in Sweden.
In an answer dated 29 October 1997, the Commission concluded that the Swedish authorities were in breach of Commission Decision 96/78 of 10 January 1996 and Council Directive 90/427 of 26 June 1990.
The Swedes have since changed the rules.
However, the Commission has not yet established whether the Swedish authorities are now complying with current EU rules.
Information received this year from the Swedish Shetland Society indicates that the Swedes are not complying with the rules in that a pony must still have been shown in a stallion prize competition before it can be used in Sweden.
In order to be approved for breeding in Sweden, a stallion must undergo an examination of its pedigree to be entered in the Swedish national register.
This must be contrary to EU rules as it is to be expected that a stallion which is already approved in one Member State should automatically be approved in another Member State.
Is the Commission of the opinion that the Swedish authorities are complying with common rules?
If not, how will the Commission ensure that the Swedish authorities comply with EU legislation in this respect?
A first-class Danish Shetland pony stallion named Vivaldi and his progeny were denied entry into the main section of the Swedish Shetland pony stud book.
The dispute between what I might describe as a courageous private breeder from one Member State and a breeding association in another Member State, reflects shortcomings in implementation by Member States of both the spirit and letter of related Community law, in particular Directive 90/427 on zootechnical and genealogical conditions governing intra-Community trade in Equidae.
I wish to remind you that it is the responsibility of the Member States to ensure that any dispute is settled by action to be taken by the competent authorities in cooperation with the organisation maintaining the stud book of the same breed or even the stud book of origin of the breed.
The Commission, following its inquiries, was officially assured that the Swedish stud book rules had been aligned with EC legislation.
However, in the light of new information, the Commission undertakes to take up the case again and to arrange for a zootechnical inspection mission, should this be required.
I should like to thank you for your answer.
I assume that the Commission will take immediate action on this matter, or will it be a case of the Commission having to be approached again before anything is done?
I should like to point out that what we are concerned with here is an individual citizen whose livelihood has been affected.
It is a matter costing an incredible amount of money.
As some of us who have been involved with the equine trade know, there is a great deal of money at stake here.
It has cost an ordinary citizen, who has made a business out of horses, an incredible amount of money because Swedish associations have not been willing to approve his stallion.
I would therefore ask whether it is once again necessary to make an application in connection with this matter.
Given all the talk currently of the Commission doing something for citizens, might not, rather, the Commission be expected to take the initiative directly?
I thank the Member for her supplementary question.
As I indicated earlier, this is essentially a matter between two Member States.
The Danish Breeding Association, in my opinion, should have taken up this issue with the Swedish Association.
It is not really the role of the Commission to develop this issue further but it is doing so in the manner I have indicated in an effort to assist the private breeder who - I perfectly agree with you - should not be compelled to have to go through these steps to seek a result in this particular issue.
As I have indicated, in the light of new information, the Commission undertakes to take up this case again and, if necessary, to arrange for a zootechnical inspection mission, should this be required.
The way Question Time is run is not acceptable.
Firstly, it does not start on time.
We had group meetings;
I was watching the screen and you jumped from Question 41 to 49.
That makes it impossible for Members to be here.
In addition, Question Time did not start at the time stated on the agenda.
How are we meant to function in this way?
It makes it virtually impossible for us and is not a fair procedure.
Mrs McKenna, today' s Question Time has been ratified by the plenary in this House.
It was explained this morning at the beginning of the sitting, we have accepted certain rules and we have skipped questions when the authors have not been present.
I am therefore very sorry that we now have to conclude Question Time.
We especially thank Mr Byrne who has been here all afternoon so that he could answer questions.
Since the time allotted to questions to the Commission has elapsed, Questions Nos 50 to 93 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes Questions to the Commission.
(The siting was suspended at 8.10 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)
Situation in Turkey
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Turkey.
.
(PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, today marks a very important step in relations between Turkey and the European Union, particularly in terms of putting the Helsinki conclusions into practice.
There had been no meeting of the Association Council between Turkey and the Union for three years and nor had there been any meeting of this kind after the deliberations and the criteria laid down in Helsinki.
This was an important meeting with an agenda that included not only relevant points of political dialogue, but also practical decisions which will translate into a step forward in the negotiating process.
They will do so specifically by establishing eight sub-committees, which will now enable the Commission, in this case represented by Commissioner Verheugen, to rigorously prepare the screening exercise and also to start negotiations on public services and markets.
These are negotiations which will increase the present level of trade liberalisation between the Union and Turkey.
By implementing the Helsinki criteria and having made progress in the country itself, Turkey has made significant steps towards these negotiations, which it is important to bear in mind.
It has been gradually committing itself to implementing or to adopting a huge range of institutional and legislative changes.
This is progress in the right direction, progress which is still of course experiencing delays and interruptions, and only seeing the process through will ensure that this progress meets with complete success.
Hence the importance of holding the screening procedure that is being prepared and the importance of Turkey' s commitment to incorporating the body of Community legislation and also to respecting the Copenhagen criteria.
In our political dialogue with the Turkish delegation, we were able not only to assess the progress made, but also to comment on what we felt were shortcomings at institutional and judicial level and also in terms of the actual implementation of economic policies.
Today' s meeting will be followed up at the forthcoming meeting of an association committee, which will study these issues in greater detail.
It should also be pointed out that there was a very constructive approach to the preparations for this Association Council with regard to drafting a joint position, which was adopted by the fifteen members of the Association Council.
This meant of course that very thorough work was undertaken with the Greek delegation too, which is following this issue with a sense of importance worthy of Athenian diplomacy.
Now, however, the delegation is also guided by the spirit of a diplomatic rapprochement, which has been seen in relation to its neighbouring country since the earthquake that devastated Turkey and the consequent expression of solidarity by Greece.
This progress in the bilateral relationship will have considerable influence on progress on this issue in the future, on the relationship between the two countries and will certainly contribute, as will these negotiations between the European Union and Turkey, to establishing a favourable framework and environment for a solution to the problem of Cyprus.
We are working in the right direction.
There are shortcomings, but this right and safe direction is also the only one that will enable the great country that Turkey is to take the appropriate steps for its economic and institutional modernisation and for its complete integration into modern democratic society.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I welcome today' s debate as an opportunity to take stock, four months after the Helsinki summit and in the run up to the Association Council which the President-in-Office has already spoken about.
The Helsinki resolution brought about a net and lasting improvement in relations between the EU and Turkey.
At last, it is again possible to discuss all issues openly and critically.
Stronger political dialogue is again taking place at all levels.
Today' s sitting has been marked by a constructive and open discussion; as a result I am able to say that the overall balance is highly promising even if, as always in such cases, there are both positive and negative aspects.
Above all, Helsinki confirmed that compliance with the political accession criteria was the sine qua non to starting negotiations.
The Copenhagen political criteria concern democracy, the rule of law, human rights and the protection of minorities.
Turkey does not yet meet these criteria, which is why negotiations will not start until they do.
In the meantime, however, Turkey and the other candidate countries will start to benefit from a strategy of rapprochement and stronger political dialogue.
The main element in this strategy of rapprochement will be the accession partnership which is currently being prepared and which will set out the short- and medium-term priorities which Turkey must meet, in accordance with the Copenhagen criteria, in the political, economic and Community acquis areas.
We plan to submit the first accession partnership in the autumn of this year.
I think that the accession partnership will be a central instrument in speeding up the process of political and economic reform in Turkey and we made it quite clear in the discussions held in Brussels, Luxembourg and Ankara that this accession partnership must address important questions in connection with the democratisation process and human rights.
The President-in-Office has already spoken about screening and I need say no more on that subject.
I should, however, like to say a few more words about the political situation in Turkey.
I am sure that you will agree that a series of incidents over recent months has given real cause for concern.
For example, 18 members of the pro-Kurdish HADEP Party were sentenced to three years and nine months in prison and three leading members of HADEP were taken into custody but then released shortly afterwards.
The three mayors who support HADEP were released after the EU troika had expressed its serious concerns to the Turkish Government.
I particularly regret that Akin Birdal, whose health clearly continues to give cause for concern, was returned to prison on 28 March to serve his four-and-a-half month sentence.
The Commission seriously regrets that Akin Birdal, an advocate of the peaceful solution of conflict and human rights, has been thrown into jail once again.
I am sorry that the opportunity was not taken to suspend imprisonment on humanitarian grounds.
I think that everything points to the urgent need to tackle reforms in a decisive manner and to ensure that freedom of expression is properly protected.
I should like, nonetheless, to draw Parliament' s attention to something which bodes well for the future;
I refer to the interministerial government committee in Turkey which is currently advising on the reforms which need to be implemented in order to comply with the political criteria.
This interministerial committee will submit a report - an initial draft was published in the Turkish press recently and the final report will probably be submitted in June - containing specific proposals on political reforms and the legislative changes needed.
I think it is important for you, honourable Members, to bring pressure to bear in future contacts with the Turkish side, especially the Turkish parliament, in order to ensure that the relevant reform proposals are also accepted.
From an economic point of view, Turkey is in a position to make rapid progress.
It has a clear strategy for structural reform, which is supported by the IMF and the World Bank.
I hope that Turkey can cultivate social dialogue and an active labour market policy still further in order to underpin the adjustment process.
The country has a dynamic economy and a highly entrepreneurial population, which will benefit from a more balanced and transparent growth model based on the EU acquis.
Our relations with Turkey entered a new stage after Helsinki and making progress with the new tasks represents a challenge for both sides.
Of course I shall continue to keep you informed of all aspects of these new endeavours.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, your statements have reinforced a belief and an impression I have.
I believe that the journey on which we embarked at Helsinki will be a long one and that no one is yet able to predict where it will end, except in Turkey' s assuming an important position either inside or outside of the European Union.
The public and private sector spokesmen we recently met in Turkey all readily agreed on this.
My feeling is that certain representatives of the Turkish people are discovering, as a result of December' s decision, that accession to the Union will mean not only drastic reform of their institutions, but also radical changes in mindsets.
This is reflected in the distrust shown, as the Commissioner has just reported, towards European institutions in general and the representatives of the European Parliament in particular.
Firstly, there was the refusal of the request to visit Leyla Zana, which resulted in the postponement of the meeting of the joint European Union-Turkey Parliamentary Committee scheduled for 22 and 23 February.
Then, on the same day, at a time when your rapporteur was in Ankara, there was the arrest of three Kurdish mayors from the south-eastern region.
Lastly, on 28 March, there was the arrest and reimprisonment of Akin Birdal, President of the Turkish Association for the Defence of Human Rights, at a time when a delegation from this Parliament was visiting Turkey.
I would ask the Council and the Commission whether it would not be appropriate, given the circumstances, to state quite clearly that while the Union is not in the business of telling anyone what to do, it is founded on the will to promote and safeguard certain fundamental values, prominent among which are respect for human rights and the rights and duties of minorities.
This is what Parliament will once again underline in the resolution, which is to be submitted for the approval of the Members next Thursday, urging the Turkish Government and the political parties of Turkey to turn to good account the constitutional review that is currently in progress in order to implement pressing reforms, in line with the Helsinki Agreements, that will enable the Turkish State to guarantee the democratic rights that we consider essential.
The ball is in Turkey' s court.
It is up to Turkey to decide whether the first obstacles encountered on this new road are to prove insurmountable or not.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to hear that both the President-in-Office and the Commissioner have taken stock of the first four months and have come to the conclusion that the climate surrounding relations between the Union and Turkey and the potential for discussion have improved.
We MEPs are particularly pleased because most of us - and this cut across all Groups in the House - expressed our scepticism as to whether the Helsinki resolution was the right resolution at the time.
The European Council in Helsinki did what it was entitled to do and passed a resolution which, when it was passed in Helsinki, incorporated certain expectations of the Turkish side and here the European Parliament is in agreement with the European Council.
Commissioner Verheugen has just recapitulated these expectations.
He has spoken of democracy, the rule of law and the protection of minorities as three basic elements in the expectations which the European Union, the Commission, the Council and the European Parliament have of Turkey and which they have formulated.
Four months after Helsinki, Commissioner, I can say on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists that we fully subscribe to your view that the climate surrounding relations has improved but no progress has been made on the three points which you listed.
It is difficult to discern any further democratic developments during these first four months.
Even progress with the protection of minorities leaves much to be desired and we are somewhat sceptical about the question of the rule of law.
You mentioned the example of Akin Birdal and Turkey must look at this example and ask itself how it intends to make us believe that progress is being made in the areas referred to when incidents occur within the country which, in my opinion, are typified by the example of Mr Birdal.
Mr Birdal advocates peace.
Mr Birdal advocates solving the problem of minorities without violence.
Mr Birdal' s reputation as a human rights activist extends well beyond the borders of Turkey.
The way in which the Turkish Government has dealt with Mr Birdal, the way in which the Turkish judicial system has dealt with this man seems to be typical of the manner in which Turkey proposes to deal with people who stand for exactly what the European Union is demanding of Turkey.
If politics contains symbolic messages then, in my opinion, the Turkish judicial system has committed a serious error four months on from Helsinki in treating Mr Birdal this way.
We in the European Parliament expect far greater efforts than those made so far and we are assuming that what we are saying in this debate here will not go unheeded.
Mr President, when Turkey joins the European Union the impact and the benefits will be considerable.
The EU will then have to adjust, and in a welcoming way.
But, in the shorter term, it is Turkey which has to adjust the most, in particular to meet the Copenhagen political criteria.
I am glad the Commissioner stressed these.
We cannot fulfil our role of critical friend by soft-pedalling on the need for drastic change, particularly with regard to guaranteeing individual freedom and a legitimate right to the Kurds.
Indeed the key to reform is ending the war against the Kurds, which gives the pretext for the state of emergency and the repression that goes with it.
The Kurds deserve a peaceful settlement involving a degree of political devolution and respect for their cultural and linguistic rights.
To say this is not to be anti-Turkish.
Will not other Turkish citizens benefit also?
The arrest and imprisonment of HADEP leaders like Sakharov prize-winner Leyla Zana and human rights campaigner Akin Birdal is an impediment to Turkey's progress to the EU.
To allow the European Parliament to vote for Turkey's accession when the time comes, reformers in Europe and Turkey must work together to lobby for change, as the Commissioner advised.
Mr President, the majority of my Group supported the Commission' s policy on Turkey and the resolution passed by the Council in Helsinki.
It was and is extremely important to us that the candidate status granted to Turkey should bring about fundamental changes to democracy and hence the way in which human rights are dealt with within Turkey.
We were pleased to acknowledge the declaration by the Turkish Prime Minister that Turkey would meet the Copenhagen criteria as quickly as possible.
The decision to defer the death sentence on Mr Öçalan was also welcomed as a step in the right direction.
However, we were then forced to acknowledge a number of incidents which we were and are unable to accept.
The mayors belonging to HADEP were arrested and we rightly criticised this move.
We are pleased that the Turkish Government reacted quickly and the mayors were released but we shall monitor the court case against them.
The former president of the Turkish human rights association, Akin Birdal, is again under arrest, despite the fact that he requires medical care.
Unfortunately, he must serve another six months of a one-year sentence.
We realise that the measures needed to guarantee the permanent democratisation of Turkish society cannot be introduced overnight.
However, a number of small steps are urgently needed in order to demonstrate that Turkey is prepared to take the path trodden by Spain, Portugal and Greece.
Turkey must at last abolish the death penalty, the only country in Europe yet to do so.
And we should not have to wait for a reform policy on the Kurdish question.
Today' s report from Luxembourg is good news but we would say, nonetheless, that Turkey must realise that respect for human rights and minority rights are prerequisite to any accession negotiations.
We are prepared to be patient as far as the speed of democratisation is concerned.
But we will not accept a standstill on this issue.
When my fellow Member Daniel Cohn-Bendit visited Leyla Zana, she said to him - and I think to us too - that we should support the reforms in Turkey and that the Helsinki resolution was Turkey' s only chance.
In this sense we shall continue to support the Helsinki process.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, whoever wants to join the EU must meet the Copenhagen criteria and abolish the death penalty.
Including Turkey.
Despite frequent promises by the Turkish Government, human rights violations continue there.
I should like to list a few examples.
The Kurdistan Democratic Party has been exposed to attack since 20 February.
Three Kurdish mayors belonging to HADEP were arrested recently and then released but are not allowed to leave Turkey.
Then the former and present leaders of HADEP, Murat Bozlak and Ahmet Turan Demir, were sentenced to three years and nine months in prison together with 18 other members of HADEP.
It was maintained that HADEP was supporting and helping the PKK which has opted for peace rather than war.
Akin Birdal has started serving the rest of his sentence.
Thousands of Turkish troops marched into northern Iraq at the beginning of April.
More than 50 000 soldiers are stationed on the border in order to fight the PKK, despite its call for peace.
Why are arms being delivered to Turkey?
More than 300 000 people gathered for the Navruz festival in Diyarbakir under the banner "Peace, Brotherliness and Democracy" .
Having been there, my personal impression is that the people are longing for peace and democracy.
The leader of the ANAP, Mr Mesut Jilmaz, said at an event in Diyarbakir, that the way to the EU was via Diyarbakir.
I therefore call on the Turkish Government to respect human rights and to find a political solution to the Kurdish question.
Because the only way into Europe is via the Copenhagen criteria.
It will be the task of the European Commission and the Council to strengthen their commitment here.
At the moment, the most important task is to advance the democratisation of Turkey, which is why I call on everyone to unite without hesitation and to reinforce democracy and peace.
Mr President, all of us who have visited Turkey recently realise that the picture is very complex.
The first impression is that there is a sort of EU euphoria in Turkey when it comes to the media.
There is a very lively debate in the country.
That is very important.
Secondly, the trade unions, popular movements, etc. all say the same thing.
They think it is positive that Turkey is a candidate country.
We even heard Akin Birdal, on the eve of his imprisonment, say that a new Turkey has been emerging in the last five months.
We must realise that we will have a lot of ups and downs in our relationship and that we will have both progress and setbacks.
Perhaps we are seeing something new being born.
But the old legal system is still there.
That is what is working against democratic fighters such as Akin Birdal.
But we also see the reformists who know very well what has to be done according to the Copenhagen criteria.
One party leader said to us that at least 65 articles of the constitution and penal code had to be changed.
When we spoke to people in that country during the Socialist Group visit we found three different approaches to EU membership.
First you have the anti-reformists, the fundamentalists and so on, who do not want membership.
And then you have the reformists - within the government, administration, human rights groups and other parts of civil society - who really want it.
They certainly want membership.
Then you have a third group, who say that they want Turkey to become a member, but on Turkish terms.
Here the Copenhagen criteria, and the Commission and our screening are very important.
Almost automatically they will have to deliver if Turkey is to become a member one day.
There are two final impressions and messages received from the people we talked to during the two or three days we were there.
The first was that nothing will prevail without a strong civil society in Turkey.
People we met from civil society also said they appreciated the help from the European Union, but that some of it was slow.
We know that and we would like the Commission to look into that.
The other and last message is that yes, we have the road-map.
But we need more precision from the road-map.
Help us to be more precise with the road-map because we want to follow it.
Mr President, the question of whether or not Turkey belongs to Europe is not primarily a geographical issue, nor is it primarily an economic one.
The deciding factor, however, will be whether or not Turkey will subscribe to a European set of values in which human rights, democracy and the protection of minorities are guaranteed.
This will not require any sacrifices, probably unlike Turkey' s other issues, but it will be for the good of all inhabitants of Turkey itself.
The political solution to the Kurdish issue would not only liberate the Kurds, it would also take a heavy weight from Turkey' s shoulders.
As a matter of fact, I am of the opinion that we should not aggravate the situation by supplying arms.
I myself am sceptical of Turkey joining the EU, but the current process may well promote peace and stability.
This is why we want to give Turkey the benefit of the doubt.
Whether or not Turkey will join may therefore depend largely on how it will fare in matters pertaining to human rights, democracy and the protection of minorities.
I would like to ask both the Council and the Commission to see things as they really are and not as they appear to be.
I should like to point out that in Helsinki, Greece withdrew its reservations and Turkey became a candidate country.
Greece has made a great many gestures of good will and good neighbourliness, a great many.
Turkey has made none.
Even today in the Association Council, Turkey' s Foreign Minister, Mr Cem, said that there is no occupying army in Cyprus, only the army which entered Cyprus in order to liberate Greek and Turkish Cypriots alike.
I just wonder who have they been trying to liberate for the last 25 years, and from whom?
Have they still not managed to do so?
I would point out that, when we visited Turkey as Parliament' s representatives, we asked to see Leyla Zana.
We were not allowed to see her because she was in prison.
Akin Birdal, who held talks with Mr Barón Crespo, was taken into prison while he was standing outside.
I just wonder if the Commission' s regrets will help to get Akin Birdal out of prison tomorrow?
Is that such a drastic step?
Finally, I would like to say, to keep within the time permitted, that only two weeks ago, Turkish newspapers published a list of some 100 European journalists, parliamentarians and other individuals, including Archbishop Christodoulou of Greece, who are persona non grata in Turkey.
Today, Mr Cem dismissed the list as media hype; but, at the end of the day, Turkey does in fact reserve the right to publish lists of persona non grata.
I should like to close by saying that I hope they will not get wind of what I have said here today and include me on this list, because I love Istanbul and I like to go there quite often.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, I was a member of the delegation from our Group which visited Turkey.
I do not want to recount my experiences at length, I just want to tell you what my impression was.
It was one of disappointment.
I am extremely disappointed that four months after obtaining candidate status, nothing serious has yet been done to move towards compliance with the Copenhagen criteria, especially the political criteria.
Commissioner, you mentioned the interministerial committee.
It is true that numerous structures are being set up.
I have been aware of this in Turkey since 1995.
If they are obliged to comply with something, they start by setting up committees and commissions, interministerial, extraministerial, every sort of committee under the sun.
The structures are superb, we can all agree on that.
Except that they do nothing.
For example, it would have been very easy without any committees, without any commissions, to abolish Article 312 of the Criminal Code; all it needed was a vote in the Turkish Grand National Assembly and that would have freed a whole series of intellectuals, authors, journalists and the very same Akin Birdal from jail.
That is how easy it is to take the first steps.
The Turks tell us they need time, they need a great deal of time, because this reform can only be achieved one step at a time.
I warned you about that.
I told you that numerous fellow Members here in this very House, in the European Parliament, were prepared to allow as much time as they needed, 200 years, 400 years, even more.
But I belong to a Group which enthusiastically helped Turkey to achieve candidate status, not just so that Turkey could be a candidate but to give Turkey a real chance to become a member and start negotiations.
Which is why we want to insist and want to press for Turkey to be helped on its way with a road map and a specific timetable and, of course the accession partnership which the Commissioner referred to earlier, and not just to remain a candidate.
Mr President, Turkey was granted candidate status at the Helsinki Summit, but accession negotiations must go on hold until the necessary internal reforms have been introduced and the human rights situation complies with European principles.
During your recent visit to Ankara, Commissioner Verheugen, you too drew attention to the fact that continuing human rights abuses, the failure to establish rule of law and the fact that no solution had been found to the Kurdish question stood in the way of Turkey' s accession to the EU in the near future.
The unequivocal shortcomings in this area contrast with statements by Prime Minister Ecevit to the effect that Turkey may be ready to start accession negotiations in 2004.
A number of factors which have been listed here several times already make this sort of prognosis appear premature.
Even the fact that the head of government, Mr Ecevit, described Kurdish as a dialect of Turkish, despite the fact that the two languages have fundamentally different roots, is an indication of the hardening of the political situation in Turkey.
The fact that all this has been accompanied by a recent offensive against the PKK in northern Iraq only adds to this impression.
There can be no question of the European Union having any interest in increasing Islamic fundamentalism in Turkey or of wanting to encourage the Trotskyist PKK, which is also guilty of massive human rights violations, to engage in new clashes.
However, one has the impression that anti-European forces within the army and the administration are behind the recent arrests and the new offensive against the PKK in northern Iraq in order to prevent Turkey from moving closer to Europe.
This demonstrates in retrospect that the concessions made to Turkey in Helsinki were perhaps premature and that the strategy towards this country, which is so important to western security, needs to be reviewed.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I have visited Turkey three times in the last six months, once before and twice after the Helsinki resolution.
I experienced surprise after surprise and also disappointment after disappointment.
The situation is in fact as a number of fellow Members have described it.
There are forces which are fighting strongly to move closer to the European Union and there are other forces which reverse all their efforts by carrying out attacks and by putting Akin Birdal back in jail, thereby provoking the pro-European forces.
It is of course a good sign that the Turkish Government now has a written programme setting out the action which Turkey must take on the basis of the demands of the European Union.
And it must take it, because paper alone is cheap.
Changes need to be made here.
The changes also affect the national security council which, according to this proposal, now needs to be reorganised as an advisory council and is no longer the final supreme instance of Turkish democracy or Turkish relations.
It is, of course, a bad sign that there is one incident after another, such as the arrest of Akin Birdal who, as Mr Schori said, has such a positive attitude to the changes in Turkey itself.
It is also a bad sign that no gradual solution has been found to the Kurdish question, the prerequisites for which are much improved today although, Mrs Stenzel, I am unaware of any statement by Ecevit that Kurdish is a Turkish dialect.
What Ecevit said to us was that there were several Kurdish dialects and that he could even imagine Kurdish being used as an official language in Turkey under certain conditions.
I should like to urge you, Mr President-in-Office, to work together with the other fourteen Member States of the European Union to ensure that the European Investment Bank is finally authorised to give Turkey financial support.
It is not easy to ward off criticism in connection with the financial protocol to the effect that we have not kept our promises to support the modernisation and the restructuring of Turkey financially.
My last point is this: of course we are also aware in this House that the question of Turkey, including its relations with Greece, is bound up with the Cyprus issue.
If we could manage to make Turkey more open and more cooperative on the Cyprus question, that would be a very positive development.
However, I should like to say quite clearly on behalf of our Group and, I believe, on behalf of many others, that unless Turkey itself does what it has to on the question of human rights and democracy, even if is cooperative on the issue of Cyprus, and unless Turkey shows that it is willing to change its internal democratic system, there can be no accession to Europe.
Mr President, the discussion here today is quite an interesting one; nonetheless, we should see to it that Turkey is judged in light of the clear-cut European criteria and that Greco-Turkish relations are not used as a fig leaf to mask a different reality.
I would like to add two or three minor points.
Turkey has its internal problems, but it has its external problems, too.
It could, for instance, show willing by accepting the jurisdiction of the court in The Hague, or the Court of Human Rights.
But no, this is not the case.
Secondly, in our endeavours to help Turkey integrate into the European Union, we must be strict when it comes to compliance with the political requirements we have laid down.
In this sense, if we try to paint a skewed picture of reality, then of course it will be a false one.
And in politics, false realities produce false results.
As for the problems cited by Turkey, there is Kemal Ataturk' s theory which says that "there is a danger that our unity will crumble and henceforth we should not say that we are Turks, we should say that we call ourselves Turks" .
There is a huge difference in meaning, because to say I am not a Turk, but I call myself a Turk leads some to reason that all nationalities should be ground together into one pulp from which a new human race can evolve.
As you know, historically, such a thing is just not possible.
In this sense, it is clear that, first, the democratization of Turkey must be the most we can strive for and, at the same time, the very least and, secondly, we should put an end to Turkey' s fears that it will crumble as a nation if its recognizes the rights it should be according minority groups, because there are not only the Kurdish minorities, there are also Arabs, crypto-Christians, and other minority groups.
In any case, what is certain is that if we do want to help Turkey, we must insist that the political criteria are respected, and I would like to add the following: to date at least, as far as I know, the only real forces in Turkey in favour of the European strategy are the forces of economy and we should bear this in mind.
.
(PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank all the Members of the European Parliament for their contributions to this debate.
I have not interpreted their opinions and points of view as giving a red light to this policy, which says 'no, this policy is wrong and we want a different one.
We want to deny Turkey the right ever to join the European Union' .
No!
Nobody said that!
And this is something upon which we agree.
I considered the speeches to be demanding ones, calling for the whole process to be scrutinised thoroughly.
The European Parliament obviously has an important role to play in this.
Turkey will not be admitted to the European Union without the European Parliament' s approval.
Well, the decisions made at Helsinki are demanding ones, with clear benchmarks, and we are not currently negotiating Turkey' s accession to the European Union.
Turkey has merely been recognised as a candidate.
In fact, as long ago as 1963, the Ankara Agreement established the possibility that Turkey might join the European Union, with the association agreement to evolve through an initial stage, a transitional stage and a final stage.
The Copenhagen criteria are clear and Turkey must not be discriminated against, either positively or negatively.
Furthermore, the very fact that we are currently making good progress with the planned enlargement of the Union to include Central and Eastern Europe enables us to prove that Turkey is not being discriminated against.
On the contrary, it is being given equal treatment, in the sense that it must comply with a body of legislation, it must amend its own laws and it must behave in the same way in this process as the other countries that have applied for membership.
I can tell you that the Commission is not carrying out an assessment even now.
This has not yet started, but the Commission has been instructed to prepare it.
The Commission is involved in bilateral discussions with Turkey in order to provide it with information on the acquis communautaire.
We have not even moved to the negotiating stage in which the assessment will be undertaken in a multilateral context, with the participation of all countries.
We are, therefore, at an exploratory stage.
We are giving Turkey powerful messages about the need for it to reform itself through its institutions, its laws and its administrative procedures.
We in the Association Council have been very strict with Turkey and Turkey has, to some extent, recognised shortcomings and has stated its willingness to improve them, in particular with regard to laws governing the press, criminal law and the way in which citizenship rights are recognised, specifically in the cultural and language fields.
I think that here too, real progress has been made, although perhaps not progress which has a clear legal form yet.
There have also been steps backwards and we have expressed our deep disappointment at the fate of the leader of one of the most representative human rights organisations, and that of certain council leaders and politicians who have recently been arrested.
It is obvious that the Turkish political process is a complex one.
However, something that can be acknowledged today is that, contrary to what used to happen in crisis situations, when Turkey was always tempted to use military power or to use extremist internal forces, thanks to the guidelines and the frameworks that were laid down in Helsinki, this strategy has contributed in Turkey to the consolidation of pro-European forces, which will, of course, have to develop a completely pro-European programme in terms of constitutional reform, political changes and new legislation.
Criticism must be levelled at the Turks, not in order to prevent them from continuing in this process, but we must monitor the situation closely so that they can implement the changes necessary for this process to continue successfully.
Mr President, I should like to subscribe to the President-in-Office' s evaluation and to say that I feel this debate was helpful and supports the line which the Commission has followed.
It does not matter that Parliament has taken a more critical stance than I am able to do at present, for reasons which you will understand.
I have drawn the Turkish Government' s, the Turkish parties' and the Turkish parliament' s attention to the role of the European Parliament in ensuring that no political compromises are made with candidates during access negotiations and in Turkey' s preparations for access negotiations which contradict the Copenhagen criteria.
I should like to expressly stress here that there can be no discounts for anyone, including Turkey, when it comes to accession conditions.
I should also like to repeat here what I have said on previous occasions: we must be conscious of the fact that the process which we have now set in motion will not be without its setbacks.
I do not know what is easy and what is difficult to do in Turkey.
But I do know one thing and that is that a debate is currently taking place in Turkey of which we only hear a part, a debate which will decide on the fate of the country and, partly on the fate of Europe too.
It is in our interests that the reform-orientated, democratic, pro-Europe forces carry the motion in this debate.
I should like to close by saying that we are still just right at the beginning.
We are in fact at the beginning of the beginning.
We are only just preparing the pre-accession strategy.
We have no pre-accession strategy yet which is why I think it is slightly premature to start talking about disappointments or about the need for a new strategy.
By definition, strategies only deserve to be called such when they can go the whole course.
I therefore advise on a little patience here.
We shall see things more clearly, we shall know what specific progress we can expect in the autumn, once all the elements of the pre-accession strategy have been defined and once we have received Turkey' s reply.
This reply must be given this year and must refer clearly and unequivocally to what we expect of Turkey and must tell us exactly what Turkey intends to do.
That will be the time to say more than was possible today in this cautious evaluation.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place at the next voting session.
Deliberate release into the environment of GMOs
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0083/2000) by Mr Bowe, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 90/220/EEC on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms (11216/1/1999 - C5-0012/2000 - 1998/0072(COD)).
Mr President, I think that today the European Parliament is faced with one of its more important debates in the last few years, given that it is dealing with the dangers of the release of genetically modified organisms into our environment.
It seems to me that this vote could be a watershed.
It would, we hope, give us a new tough set of rules that would ensure that genetically modified crops and other GMO products are used throughout Europe in a safe and sensible way that ensures protection of the environment and guarantees the safety of public health.
There are a number of critical issues which need to be addressed.
The first and the most important is the issue of producer liability.
The European Parliament has long called for legislation which would ensure that companies that want to produce genetically modified organisms would be totally responsible for the products they produce.
In other words, under the terms of the amendments, companies would be required to take out insurance to cover any possible damage to human health or the environment caused by GMOs and could be sued if their crops escaped and created super-wheats or contaminated organic crops or if GM crops were found to damage human health.
Regrettably, instead of accepting their full responsibilities, a number of companies have been launching massive campaigns behind the scenes to try and stop this proposal from advancing.
I am in no doubt that when we have the discussion tomorrow many MEPs will be confused and perhaps split in their vote on this issue.
I feel that the compromise we have found with the Christian Democrats is one that is viable and workable and I hope it will find support here.
At the same time the European Commission can endorse it by giving further reassurances about their own proposals for such a liability measure.
I want to see that European Commission proposals have real teeth when it comes to this Parliament in the not too distant future.
In addition to that critical issue there are also a number of other important questions.
I hope that tomorrow my colleagues will renew their support, as they did at first reading, for the demands for strong new limits on the use of GMOs containing genes with resistance to antibiotics.
Parliament has in the past called for a ban on all GM crops and foods containing such antibiotic-resistant genes, even those used for research.
Tomorrow we may take a softer line, but nevertheless we want to see action in this area.
We want to ensure that serious consideration is given to the dangers of using these crops.
Other measures that I think we need - and on which I would seek the support of the Parliament tomorrow - include new measures to restrict the dangers of the cross-breeding of GMO plants with naturally occurring wild relatives.
We need to ensure that when products are placed in the field, whether they are plants or whether they are animals, they do not cross-breed and irreparably damage the balance that exists in the natural environment around them.
We must also address an issue which was avoided at first reading, and that is the question of the control of the import and export of GMO crops and other GMO products.
Here we need to go to at least as far and perhaps beyond the measures agreed in the Bio-Safety Protocol in Montreal in January.
Many people fear the possible consequences of genetic pollution and it is our job to respond to those fears.
Those fears have recently been heightened by the discovery of GMO-contaminated cotton-seed imported from the USA into Greece for cotton production, which for the moment at least has no approval at all for commercial planting within the EU but nevertheless has found its way across our borders and into use in at least one Member State.
We have been lobbied by very many groups during the process of developing this legislation.
Not just the industry but also Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace have given their backing to various aspects of Parliament's report.
They have supported us in continuing to press the Council of Ministers to agree on new GMO rules on licensing as quickly as possible, to bring to an end the de facto moratorium on new GMO commercial approvals, which has been in operation since the Commission published its proposal almost two years ago.
The lobbying has become quite intense in the last few weeks.
The outcome of the vote in Parliament tomorrow is likely to bring a few shocks and surprises.
But it should mean that in six months' time the European Parliament, the Council of Ministers and the Commission will have arrived at an agreed proposal, at a revised directive for the commercialisation of biotechnological inventions and biotechnological products.
That should give biotechnology companies and others involved in the industry a clear idea of the rules that they have adhere to and consequently a more transparent and predictable regime.
That can be only good for the future development of this new technology within the European Union.
At the same time, I would hope that our governments will be able to assure their consumers and their people that GMOs released into the environment anywhere in Europe will meet the much more stringent standards that we are fixing here in Parliament tomorrow and that the public concerns regarding the protection of human health and the environment from the dangers of GMO inventions have been properly addressed.
And I hope one of the significant non-legislative outcomes of this process will be a shift in the balance of power in the approval and control of GMO crops and food in favour of the public.
For the biotechnology industry that can only be to the good.
It will create an atmosphere, a situation in which it can work carefully, thoroughly and I hope successfully to make positive use of this very brave new technology that we should all welcome, with the appropriate safeguards.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur, David Bowe, for his hard work.
He really has tried to find compromises on this complicated issue but has not succeeded in finding compromises in all areas which all the Groups here in the House are able to support, which is why we shall be voting on one or two points tomorrow.
Those who know me know that I am not a blind advocate of genetic engineering.
Many aspects worry me.
I even have mixed feelings about the announcements which we heard last week on the almost complete decoding of the human genome because I think that we do not yet have enough strict rules in the European Union on the application of biotechnology to human beings in this way.
However, today we are debating the release of genetically modified organisms, especially plants.
And in my view, and in the view of the PPE, this is a different kettle of fish.
The common position is not too weak to guarantee public safety, as some would have us believe; on the contrary, it is very, very strong.
It makes provision for a great many rules to govern monitoring, labelling and informing the public.
The common position offers an adequate level of safety for both man and the environment, which is why the PPE is against tightening up the common position, especially in certain critical areas.
If certain amendments calling for stricter provisions are accepted, then we can kiss biotechnology in the area of plants goodbye and we can totally ban it right away, but that is not what we want to do.
Take the example of genetic transfer.
All we hear about are Frankenstein plants and superweeds.
However, if you study the subject in detail, you will see that it is not a fact that cross-pollination from genetically modified plants is always an environmental disaster.
I have a key witness here.
The former research policy spokesperson for the Greens in the Bundestag once said that no Frankenstein plants were growing in the fields.
Unfortunately, the Greens did not nominate him again for the Bundestag, but he is right nonetheless, which is why we have tabled a motion stating that we should keep an eye on these risks but not totally ban genetic transfer.
We are also opposed to discrimination against biotechnology when it comes to liability.
We do not want specific genetic engineering liability, we want general environmental liability.
It has frequently been said that the Commission must be forced to do something at long last.
I share that view but we must first praise Mrs Wallström here: she promised during the hearing in the European Parliament that she would present a White Paper on environmental liability and she has done so.
Her predecessor failed to do so for several years and we should now move forward on the basis of this White Paper and decide on specific liability rules to be incorporated in the directive.
The common position is not too weak; in our view it is too strong on certain points.
The general 10-year limitation on release consent is impracticable for plant cultivation, which is why we support the motion tabled here by David Bowe that the 10-year period should only apply from the first registration of the plants.
I think that the common position gives us good control of the risks.
We should not make the mistake of gambling away biotechnology' s chances, which is why we shall not be voting in favour of all the tabled amendments.
I should like first of all to thank Mr Bowe for the work that has been done on the recommendation for second reading on amendment of the directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms.
I think it is a very competent piece of work, and I think some important improvements have been made to the common position.
I shall single out the points I think are most important.
First and foremost, I think it is right that we should now have an actual ban proposed on the use of substances which can produce resistance to antibiotics.
I think it is important for health reasons.
The second point I would make is that, unlike Mr Liese, I am in favour of including proposals to the effect that measures should, if possible, be taken to prevent gene-transfer from GMOs to other organisms, otherwise known as GMO contamination.
I also think it is important that risks should not be assessed on a case-by-case basis when applications and requests concerning consents are examined.
Instead, an attempt should be made to carry out an overall assessment of the accumulated effects of the many consents which are issued upon the fertility of the soil, the food chain, biological diversity and the health issues which are of importance to us as human beings.
I think that is a major flaw in current practice in this area.
In this connection, I also think that consents ought to be reviewed every ten years, so that they can only be issued for up to ten years at a time.
In that way, we can be properly sure that the necessary monitoring is carried out.
I also think it is right that this proposal should provide us with legislation ensuring that, whenever vertical legislation is enacted in specific areas, the same conditions regarding risk assessment and monitoring should be complied with as also apply in the case of the general directive.
Finally, I would call attention to the question of objective liability.
I agree with the original proposal in Mr Bowe' s report to the effect that businesses seeking consents should be made objectively liable and that liability insurance must also be taken out in connection with an application for consent.
If insurance cannot be taken out to cover such circumstances, then the risk in granting a licence is too great.
I hope we shall see the adoption of these amendments designed to tighten up on the common position.
If they are adopted, I also believe we shall obtain a legal basis for granting future consents for GMOs which serves our interests and which will provide the necessary security.
In that way, we shall, in actual fact, obtain the legal basis that should have been in place before the first consent for new GMO crops was issued.
In my opinion, the present legal basis is far too weak.
Mr President, I would like to stress that this is a debate on procedural questions regarding the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms, or GMOs.
Contrary to what one might think, this is not a fundamental debate on the pros and cons of GMOs or its principles, for that matter.
Needless to say, how we perceive GMOs will be reflected in the positions we adopt during the discussion about these procedures and the framework around them.
In simple terms: in the extensive amendments to this report, which is excellent by the way, the most important aspect seems to be that either we decide to make life easier for the GMO industry or we decide to give it sleepless nights.
But the discussion also reveals that the production of genetically modified food has prompted quite a few questions: ethical and moral questions, questions related to public health and the environment, questions as to what opportunities industry and research are given and questions regarding the freedom of choice for consumers.
The following points are key issues for the Liberal group and these will also influence our voting behaviour.
First and foremost, there is the issue of the freedom of choice for consumers.
It is, of course, too crazy for words, really, that if you want GM-free food, you will need to settle for food with a guaranteed maximum GMO content of 1%.
This is not dealt with as such in the draft directive but public information, labelling and transparency which crop up in this context are very much part and parcel of this issue.
Secondly, we would like to see the public have plenty of opportunity to have its say during the approval procedure of GMOs.
Thirdly, we would welcome a streamlined procedure that offers security to both consumers and producers and, as far as we are concerned, better harmonisation throughout the European Union.
Fourthly, we would like to see research promoted in Europe in the field of biotechnology so as to offer more clarity regarding what is and is not feasible.
One controversial issue is producer liability.
We are in favour of the self-regulating effect this has.
Ideally, we would like to see this liability included in the long-awaited horizontal regulation of environmental liability.
However, some of us are tired of waiting for this horizontal regulation in which the Commission has been engrossed for some 10 years now, and we want to move forward.
The present proposal is important to both producers and consumers and is welcomed by the liberal group.
We, too, would like to congratulate the diligent rapporteur on this report.
Mr President, tomorrow' s vote will be a litmus test of Parliament' s responsibility and credibility.
The main point, for us, is liability and compulsory insurance.
If genetic engineering is as risk-free as the industry and Mr Liese insist, then why is there such huge resistance to strict liability?
We too want general environmental liability, but we know that no provision is made for the corresponding liability for genetic technology or for general liability in the Commission proposal, which is why we have proposed compromise Amendment No 45, containing just that.
Anything else would amount to
hiding behind a long-term policy of wait-and-see and endless prevarication.
It is ridiculous to say that all we are asking is that the Commission should do this by the year 2001.
What will happen if it does not do so?
What will happen if horizontal environmental liability does not properly cover the area of genetic technology or, Mrs Wallström, as you suggest, only covers the Natura 2000 areas?
The second main point for us is the ban on antibiotic-resistant genes.
We need a clear ban here.
I cannot understand, Mr Bowe, why you said that we will take a softer line tomorrow.
Is that your sop to the genetic engineering industry?
I think that it is quite clear - as scientific studies have proven - that more and more human pathogens are becoming resistant and it would be a disaster if antibiotics were to be permanently lost as a form of treatment.
My last point concerns genetic contamination.
I think that we need a clear commitment here on the part of the Member States and I hope that tomorrow' s vote will send out a clear signal on environmental and consumer protection and that tomorrow will not be a black day in the history of environmental and consumer protection.
Mr President, where the release of genetically modified crops into the environment is concerned, the precautionary principle must be the decisive factor.
At present, it ought to entail a moratorium on the release of new genetically modified crops into the environment.
Scientific ambiguities, especially where the risk of dissemination is concerned, and deficiencies in legislation and in the application of international agreements are both factors which justify a moratorium.
We also consider that each EU country should be entitled to have a tougher policy than the EU in this area, and we shall therefore vote against Amendment No 6 concerning a common EU procedure governing the release of genetically modified organisms into the environment.
The proposals to be adopted tomorrow will not go anything like so far as we would have wished.
We shall therefore vote in favour of as satisfactory a solution as possible to the issue as a whole.
This means that we shall be voting in favour of most, but not all, of the proposals in the Bowe report.
We shall be voting in favour of a situation in which those who release genetically modified crops into the environment are held fully liable under civil law.
We want to see an end to the use of antibiotic resistance markers We want to see clear, compulsory labelling, and we demand that each application should be dealt with separately, and with no use of simplified application procedures.
We are also in favour of having a clear obligation for the provision of information and in favour of recipient countries' being approved in the case of exports to third countries.
Mr President, the proposal for a directive on procedures for the authorisation of genetically modified organisms has been returned to this House for second reading, even though events since the first reading have done nothing but heighten the fears that we originally expressed.
On 11 February 1999, at first reading, we opposed this proposal since we considered that it in no way controlled the risks that GMOs pose to the environment and to animal and human health and that a straightforward application of the precautionary principle should have resulted if not in the definitive prohibition of the release of these organisms, at least in a moratorium lasting several years.
Furthermore, we were critical of the authorisation procedures stipulated in the proposal, which seemed to us too lenient and inordinately centralised.
A year on, studies have been conducted that even more clearly highlight the dangers of releasing GMOs.
As recently as last week, a committee of inquiry from the French National Assembly concluded, and I quote, that it 'considered the placing on the market of new products deriving from genetically modified organisms to be premature' .
In these circumstances, we find the text which has been presented to the House for second reading increasingly outmoded.
All our principled objections, including the request for an official moratorium, are all the more relevant today and, as was the case with BSE, we would like to see any country which is convinced that it is running a serious risk being entitled to take national prohibition and safeguard measures.
How is it possible, in this day and age, that we have to demand a right as self-evident as this?
Mr President, in February 1999, we discussed the revision of Directive 90/220 at first reading.
I would remind you that in his contribution, Mr Blokland talked about the importance of the precautionary principle.
We are thus delighted that the Council has underlined this principle in the common position.
Both in the main body of the Directive itself, notably in Article 1, and in its application, the precautionary principle has been accorded an important role when it comes to weighing it up against economic interests.
I mainly have the restriction of the simplified procedure and the attention to GMO traceability in mind.
On the whole, we should therefore be satisfied with the present proposals.
We are thankful to Mr Bowe for his report, which once again contains proposals which we are totally behind.
We are particularly delighted with the stricter wording related to reducing the risks for consumers.
Compared to Amendment No 32, the original Amendment to Article 28 (1) was more forceful, in our opinion.
It very explicitly spelled out the possibility of consulting ethical committees in the case of ethical issues.
The present Amendment No 32, on the other hand, only underlines the importance of being open with the public.
We regret this toning down.
Finally, I would like to point out that it is not sufficient to map out and restrict the risks pertaining to these new production methods.
Plants and animals are not production factors which can simply be manipulated.
The biotechnology debate requires an integral ethical approach.
We believe that God created the world.
Based on this awareness, we need to treat the natural world around us responsibly.
Mr President, this is a debate about plant research and plant protection from research.
It is a debate about the potential of GMOs for good and their potential for risk, and how you manage that risk.
You cannot abolish risk because it is part of our natural environment.
We cannot prevent all man-made risk because that would end scientific progress.
But we must respond to public concern about the potential and unknown dangers to our environment, to our food chain and to our health.
I believe there are four areas where we must act to reassure the public.
I believe we can do so without destroying biotechnology.
Firstly, antibiotic-resistant genes must be phased out.
The amendment sets a realistic, but urgent date of 2005 for that.
Secondly, we must be open with the public about where experimental crops are being grown.
That is only right.
It is fair.
In return we must ask environmental action groups to show restraint and responsibility with regard to that knowledge.
Thirdly, we must build on the Montreal Protocol as far as the export of GMOs is concerned, and this should be done on the basis of mutual agreement and transparency.
Fourthly, as many Members have said, we must ensure liability; but it is a question of whether we need any greater liability than applies to other environmental risks.
I suspect we do not, so long as we already have criminal, civil, product and environmental liability in law.
That should suffice, but it is wise to add the provision on negligence as something which can be brought into play within the courts.
We can gain real benefits from GMOs if we get it right.
Fewer crop sprays, for example, would benefit the environment if we grew GMO crops that did not need so many crop sprays.
But we have to take the public with us, with the science.
I believe these measures will help to do just that.
Mr President, ideally GMOs should not be released into the environment.
But if it is going to happen there have to be a number of measures taken to ensure that the industries that say this technology is safe take responsibility.
That is why I cannot understand why the industry and the lobbyists are so concerned about the issue of liability.
If they are so sure that their products are safe then why are they afraid to take responsibility, both as regards liability and compensation?
The other issue I should like to address is the contamination of gene transfer.
We have a situation where, for example, conventional farms can be contaminated with GMOs.
That means there is no free choice, either for the farmers themselves - and that goes for organic farmers too - or for the consumers, in the long run.
If you have contamination of conventional farms or organic farms, there is basically no free option for the consumer.
This is not acceptable.
At the end of the day, the GMO industry does not have anything to offer the consumer or the environment, even as regards the use of chemicals.
It is ironic to think that the same industries that are promoting this so-called chemical-free agriculture are the very same ones that have bombarded us with chemicals over the years and are making those crops reliant on chemicals in the future as well.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Bowe for his report and, in one minute, mention four fundamental questions which have already been discussed.
Firstly, the protection of public health.
It seems to us that we should strictly forbid the use of antibiotic-resistant genes.
Germany, Luxembourg and Austria have shown the way by banning Novartis maize, which has a gene which is resistant to ampicillin, a wide spectrum antibiotic.
Secondly, the commitment to international agreements.
Amendment No 1 refers to the Montreal Protocol and the need to defend biosafety and the consultation of and request for authorisation from non-EU countries for exports.
Thirdly, the civil liability clause, which is clearly necessary for those who are responsible for the release of these genetically modified organisms which may have effects on health or the environment.
Finally, Mr President, the prevention of genetic contamination.
This means preventing the spreading of transgenic pollen which may travel and contaminate other plants and, therefore, seriously affect the environment.
Mr President, I should like to start by complimenting Mr Bowe on his objective and balanced presentation.
In previous debates in Parliament I have put on record my own views in relation to biotechnology.
In the short time available, I appeal to the Commission and, indeed, Parliament to urgently expedite the conclusions necessary to allay consumer fears concerning the public health, environmental and ethical aspects of a technology which has the potential to make a significant contribution to food production and public health.
Of course there are concerns on the part of consumers.
They are entitled to an in-depth and independent evaluation of what is a rapidly changing technology.
The longer we allow the confusion to exist, the greater the delay in enabling society to benefit from its full potential.
In this regard the bio-industry has itself contributed in no small way to public unease by the planned introduction of unacceptable practices such as seed-terminator technology and other ethical issues such as experimentation with human embryos.
It was the vigilance of this Parliament in particular that raised a warning flag in relation to many aspects of the application of this research.
But there are now welcome indications that the industry has taken on board Parliament's concern in this regard.
An indication of the potential of genetic research to make a positive contribution to food production is demonstrated by the very recent announcement by Monsanto of a significant breakthrough on the genetic structure of rice, which is the staple food on which millions in the developing world depend and about which there is considerable concern with regard to the continuity of supply.
The bottom line in relation to every aspect of the application of GMO technology, particularly in food production, is transparency, consumer information and accurate labelling.
In short, the consumer must at all times be given a choice.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, European consumers are justifiably concerned about genetically modified organisms and their release.
The industrial lobby continues, unscrupulously and in the name of the great god profit, to play the sorcerer' s apprentice, juggling dangerously with food safety and consumer health.
It is Europe' s duty to pass stringent legislation that will make these alchemists accountable and to guarantee product quality whilst also providing citizens with clear information.
We totally agree with the line of thinking adopted in this report.
The emphasis should be placed on the traceability facilitated by comprehensive information, including that aimed at third countries which import or export GMOs.
Indeed, consumer safety calls for equal treatment with a view to avoiding any deflection of trade or the export of products unsaleable on the European market.
We must also require the prior approval of the recipient country before any trade can take place.
If the liability of the operator responsible for release is to be officially established, it would also be advisable to define this liability precisely and unhurriedly, in order to avoid introducing an over-general concept of environmental liability.
Lastly, the risks to the environment should be assessed via an annual cost-benefit analysis of these GMO releases, carried out in a transparent manner and extended to cover animal and plant health as well as public and private goods.
Mr President, there has been a significant increase in biotechnology applications and they are becoming more and more important both to the economy and to society, because using applications derived from genetically-modified organisms will be instrumental in improving our quality of life.
Hence, it is essential that we introduce a modern framework governing the development, marketing and exploitation of genetically-modified organisms.
Europe must not be left behind the USA and Japan.
This, however, does not mean that we should overlook the safety issues surrounding these innovative applications, such as public health safety and environmental protection.
I must point out that we have all witnessed the ongoing war of words recently over the safety of genetically modified organisms.
This has led to confusion amongst consumers and has resulted in their being unable to form a sound judgement on the benefits and dangers of biotechnology.
We should therefore win consumer confidence and the way to do so is by improving safety standards.
For example, we can build up public confidence by banning the creation or use of GMOs containing antibiotic-resistant genes and by providing agencies and the general public with detailed and objective information.
Parliament called at first reading for amendments to be incorporated into this directive which cover the above two objectives, i.e. the creation of a useful framework of rules for the deliberate release and trade in GMOs, accompanied by safety measures for the protection of public health and the environment and information for the public and consumers.
It is also important for provision to be made for the directive to be adjusted and amended in line with new developments resulting from the fast pace of change in biotechnology and its applications.
In closing, I should like to dwell on one point which I stressed in the Committee on the Environment and which deserves our particular attention, and that is the issue of safety.
We are awaiting a more general proposal from the Commission on product liability and safety.
We must not overreact if we want this directive to promote and support such a promising sector.
Mr President, to genetically modify food means to break through the barrier that divides different species, for example by introducing a fish gene into a strawberry.
This is not possible in conventional agriculture.
Tinkering with genes holds unknown risks.
This is why measures are needed to prevent gene transfer so that this fish gene cannot contaminate conventionally or organically grown strawberries.
According to the gene tech industry, the risks of such unwanted contamination are low.
If these risks are so low, why is it then that the gene tech industry refuses to accept any legal liability?
But maybe there is a risk for the environment and human health and in those cases, such a liability clause is most definitely needed.
The Christian Democrats are playing a dangerous game.
Whilst they are in favour of a liability clause in the directive on disposing of dangerous waste, they suddenly want to wait five years when it comes to gene technology.
If liability pertaining to gene food is not regulated now, suspicion among the public regarding this type of food will only grow.
The Christian Democratic position will rebound perfectly off the gene industry.
Mr President, genetic engineering and biotechnology are the key technologies of the future.
If we in the EU hamper or even block the use of genetically modified organisms, we shall be manoeuvring ourselves into a backwater in this important area.
We are already lagging far behind other countries.
The resultant competitive disadvantages for researchers, breeders, seed growers, farmers and even consumers would be immense.
But it is precisely these obstruction tactics which several groups within the European Union are applying.
They of course appear to be rather ideological in nature because generally there are no material grounds for them.
This attempt at obstruction can be found in a series of proposed amendments in the Bowe report.
They are distinguished by the fact that they demand the impossible, knowing full well that these demands cannot be met and can therefore block the release of GMOs in general.
This applies in particular to genetic transfer, which simply cannot be prevented in the open air, and to the question of liability.
The call for special liability means that farmers dare not use GMOs.
I also think that keeping a register of cultivated land beyond the experimental stage is unrealistic because I assume that 80-90% of farmland would be entered in such as register in a few years' time.
No one wants to play down genetic engineering, including me.
But nor can we demonise it.
Farmers have always endeavoured to use targeted breeding and cultivation techniques in order to develop efficient plant and animal material.
Techniques continue to develop, including in breeding and cultivation and one new technique is genetic modification.
It is our task to ensure that this technology is used responsibly, not to prevent it.
Mr President, I would urge colleagues to strengthen this report by insisting on environmental liability.
Producers of GMOs should be required to take out insurance against any damage to human health or to the environment from the release of their products.
The Commission promised the introduction of horizontal legislation over ten years ago.
But even though we now have a White Paper, the actual legislation is some years away.
This means that, if it is not accepted into this directive, the victims will have to pay for any damage instead of the companies that are making the profits.
Thousands of people across Europe have chosen not to buy products containing GMOs because of the evidence of health and environmental damage.
We must address those very real issues.
I would urge colleagues to accept my group's amendments on liability insurance, GMO contamination and the ban on antibiotic-resistant genes.
Consumers are demanding the strictest controls and will be satisfied by nothing less.
It is vital that all the necessary safeguards are now included in this directive.
Mr President, I am pleased that Parliament, in collaboration with the Council, is now finally in a position to give Europe a chance to make its influence felt in the sphere of GMOs.
We must be careful, however, that we do not now just sit back in the belief that we have finished our work.
We have selected an authorisation procedure which is more restrictive than its American equivalent, and this will of course be significant in terms of our ability to hold onto the best companies and researchers.
The time limits we adopt for processing applications should not, therefore, be applied as the rule but, instead, constitute an absolute maximum.
We must reject the proposal that the entire liability for any damage should be shifted onto whoever has released the GMOs into the environment.
A natural consequence of Europe' s strict authorisation procedure must be that the authorities assume a portion of the liability.
Only by sharing the liability between the authorities and businesses in this way will it be possible to offset the competitive disadvantages presented by the laborious approval procedure, and only in this way will be able to compete with the Americans.
Mr President, when I started at the Commission last autumn I realised very quickly that the directive on the deliberate release of GMOs would be one of the most sensitive dossiers under my responsibility.
Genetically modified products and biotechnology give rise to a number of questions and concerns.
The most important are perhaps: what are the benefits?
What are the risks?
How do we best avoid possible negative effects?
How do we ensure that we have access to all the relevant information?
To tackle these three concerns raised by our citizens we need a wide and open debate where all key players participate and the discussion cannot be limited only to the experts.
Here the European institutions, the Member States, industry and science all have to take their responsibilities.
The basis for meeting these new challenges has to be an efficient and transparent legislative framework.
I should especially like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Bowe, and the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy for their hard work in making a rapid and important contribution.
Our role as European policymakers should be to provide for a balanced response to these new challenges.
We need a regulatory framework, based on safety and the precautionary principle which ensure a high level of protection for human health and environment.
At the same time, it has to allow society to benefit from the development of modern biotechnology.
Our European legislation on GMOs guarantees an individual and thorough risk assessment of each GMO product placed on the European market.
We are here today to strengthen and improve the existing framework.
The sensitivity and complexity of the matter might explain why we are confronted with a total number of 52 amendments at second reading.
The Commission can accept in their entirety Amendments Nos 9, 17, 19, 29 and 47, which improve the quality and the clarity of the texts.
The Commission can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 1 to 4, 8, 11, 24, 35 to 38, 46, 48, 49 and 52.
They further strengthen the intention of the Commission to establish an efficient transparent and balanced regulatory framework for GMOs.
Let me comment further on Amendment No 1 and Amendments Nos 13, 14 and 28, which all relate to the biosafety protocol and obligations for imports and exports of GMOs.
The European Community was one of the driving forces in the successful adoption of the Cartagena Protocol on biosafety in January.
The Commission therefore welcomes the spirit of Amendment No 1.
This refers to the need to submit the appropriate proposals for the implementation of the protocol when ratified - work has already begun.
However, the Commission cannot accept the inclusion of provisions on import and export obligations in the text of the directive.
We believe that the implications of the protocol on the overall European Union legislative framework have yet to be fully assessed.
Amendments Nos 13, 14 and 28 are therefore not acceptable in the present revision.
Let me now turn to the issue of liability, and I know that this is an important political subject for all of you.
When I made my presentation to Parliament in the autumn I promised that I would make particular reference to GMOs in the White Paper on environmental liability.
The Commission did exactly that when adopting the White Paper this year.
The Commission is of the opinion that a horizontal approach is the most efficient way to guarantee a comprehensive responsibility regime for environmental damage.
This will provide clarity for complainants and prevent loopholes.
This is also the best way to complement the existing horizontal system for product liability already covering GMOs.
I can assure you that I will do my utmost to be able to present a proposal for legislation on liability before the end of 2001.
I can therefore accept Amendments Nos 2, 36 and 46 in principle, as far as they refer to the Commission White Paper.
Let us be clear, if this is put in this directive, rules will have to be made to ensure legal clarity, and how long will that take?
It must be seen in that context.
However, I cannot accept Amendments Nos 33, 40 and 45.
I am also fully aware of the political importance of certain other aspects raised by the proposed amendments.
It is clear that antibiotic resistance marker genes need to be phased out and be replaced with alternatives as soon as practically possible.
A phase-out is already foreseen in the common position.
The Commission agrees to strengthen this political message.
The Commission cannot agree to a general ban of GMOs containing antibiotic resistance marker genes.
At the moment there is no scientific evidence that all GMOs of this type present adverse effects to human health and the environment.
Instead, we should continue to carry out a comprehensive case-by-case risk analysis.
Within these limits, Amendments Nos 11, 37, 48 and 52 are therefore acceptable in principle.
The Commission can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 3, 4, 8, 24 and 35 to the extent that they are in line with the logic of the texts and fit within the overall legislative framework.
The Commission can therefore agree to a recital concerning socio-economic aspects which refers to the reporting obligation of the Commission.
This will be done every three years under Article 30.
The Commission welcomes Amendments Nos 38 and 49 concerning gene transfer.
They constitute a balanced approach between a total prevention and a permissive approach.
However, the wording should be aligned with the text of the directive.
In addition, the Commission reference should be deleted since the Commission does not necessarily play a role under Part B - national consent.
However, the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 12 concerning the prevention of gene transfer.
Gene transfer between organisms is, as we know, a common phenomenon in nature.
Instead we need to ensure that potential risks from gene transfer are thoroughly assessed before GMO products are released for research or placed on the market.
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 22 and 23 as they stand, since the provisions foreseen in these amendments would not be workable within the authorisation system established by the directive.
This is both for administrative and legal reasons.
The Commission, however, acknowledges that these amendments aim at addressing the possible problems that certain industries might face with strict time-limited consent.
This concerns in particular the plant breeding industry.
The Commission will therefore consider how due account can be taken of these concerns while ensuring political, legal and administrative consistency.
In this context, Amendment No 26 is also not acceptable since this would limit the flexibility of the optional time limitation of consent for the renewal.
Amendment No 25 seeks to introduce a provision which allows for the introduction of differentiated procedures under Part C of the directive.
This builds on the original proposal as presented at first reading in Parliament.
However, this amendment goes beyond the Commission proposal and is therefore not acceptable to the Commission as it stands.
The Commission is, however, willing to reconsider this amendment in the light of its original proposal and within the framework of an overall compromise.
Finally, I should like to deal as a package with the amendments I have not yet addressed.
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 21 since the legal basis of future legislative measures is subject to its content and cannot be established in advance by this directive.
Amendment No 6, concerning a centralised Community procedure, is not acceptable.
However, I should like to stress that careful evaluation of a centralised procedure would be done in the Commission report required under Article 30 of the directive.
Access to the work of the European Group on Ethics and their opinions is an important of the general evaluation.
The Commission is, however, of the opinion that this is already appropriately covered in the Rules of Procedure of the Committee.
Amendment No 32 is therefore not acceptable.
Amendments Nos 5, 7, 10, 15, 16, 18, 20, 27, 30, 31, 34, 39, 41 to 44, 50 and 51 are also not acceptable since they would introduce legal and technical uncertainty or jeopardise the overall balance achieved in the common position.
To conclude, we urgently need a revised Directive 90/220.
It has to ensure a high level of protection for human health and the environment and, at the same time, allow society to profit from the benefits of these new technologies.
To strike the right balance between these two justified concerns we need a transparent process, a wide dialogue and strong political leadership.
We all have to take our responsibilities in achieving this, and this is the only way in which we will win the trust and confidence of our citizens.
Mr President, I think that tomorrow' s vote is so important that I should like to ask the Commissioner to clarify two points so that we know what we are voting on tomorrow.
Commissioner, my first question is this: have I understood you correctly, can you promise that you are making provision for an environmental liability with compulsory insurance, yes or no?
I just want a yes or no.
Or is it correct that you only agree to liability as set out in the White Paper, i.e. just for Natura 2000 areas and with no compulsory insurance.
In plain text, this means that if damage occurs and the person responsible cannot be held liable, the general public, i.e. the taxpayer will pay for it.
Can you give Parliament a guarantee - and I should like a yes or no - that compulsory insurance is contained in a horizontal directive?
My second point is this: unfortunately, you did not go into proposed Amendment No 42.
Can you confirm that there is no EU legislation for GMOs in contained use?
You know that the contained use directive excludes this and, at the same time, Article 2 (4) of the common position makes no provision for regulations on GMOs for contained use.
There is a gap in the legislation here and I think that this is very important for tomorrow' vote.
For example, transgenetic fish in contained use would not be covered by the two directives.
I should like a clear answer on this.
I am not reopening the debate.
I will give the floor to the Commissioner if she wants to respond to these two specific points, but I thought the Commissioner's response was very clear and comprehensive.
Commissioner, do you wish to reply?
.
Mr President, I shall start with the second part of Mrs Breyer's question.
It is true that there is no specific Community legislation for the contained use of genetically modified plants and animals.
However, Article 2(4) of the common position obliges Member States to ensure that these GMOs are handed over to a third party only if stringent containment measures are in place, otherwise notification under Part C of the directive is necessary.
Amendment No 42 would prevent any exchange of genetically modified plants and animals for research activities under contained use until Community legislation is in force.
That is why we cannot accept Amendment No 42.
As you know, we have now issued a White Paper on environmental liability.
It is now open for comments and views and we are ready to discuss it because I want to ensure that this environmental liability paper covers GMOs.
Your views are also welcome.
I intend to ensure that this paper covers GMOs.
It already covers product liability.
Insurance is one thing we will have to look into in more depth and also get the views of other parties on the practical aspects.
The White Paper is a first step, as you know.
That has to be discussed in depth and I will come back with a proposal.
I believe it will be possible to put an insurance system in place.
The debate is closed.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Identification, registration and labelling of beef
The next item is the report by Mr Papayannakis, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Council Regulation (EC) 820/97, (COM(1999) 487 - C5-0240/1999 - 1999/0204(COD)).
- (EL) Mr President, we all know that the bovine spongiform encephalopathy crisis, the mad cow crisis, is yet another crime which has not been punished, and I doubt it ever will.
But aside from this serious issue, it has left us with an institutional crisis, a market crisis, a drop in sales of beef products, a drop in prices and, most importantly, a consumer confidence crisis.
The regulation under discussion has come too late, much too late in my opinion, but all the same it will help to provide some answers, some solutions and it will help us to take some action to restore consumer confidence.
As you will recall, we fought a hard battle over this regulation last December in order to protect the rights of the European Parliament.
We also fought a battle to push through the implementation of the measures laid down in this regulation as swiftly as possible.
In short, we all know what we are talking about.
On the basis of this regulation, very soon, this year, all bovine animals will, by law, have to be identified and monitored right up to slaughter.
Meat from bovine animals will carry a label indicating the origin and history of the animals from which the meat is derived.
During our analysis of this regulation, we tried to cater for a great many demands and a great many opinions.
We wanted the provisions of the regulation to be kept as simple as possible so that they could be applied, and applied as quickly as possible.
Let us not forget that the system we are going to implement is an extremely complex, extremely technical system, and concerns approximately 100 million animals throughout the EU.
So we are talking about an extremely complex operation.
The system therefore needs to be simple and practicable and it needs to be comprehensible to the consumer; this is of utmost importance to us.
Above all, it must not contain exceptions or what we call loopholes, i.e. ways in which the regulation can be contravened either through complex wording or because of local or special exceptions or applications.
I believe that we have managed to achieve this.
The system that Parliament is endeavouring to establish though its amendments could be applied from 1 September 2000 onwards and we insist on this because one demand of the entire House was that specific dates and deadlines should be set at long last and that we should get started.
I would just like to look at two amendments, two categories of amendments.
First, your rapporteur is calling, with the greatest respect, for a report, a Commission proposal, within the year, on the application of this system to meat products.
If we want to be taken seriously, we should also take account of consumer confidence in all meat products, of which, as we all know, there are a great many.
And secondly, some amendments deal with how permits are to be granted to enterprises, operators and so on to apply the labels, to label the meat.
The provisions recommended by the Commission are, to my mind, extremely minimal.
The interested party submits an application and, after a period of time, the system which he wishes to apply is applied.
I propose that we change this system.
Anyone labelling meat must have explicit approval from the competent public authorities.
This may seem a little more laborious, but we already have a laborious system and we must, at all costs, have state approval for meat labelling.
If not, then I am afraid that the system will become too lax and may even become corrupt, and, as a result, we will not achieve our main goal of winning consumer confidence in the system.
Mr President, as draftsman of the Committee on Agriculture, I should like to recapitulate a number of the committee' s main causes for concern on this question.
The most important objective of the Commission proposal - and I should like expressly to stress this once again - is the traceability of beef or bovine animals from birth through to processing and sale.
This is one of the consequences of the BSE crisis and we must bear the objective of this proposal, i.e. traceability, in mind when debating what information should appear on the label.
We want labels which are practicable, simple, safe, cheap and easy to control.
Labels must be easy for consumers to understand, which is why the information needs to be kept to a minimum.
Consumers want information, not a novel.
Information on the fattening process and, where applicable, on antibiotics or other stimulants administered, as demanded in proposed Amendment No 48, have absolutely no business to be on the label.
Information which does not come under compulsory labelling but which is requested by market participants or is already included on labels in the Member States can continue to be included within the framework of voluntary labelling.
This applies in particular to information on the region of origin of the meat.
As far as the entry into force of the regulation is concerned, we agree in principle with the Commission' s approach that compulsory labelling should be introduced in two stages, but we do not agreed with the timetable insofar as we think that the date of 1 January 2003 has been put far too far back.
We shall have problems explaining this to consumers.
The Committee on Agriculture agreed on the wording "by 1 January 2002 at the latest" in a compromise on the introduction of compulsory information on origin, i.e. stage 2.
Now the Committee on the Environment has opted for 1 September 2001 and I think that we can agree to this date.
It is only a matter of four months.
But we are emphatically against making all the information, including the indication of the place of birth, compulsory when the regulation enters into force in September 2000, rather than in two stages.
That makes no sense, as the electronic database on which traceability depends is not yet up and running in the majority of Member States.
A compulsory labelling system for beef can only be as good as the system for registering bovine animals and all their movements.
Mr President, beef labelling has two distinct functions.
Firstly, traceability in the case of a food safety incident - the recent E. coli outbreak in Scotland for example - and, secondly, to give consumers information about the origin of beef at the point of sale.
The two should not be confused.
For traceability we need maximum information made available to the authorities as and when required but the consumer label should be simple, concise and unambiguous.
The need for information sprang from the BSE crisis.
Member States have differing levels of BSE incidence but there are also variations in the measures to eradicate the disease and protect human health.
Although the United Kingdom has the highest incidence of BSE, it also has the most comprehensive control measures.
Other countries, which admittedly have lower declared levels of BSE, operate a whole-herd slaughter policy which entails the risk of the under-reporting of cases.
Therefore people want to know which country their beef comes from.
Reference to regions should not be an alternative to country of origin but a voluntary addition.
Even regions like Yorkshire, Britain' s premier region and coincidentally the region I represent, are not known by every citizen throughout the EU.
From a marketing and promotional point of view smaller areas and localities could be used, as well as regional breeds such as Aberdeen Angus.
The well established description of Scotch beef should continue to be used.
Small traditional butcher shops that sell beef unpackaged should be allowed to display information as an alternative to labelling each item.
Many consumers would be confused if given information about hanging or maturation, which could be mixed up with sell-by dates in their minds.
I would draw attention particularly to Amendment No 41 which seeks to exclude farmers from Community aid schemes if the regulation is not strictly adhered to.
I have already had cases drawn to my attention regarding other EU schemes where honest errors by farmers, who are not professional bureaucrats, have resulted in punitive sanctions which often threaten the future of a family farm.
We should not go down this road.
The listing of antibiotics and stimulants that might have been administered would, if adopted, create a two-tier beef market.
Animal welfare would be compromised as farmers would be reluctant to treat animals therapeutically.
Similarly, reference to fattening methods should not be introduced.
I hope that in amending this regulation Parliament can for once simplify rather than embellish and make the labelling of beef consumer-, butcher- and farmer-friendly.
Mr President, my group welcomed the report by Mr Papayannakis and salutes him for his persistence.
I say that because he comes from a small political group - and it is often hard to make headway here - and he comes from one of the southern Member States, which will in some ways have to make sacrifices and introduce regulations to bring about effective, proper beef labelling throughout the Community.
He has also had to face the obfuscation and delays brought about by the Council.
The fact that we have had to wait two years for this proposal to become a practical reality is a poor comment on the urgency with which they regard it, although the situation was plainly critical from the time of the outbreak of the BSE crisis onwards.
However, we are not here today for recriminations but for looking ahead.
This is our chance to put right this sorry process of delay.
Parliament has the opportunity, if it is willing to grasp it, to set a realistic timetable for the two-tier implementation of a comprehensive process of labelling for beef and for beef products.
In the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, we supported most of the amendments from the rapporteur and others and we do so again today.
We do that on the basis that the key proposal plainly has to be the issue of timing.
Some of the versions of this report in themselves have been contradictory in the dates that they gave.
We are now talking about implementation of the first stage in September 2000 and the second stage in September 2001.
I was glad to hear the representative of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development say that they would settle for the four-month advance that would involve coming forward from January 2002.
We believe that this is necessary because we should now get the whole European Union on the move.
That is why we want the second stage as set out in Article 13(5) to be distinct and a commensurate advance.
Why do we want that?
There are some here - certainly some from Member States that have very effective traceability and labelling possibilities already - who would like to do the whole thing at once.
They would be able to say to others: look - you cannot do it, you are at fault.
Our job is to bring all 15 Member States together so that the process of traceability throughout the whole of the food chain, from the birth of the animal to its slaughter and disposal, would be universally applied throughout the European Union.
We say to those who are resistant to this: please remember that it is necessary to bring everybody on board.
What everybody wants - whether they are farmers, citizens or consumers in the United Kingdom or anywhere else in the Union - is to feel that they have equal confidence, wherever they are, in the safety of the product that they are consuming.
We have struck out the second subparagraph of Article 13(5) and all other amendments which follow the same line of allowing imprecise mixed origins or an indication such as "EU origin".
One day "EU origin" may be assurance enough but it is not at this moment.
We need to know from which state a product has arrived.
I know that there are people in the Netherlands who disagree with that and I would be interested to know why.
I cannot see that "EU origin" is currently sufficient in the way of labelling and we are opposed to that proposal.
We are also opposed to the derogation for minced beef, which might apply to something like 30% of the beef output, which ought to be open to labelling.
Minced beef is as much, if not more, at risk as any other form of beef since it frequently comes from a variety of sources.
It is the case in my country that we have seen minced beef and lamb and other meats mixed up together.
We need traceability and labelling there as much as anywhere else.
We agree with the rapporteur' s intention to stiffen and speed up the compliance provisions in Amendments Nos 42 and 43.
We also agree that supplementary information should and can be provided for those Member States that need it and for those special regions which have important information to communicate.
My last point is to end where I began.
My country, Mr President, and yours - if I can call Scotland my country too, as I certainly would - have suffered the horrors of BSE.
We know we bore a large part of the responsibility for it.
It was incumbent upon us to make special provisions by way of food safety as a result.
After our years of effort to that end, we can now justifiably say to the Community as a whole that what we want for ourselves we want for everyone else as well.
Mr President, rapporteur, ladies and gentlemen, it is important to reinstate market confidence.
It is, however, still more important to restore citizens' confidence in the food they buy and eat - in actual fact, it is perhaps in that way that the market will be strengthened.
The crucial factor is that it should be possible to trace with certainty the origins of what we eat.
Amendment No 29 is very important for producers, above all perhaps for small producers in vulnerable areas.
This Amendment would entitle producers to provide information on the label in addition to the name of the nation where the goods concerned originate.
There would be the option to state, for example, the particular area from which the meat comes or the fact that a particular breed of cattle or special breeding methods have been used.
However, there should be no legislation on this matter, other than a ban on lying.
I am very pleased about Mr Whitehead' s remark about minced meat.
I fully and wholeheartedly support Amendment No 30 from the rapporteur.
For me, the most important aspect of this whole issue is that no exceptions should be made for cheap food.
We who sit in this Chamber, for the most part middle-aged and well-to-do, know perfectly well that it is young people and families with children who buy and eat the cheapest food - sausages, hamburgers etc.
In all social systems and at all periods in history, the most vulnerable groups have had the least purchasing power.
It is our absolute moral duty first and foremost to make cheap food safe before we do the same for fillet of beef.
Mr President, Commissioner, the European Parliament has proven its far-sightedness on this matter and I should like to thank the two rapporteurs from the Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Agriculture for their work.
They have approached the issue with the same consistency demonstrated by the European Parliament.
Allow me to refresh your memory: compulsory registration has applied for a long time, because Regulation No 820/97 entered into force on 1 January 2000.
The postponement adopted is not lawful.
The European Parliament has filed charges against the Council because the postponement was not within the Council' s discretion.
Nor did the Commission come up smelling of roses here.
It was the Commission which proposed this seemingly elegant but legally dubious procedure.
If nothing is done, compulsory labelling will enter into force on 1 September 2000.
The Commission is therefore urged to accept the European Parliament' s proposals in this codecision process by 1 September.
We have tried in our suit to ensure that no equally elegant attempt will be made to implement an extension on 1 September - and I hope that we shall succeed in putting a stop to this.
If we cannot agree on Parliament' s proposals by 1 September, then the old regulation with the compulsory system will enter into force.
I therefore hope that you will implement Parliament' s reasonable proposals and that you will give up your plan to postpone this once again until the year 2003.
It will confuse our citizens and will certainly meet with decisive resistance here in Parliament.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, consumers can be given a guaranteed indication of origin for the majority, I repeat the majority of foodstuffs and for beef in its many and varied forms, if they so wish.
The basis for this was and still is the passport for each individual animal which provides information on place, origin and birth.
Thanks to comprehensive controls of and the wealth of data on the animal trade, the place of origin and rearing can be proven.
What I mean is that we are not starting from square one and, as a producer of several tonnes of beef a year, I know what I am talking about.
The latest crisis in the foodstuffs sector may justify the introduction of stricter standards, as contained in the report; however, where possible, red tape should be reduced.
I agree with all the proposed amendments which are predicated upon greater promotion of regional marketing and processing of agricultural products and which help to build up regional markets and create greater transparency, irrespective of the date on which they are introduced.
Mr President, the people who will be most shocked to learn of this evening' s debate must surely be European consumers.
They will be astounded to learn that, so many years after the start of the BSE crisis, the European Union still does not have a reliable traceability system for beef.
Quite clearly, though, consumer confidence must be restored, as a matter of urgency, by guaranteeing the consumer perfect traceability from the stable to the table, so that any potential risk to human health can be efficiently eliminated at an early stage.
Fortunately, the appropriate initiatives by the most enterprising Member States have compensated for the extraordinarily slow reactions of the Community apparatus.
It is therefore all the more deplorable that they should have been deprived of this possibility by the Treaty of Amsterdam.
I am thinking in particular of the compulsory labelling system which was drawn up in France together with livestock farmers and distributors, which has been in force since 1996.
This system has proved very effective.
It has made it possible to restore consumer confidence.
France' s legitimate wish not to lift the embargo on British beef prematurely, since Britain did not offer the same guarantees of traceability, was in order to maintain this restored level of confidence.
France had simply forgotten that it no longer had the right to do this.
What a decidedly strange Europe it is that penalises Member States which take the necessary initiatives and action to restore consumer confidence and protect citizens' health!
If legal action can now only be taken at Community level, then let us at least act quickly and stop indefinitely postponing the implementation of the commitments made in 1997 with a view to providing the consumer with transparent and comprehensible information.
Compulsory labelling indicating the origin of goods must therefore be introduced as soon as possible, and it must certainly not be postponed until 1 January 2003, as the Commission proposes.
We must not agree to any exemptions, again as the Commission proposes, for minced and cut meat, which would be tantamount to excluding 30% to 50% of beef, according to the country, from the need for mandatory labelling.
Nor must we agree, as the Commission is once again proposing, to adopt an over-general EC-type generic designation of origin.
Consumers want to be certain of the operators' ability to monitor the origin of meat accurately.
The Member State of origin must therefore be indicated.
Furthermore, beef imported from third countries must be subject to the same labelling regulations as Community beef, and if it does not comply with European Union regulations on traceability, this must also be clearly indicated.
This, Mr President, is the intention of the amendments which Mrs Thomas-Moreau and I tabled on behalf of the UEN Group, which we are proposing to all our fellow Members who are keen to contribute to bringing about genuine traceability of beef.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, fourteen years after BSE first appeared, we have finally got around to doing something about labelling meat in order to protect consumers and ensure traceability.
This protection is undoubtedly belated in principle but, above all, illusory in practice.
Firstly, in the draft regulation, 50% of European meat is effectively exempt from compulsory labelling if it is minced or cut.
For the remaining 50%, labelling is not compulsory until 2003, which means that we have three years to dispose of British surplus stocks.
And after 2003, the designation of origin may be limited to a simple indication of 'EC origin' with no mention of the country.
What is more, to bury the prion under even more details, the label is laden down with indications of: the place where the animal was born, fattened, slaughtered and boned, with the Member State of origin, the region of origin, the farm of origin, a total of twelve items, plus the price and the weight, making a total of fourteen items, which is simply too much to read and take in.
So, Mr Papayannakis is improving the system, the deadline for compulsory labelling has been brought forward from 2003 to 2001, since 2000 is out of the question; labelling is to be simplified, the national labelling systems mandatory in France, Belgium and Finland are to be retained.
This is a good move.
The amendments will be adopted.
The unwillingness of the Commission is, however, with apologies to the Commissioner, apparent to everyone.
As a solution, labelling is a good idea only at first sight.
Labelling is no safeguard against GMOs, chocolate containing vegetable fats or, tomorrow, GMO fats, or, at a later date, American hormone-treated beef, or prion-infected meat.
The only effective protection would be checks, and this requires States and frontiers.
We have, however, eliminated frontiers, and this is the price we have to pay for Europe: freedom of movement at the expense of safety.
I just hope, ladies and gentlemen, that no one will have to be punished in future.
Previously one could be punished at the stake, now punishment would mean a steak, a British beefsteak.
Mr President, this debate on the labelling of beef is closely akin to our previous concerns on the subject of food safety.
By means of this report and its conclusions, if they are adopted, we will be raising a number of concerns among consumers, in a very sensitive area where the mad cow syndrome is still predominant.
As far as the EDD Group is concerned, product traceability provides a guarantee both for the protection of consumer health and for the promotion of quality products which all producers, large or small, are capable of producing if they favour quality over base commercial and financial interests which have little regard for human health.
In our view the important and essential thing in this report is that all meat industry products should be covered by compulsory labelling, from basic butchered meat to derivatives, minced meat, cut meat, etc.
In the same way, the consumer must absolutely be provided with a complete set of information, with labelling which gives full details on the way the animal was reared and slaughtered: its place of birth, farming and slaughter, as well as feeding and farming techniques, not forgetting any antibiotics or growth promoters which may have been administered.
Finally, it is essential that these measures should be implemented as quickly as possible, since it is a matter of consumer rights.
Let us not delay, especially as this is no recent matter.
It is high time we took action.
Consumer confidence cannot be decreed, it must be earned.
To that end, as I already stated in our discussions on 5 October 1999, the CPNT party members within the EDD Group will therefore support any measure in support of complete traceability, which can only be of benefit to everyone concerned: the consumer, who will be informed, and the good producer, who will be protected.
Mr President, I wish to put firmly on the record tonight that the farmers in Northern Ireland are exceedingly angry at the UK Government for not seeking European funding to help promote beef labelling.
Other states have taken up this money to the tune of some £4m. the Irish Republic to the tune of £100 000 - yet the disgraceful attitude of the London Government is to keep this from the UK farmers.
I want also to say that the place of origin mentioned in any labelling system should be the real place of origin, because any idea of stating where meat is processed as the place of origin is not acceptable.
That is a very fundamental question that must be made perfectly clear in any law that we pass.
Any food labelling policy must be accurate and dependable for both the producers and the consumers.
Whatever may be the policy of this Union in regard to an open market economy, those people who want to buy home-produced meat should be given the right to know it is home-produced.
Farmers deserve to have a guarantee of that, and so should the consumers.
Mr President, the discussion on labelling beef has reached a point at which it is crucial to restore confidence among producers and consumers.
The report focuses on the traceability of beef, i.e. knowing its exact origins, but at the same time, this cannot be detached from consumer confidence, as consumers want information.
It strikes me that this Parliament insists on also making national labelling possible and obligatory, while the Commission places the emphasis on labelling which states "originates from the EU" .
I am convinced that one day, we will be proud again of a label which states: produced in the EU, and that we will have a food safety bureau in the European Union with a forceful, supranational mandate which can act promptly as and when problems arise.
This must be our ultimate goal.
We will then be where we need to be.
Until such time, we need to be able to find out exactly what is happening, we need to be able to give the consumer sound information and until such time, we will need to use stop-gap measures to do this.
One of these measures is most definitely the use of a label indicating the Member State.
This is good, because in this way we can start restoring confidence in the producer, especially at a time when food safety is so much in the public eye.
We simply need this.
Another positive step is if it could also be pointed out that there can be a time when confidence will be restored.
In this sense, I have to say that my delegation and some in my group support Amendment No 61 tabled by Mr Maaten and Mr de Roo, in which the times are indicated when assurances can be given with regard to BSE inspections and other matters and which states that there can also be a time when the EU label will be applicable.
I consider this to be an interim step, and ultimately I can see one key goal: to restore confidence, to produce a forceful EU label and ultimately a forceful food safety bureau, because these discussions are interconnected.
Mr President, Commissioner, food safety gets people talking perhaps more than any other issue, and, for that reason, it is good that it also gets us talking here in Parliament.
But the most important consideration is that it does not just get us talking, but that we should also do something about it.
The work of Mr Papayannakis has already been praised here.
I would like to express my thanks too: it is a good basis for better standards of consumer safety throughout the European Union.
We have plenty of examples of consumers not having always been given priority when it comes to food production.
The Single Market and the free movement of goods provide more freedom of choice for the public and better markets for producers.
As the issue here is about food, it is even more important than ever to ensure that this freedom is also responsibly restricted, that consumers are protected, and that they have a right to know what they are eating.
In this case, it is especially important that meat and processed meat products are among those products whose origin the consumer knows.
Many have mentioned here that the EC label is not enough and that more precise information is needed.
I agree with this.
It is absolutely essential to know what country the products are from.
In addition, the origin, not only of meat products, but of the ingredients used in processed meat, must be shown as clearly as possible.
Labels must also be made compulsory as quickly as possible.
The timetable that the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy is proposing is not too pressing.
The Member States should have already prepared themselves for it.
Mr President, this regulation cannot be postponed any longer, and I fully support the stricter timetable that the European Parliament is proposing in the amendments to the Commission' s proposal.
Consumers require information about where the animal was born, bred and slaughtered, and cattle should be identified and registered so that their traceability can be guaranteed.
The Commission must be far more vigorous than it has been so far in putting the screws on those countries which have not established databases, so ensuring that the countries concerned become fully operational in this respect.
The issue is also one of credibility when it comes to implementing joint resolutions in all Member States.
It is also about citizens' confidence and belief that food quality is everything it should be.
A bit of drive needs to be shown, and no exceptions should be made in the case of cattle which graze in the mountains.
Where registration is required, what, in any case, is the difference between cattle which graze in the mountains and those which graze in valleys or in fields?
I am in favour of beef being labelled with the name of the country or countries it comes from and I am strongly against introducing a common EU label from which consumers cannot see which countries are involved.
The purpose of the regulation in question must be to achieve a situation in which consumers have confidence in meat from all EU countries.
Until this is a reality, consumers need to know precisely which country their meat comes from.
I have tabled an amendment to the effect that the slaughterhouse' s authorisation number should not be shown on the label.
In this way, I wished to ensure that small and medium-sized slaughterhouses could continue to supply meat to butchers.
The authorisation number does not provide the consumer with any useful information and has no bearing upon traceability.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by thanking everyone who has worked so constructively on this report.
The compulsory registration system for bovine animals due to enter into force is the sine qua non for a reasonable beef labelling system.
As a farmer, I am concerned that every consumer should be able to trace where his schnitzel has come from.
All farmers are proud of the quality of their products and it is therefore in the farmers' interests for everyone to know whom they have to thank for their extremely safe and healthy food.
Such a system must be practicable if it is to achieve its objective.
We must take account of how the procedures will be applied in practice.
Because of the varying topography of Europe, its farmers must apply different working and production methods.
Take the example of summer pasturing in the Alps.
As you know, every spring a total of 400 000 cattle are driven on to the Alps in Italy, Austria and Germany, where they remain for the summer, i.e. for about three months.
Consideration must be given to the pasturing lists which are already in use and which take account of this situation in order to avoid forcing additional unnecessary administrative costs on farmers.
As we have said, traceability must be guaranteed in all cases.
But the regulation must be adapted to actual and local circumstances if it is to be seen as anything other than EU harassment, which merely triggers abuse and if it is to gain acceptance among the people.
I therefore hope that proposed Amendment No 19 to Article 7(1) second indent will be adopted by the entire House.
It has already been adopted by the Committee on the Environment and in the Committee on Agriculture.
Mr President, the discussion on labelling beef is quite loaded.
An important question is whether the "Origin: EU" label should be permitted as an added option.
The Commission thinks it should.
Many in Parliament believe that it is the country of origin that should be on the label.
The background to this is the food crises.
I could not agree more that beef should be completely traceable and that this should be the case as soon as possible.
I also understand that consumers increasingly want information on the country of origin or region of origin concerning their food.
This is often a matter of taste.
Furthermore, I agree with the analysis that the "Origin: EU" label could be abused by countries where food safety is not regulated.
But I do not advocate scrapping the option of including "Origin: EU" on the label either.
In my opinion, we should choose another approach.
We need to prescribe conditions for the use of the "Origin: EU" label.
One condition, for example, could be that the identification and registration system must be fully implemented and observed.
There are, of course, other means of enforcing compliance, but this method is far more direct.
Parliament has to keep an eye on compliance with the directives it produces.
This approach has the added advantage that the "Origin: EU" label has a positive ring to it.
Rather than being a cover-up for countries where food quality needs to be regulated, the "Origin: EU" label is thus a quality guarantee.
If the producer prefers to indicate the country of origin nonetheless, this is possible too.
There are a number of additional arguments as to why "Origin: EU" labelling should be possible.
For example, the meat industry and retail trade have raised all kinds of practical objections and pointed at the red tape which too detailed information would entail.
I will not spend any time on this argument, as it is not of key importance, in my opinion.
However, I would like to ask your attention for a question of principle.
The internal market is a large entity.
The principle of mutual recognition is fundamental.
Mutual recognition requires trust, and trust requires common standards, especially in the case of food safety.
If we prohibit the use of the "Origin: EU" label, we would be resigning ourselves to a kind of re-nationalisation of the internal market.
We would then be accepting that we have more confidence in certain countries than others and this is a sign of little faith in our own food safety policy.
This is unacceptable in my view.
All EU Member States need to guarantee safe meat.
"Origin: EU" is then a symbol for quality and I therefore advocate backing Amendments Nos 60 and 61.
Mr President, Commissioner, in my view, at present this is not a matter of confidence in the safety of food alone: it is very important that we also look to the near future.
We must put our own house, our own part of the world, in order.
The EU is expanding eastward, and we all know the capacity and volume of meat and beef production there, for example.
This should also alert them to the fact that they must now start to put their own affairs in order, so that they can adapt to the model that exists here.
If we are not ready, how can we expect others to be?
For this reason, labelling must be kept very simple: the labels must show the country of origin, and, if one wishes, the region of production.
But a label showing the country of origin of a product is very important to us, particularly if we want consumers to have confidence in food safety in the future.
Mr President, Commissioner, the beef industry has signed a contract with public opinion, based on the transparency claimed and, I might even say, demanded by the citizen.
Today, this transparency is applicable, within the beef industry, to two different but indissociable areas: BSE and labelling.
France is stepping up its precautionary measures for specified at-risk materials and is implementing an extensive protocol to evaluate ESB tests on bovine animals.
Tomorrow, the European Union is preparing to outline a test programme for all Member States.
In this context, consumers would not understand the delays in the matter of labelling.
I am therefore particularly concerned to ensure that the operators in this industry are not confronted with a legal vacuum which would lead public opinion, quite legitimately, to wonder whether there is a real desire for greater transparency.
How else is it possible to explain the fact that at European level we have managed to obtain an agreement on chocolate but that we are unable to meet the deadlines we set ourselves in an area as sensitive and important as beef.
Let us make no mistake as to what is at issue here.
I am convinced that the subject of beef labelling is no mere technical issue.
I should like to point out that if labelling is of such great importance to consumers it is because it is their guarantee that product traceability has been tightened up, that the operators in the industry and also the European and national public authorities have become more accountable, and that control systems have been improved.
Finally, what our fellow citizens are demanding is the right to information.
This right to be informed is the natural counterpart to the development of trade and the proper exercise of competition.
By virtue of the transparency it conveys, labelling makes it possible to improve the freedom of movement of beef, providing assurances to consumers and guaranteeing their freedom to make an informed choice.
In the beef sector, improving consumer information through labelling represents a strong message from Europe to its trading partners: it demonstrates its intention, over and above product health safety, to safeguard the consumer' s freedom of choice.
Mr President, I agree with the many speakers before me that what we need more than anything at the moment is a system which enables traceability at all stages of production.
Fortunately, integral chain control (ICC) is already well-known in many countries.
In my opinion, this is not related to national borders.
If certain conditions are met - and I would like to refer to Amendments Nos 60 and 61 concerning the inspection of BSE, as others have done so before me - then the designation "Origin: EU" is sufficient as far as I am concerned.
This does not preclude all the other information being added to the label on a voluntary basis.
Mentioning the relevant country, region, town, village, and so on and so forth, is fine but let the consumer decide where he wants to buy the product.
But it should not be an EU stipulation.
If this were to be the case, then this would be a re-nationalisation of Europe' s common market in a sense, and that would be a retrograde step.
Mr President, I am very disappointed at the delay, though I am delighted now that we are going to have clear compulsory labelling.
I hope this will restore consumer confidence in beef, especially after the BSE crisis.
I would like to see not only the country but also the region of origin on the label.
I represent the West Midlands which has some of the best beef in the world - Herefordshire beef and Shropshire beef.
I should like to see that go on the label.
I would oppose very strongly the idea that "EU" should be on the label and not the country and region of origin.
I am also concerned about some of the words that might go on the label.
One of those words is "slaughtered".
That will not help with consumer confidence and might put some of the consumers off if they actually see where the animal was "slaughtered".
I wish we could find a new word for it.
Generally speaking, I am delighted that at last we are going to have clear labelling and, as I said, I want it to be the country and region of origin.
Mr President, I wish to begin by saying that I welcome the report.
A European Union-wide identification system for cattle is long overdue.
The system is certainly very necessary, if nothing else than to achieve a level playing field within the European Union and to ensure that all countries reach the same standards.
I want to sound a note of caution.
I come from an area in Northern Ireland that has a standard of identification and traceability which is as good as any ever will be.
No system is a hundred per cent perfect, so do not think you can bring that about.
There will always be people out to abuse the system.
That has been the case for centuries - and will continue.
You can only try to develop the best possible system of traceability.
I have a number of concerns.
The first is: who pays?
The problem to date has been, in my experience in Northern Ireland, that the consumer has borne the brunt of the cost of the extra traceability, and this has been substantial.
It has not been borne by the retailer.
The consumer will perhaps ultimately pay - but he or she may not.
From that point of view it is expensive for those people.
I have one further question of the Commission.
Is it wise to renationalise the beef market?
Or even to regionalise it within countries.
I seriously question that point.
We have fought for years within the European Union to achieve a single market and now we are renationalising that market.
I challenge the Commission tonight to answer that question.
Is this a wise move?
Let us not look to the short term, let us look to the long term, because the long term is the challenge - not five years but ten, fifteen years from now.
What is going to be the situation on the beef market?
As I said, in Northern Ireland we have full traceability and our measures go beyond the regulations.
I have to say to the Commission, and to producers in other Member States, that my producers have to date not seen any financial benefit from that which they have suffered.
The proposal, as Mr Goodwill has said, has two important aims.
First to ensure the traceability of beef, second to allow consumers to make a fully informed choice.
Unfortunately, although the two aims are compatible, there is some tension between them where the details of the regulation are concerned.
This is particularly the case in relation to Article 13 and Article 13(2) primarily serving the first and Article 13(5) the second aim.
Amendments Nos 26 and 28 to 13(5) therefore seemed rather confused - one seeking less and one seeking more detailed information for consumers.
For this reason, whatever the final form of Article 13, I regard Amendments Nos 15 and 29 as being of the first importance.
Amendment 29 in particular will allow areas of the EU that are justifiably proud of the quality of their product to identify it as such.
For my own constituency of course, Aberdeen Angus beef is already justly renowned throughout the world but I am sure the same is true for other regions in the rest of the UK and other Member States.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Papayannakis, and Mr Kindermann, the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture, for their constructive contributions to the debate on the draft regulation under discussion.
A whole series of amendments to the Commission proposal have been tabled, 44 of which were accepted by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection on 22 March.
A further 18 proposed amendments were subsequently submitted for this plenary sitting.
I should like to start with the Commission' s views on the first 44 proposals.
The Commission is able to accept 18 of them.
This includes proposed amendments which are accepted in full or in part and amendments which require minor editorial changes.
In another 12 proposed amendments I can see what your concerns are but the Commission is unable to accept these amendments.
However, I shall ensure that the Council is informed of your point of view.
This applies, for example, to proposed Amendment No 20.
A number of the proposed amendments which the Commission is able to accept, such as Amendments Nos 2, 3, 4, 18 and 19 first part, and 21, 33, 35 and 42 tighten up the wording.
I also accept proposed Amendment No 19, second part, which makes provision for a simplification for cattle pastured on the Alps in the summer.
The improvements to the definition of labelling are also acceptable.
The same applies to the information to be included on the label and to the interpretation of the concept of origin.
I am therefore prepared to accept proposed Amendments Nos 22 and 23, insofar as they concern labelling, and the parts of proposed Amendments Nos 25, 26 and 28 calling for information on individual regions to be scrapped.
As we are all concerned that the labelling system should be introduced as quickly as possible, I welcome proposed Amendment No 39 reducing the deadline set for the Member States to appoint the competent authorities.
Finally, proposed Amendment No 44, under which the regulation would enter into force on 1 September 2000 heads in exactly the same direction.
I think the new recital suggested in proposed Amendment No 6, whereby Member States must ensure that their databases are operational as quickly as possible, is also a good idea.
I am also able to accept the parts of proposed Amendments Nos 25, 26 and 28 making information on the region optional, whereby I assume, if no decision is made to the contrary, that this information will come under the voluntary system.
As I too take the view that the possibility of confusion with protected geographical indications governed by Regulation 2081/92 must be excluded, I agree unreservedly with the new recital in proposed Amendment No 15.
Nonetheless, we must still investigate how the stated objective is to be reached, whereby I envisage a more comprehensive solution than that suggested in proposed Amendment No 29.
The question of when compulsory indications of origin need to be introduced is an important point.
As the obligation to enter the place of birth and all stopovers in the animal passport and database has only been introduced for animals born on or after 1 January 1998, it will be difficult to trace the complete origin of bovine animals over the next five years.
According to our calculations, this problem will apply to just under half the beef produced from 2003 onwards, which is why I have reservations about introducing compulsory indications of origin earlier or even, as suggested in proposed Amendment No 26, as early as 1 September 2001.
I would point out in this respect that the Committee on Agriculture has recommended that they be introduced on 1 January 2002.
I also note that you insist that indications of origin must state the country, even if this means listing several countries on the label.
I am sorry that you find the simplified indication "Produced in the European Union" unacceptable, despite the fact that it is in keeping with the principles of the internal market.
As far as labelling of minced meat is concerned, we must bear in mind that the production of minced meat, for example of hamburgers, is a continuous process.
The obligation to provide a complete indication of origin for this meat would therefore give rise to technical problems and may well bring the entire intra-Community trade in processed meat to a virtual standstill.
I would therefore suggest that you reconsider the simplified labelling system.
The proposed labelling regulation makes provision for the possibility of combining animals in groups rather than entering each individual animal with producers who take the trouble to guarantee the traceability of each individual animal given an incentive in the form of a special logo.
I must admit that I do not fully understand why you demand in proposed Amendments Nos 14 and 31 that we should let go of the only instrument which guarantees real and complete traceability.
As far as the Commission' s powers to react to unusual and unforeseen circumstances are concerned, I am, unfortunately, unable to accept proposed Amendments Nos 16 and 38 because they prevent a practicable solution.
Finally, I think it is premature to commit ourselves to extending the labelling system to processed products containing beef, as suggested in proposed Amendment No 40.
Let us gain some experience with the system being proposed now and then we can consider this idea at a later date.
As far as the proposed amendments tabled subsequently at the end of last week are concerned, I have already explained in connection with proposed Amendments Nos 45 and 46 that the Commission agrees with you that the first stage of the compulsory system should start on 1 September this year.
If proposed Amendment No 44 is accepted, the regulation automatically enters into force on this date.
Proposed Amendments Nos 45 and 46 are therefore superfluous for technical reasons.
As far as proposed Amendment No 47 is concerned, I should like to advise against continuing the national compulsory beef identification system as soon as the full EU system has been introduced.
In the end we would have 15 different national systems, which runs completely counter to the internal market.
Proposed Amendment No 48 refers to information on the use of antibiotics or stimulants and to fattening methods.
This idea may look simple on paper, but it is in fact extremely complicated to administer and, more importantly, to control.
In addition, there is no definition of the various rearing methods and every animal will certainly be fed using various methods, rather than one and the same method, during its lifetime.
As far as medication is concerned, it would be much better to maintain our high veterinary standards, thereby guaranteeing that only safe beef reaches the market.
The Commission would therefore prefer not to adopt this proposal.
As far as the voluntary system is concerned, which is to be set up alongside the new compulsory system in order to include all the information which is not being made compulsory, the Commission can accept two of the four amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment, namely proposals 33 and 35.
It is obvious from the vote in committee that Parliament is not in favour of amending the Commission' s basic attempt to simplify the approval procedure.
However, I see that a total of nine new proposed amendments have been tabled for this plenary sitting which were not adopted by the Committee on the Environment.
These amendments seek to re-introduce a formal approval procedure for voluntary information on labels.
Let me assure you that such amendments do not cause any particular problem because their purpose is to reinforce the administrative procedure.
For the rest, recent discussions in the Council have gone in the same direction.
I am therefore convinced that these proposed amendments will be taken on board by the Council.
From now on, the Commission will be acting as go-between between the two decision-making institutions on this matter.
With just over three months, we do not have much time left for a final decision.
Given the speed with which you have worked here in Parliament, hopefully the Council will decide on its common position as quickly as possible.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 12.10 a.m.)