# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
.
(EL) Mr President, I see from the Minutes that the question and answer exchange during question time with Minister Moscovici has been wrongly recorded.
The Minutes state, on page 14, in the Greek version at least: "Question 16 by Mr Ìarinos: Violations of Cypriot airspace by Turkish fighter-planes.
Mr Moscovici replied to the question and to Mr Marino's supplementary question and Mr Zacharakis then intervened" .
I should like to point out that in the morning the President of the French Republic, Mr Chirac, gave the impression, by appearing here in person and from what he said in his speech, that under the French presidency there would be closer, more systematic cooperation between the European Parliament and the presidency; however, in the afternoon, the first minister of the presidency to appear and work with us, the former MEP Mr Moscovici, did exactly the opposite.
Apart from the fact that he was curt with us, he gave I think almost all my fellow members more or less one-word replies or claimed that he had replied, although he did indeed reply to the written question which I had submitted.
But when I then submitted a second question as a result of yesterday morning's debate on the incursion of the Turkish occupying army into another part of Cyprus, instead of replying on the issue which I had put to him, he said "I have already replied" .
Mr Zacharakis then intervened with two questions and Mr Moscovici barely bothered to stand up and did not bother to reply.
I should like to ask, first, if a minister or commissioner questioned here is able not only to refuse to reply but to do so in a completely disdainful manner and if we are supposed to take "I have already replied" as an answer, when they have not done so.
The same happened to other fellow members who, if they are present here, can confirm this.
I should like a reply on this and I should like the Minutes to be corrected.
Mr Marinos, we have taken note of your view here and it will also be included in the Minutes.
It is true that it would be opportune to review the Question Time procedures from time to time.
I shall look into this.
I too should like to request that the Minutes be corrected because, as they stand, they are not an accurate record of what happened during the sitting.
I should like the Minutes to record that I submitted two specific questions to Mr Moscovici and that he did not reply.
Of course, following on from what Mr Ìarinos said and over and above the disdainful manner adopted by Mr Moscovici, who failed to honour traditional French courtesy, even though Parliament is sitting on French territory, what I note and conclude from his silence, and it would be a good idea to bring this to the attention of the Greek Government, is that the French Government secretly intends to oppose the accession of Cyprus to the European Union and to promote the accession of Turkey, even if it does violate human rights and the basic principles of international law.
Mr Zacharakis, we will not be holding the political debate on this issue here.
Mr Moscovici took the floor yesterday and we will check whether this was included correctly in the Minutes.
Mr President, I wish to raise once again the point I raised on Monday and again yesterday with regard to Mr Helmer's comments in this House.
Can I say that I am surprised that on two occasions now I have asked Mr Helmer to comment on the item about the Queen of the United Kingdom supporting the euro, and so far he has failed to do.
Can I say to this House that I understand this must be the first time that Mr Helmer has been speechless.
(The Minutes were approved)
Mr President, according to our information, Mrs Stauner withdrew the explanatory statement in the relevant committee yesterday, but despite that, it has been distributed today.
I would just like to ask you, Mr President, to establish if this statement was withdrawn by the rapporteur or not.
If it was, then it should not be distributed as an official document.
I shall enquire at the services into the exact course of events.
The fact of the matter is that yesterday evening, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, I withdrew this explanatory statement.
I asked the secretariat of the Committee on Budgetary Control to draft a letter to that effect.
Because we were sitting in the evening, that was no longer possible.
I assume that if I go to my office now, I will find the letter there and can sign it so that we can proceed accordingly.
Mr President, I wanted to bring up an issue which should be of great concern to this Parliament, and in particular to Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Budgetary Control.
A serious abuse of European law and the Statute of the European Investment Bank is taking place in my own country.
Member States are not authorised under EC law to propose or nominate their own nationals directly to the Board of Governors for the position of Vice-President of the EIB, and to do so is a clear violation of the Statute of the European Investment Bank.
The task of making the nominations and appointment is reserved exclusively to a Board of Directors of the Bank, which is a quite separate body.
The situation in Ireland is quite contrary to this principle.
The Irish government have, in contravention of the law, nominated a person who not only has no experience of economic or financial affairs, but is furthermore a disgraced supreme court judge who was forced to resign before he was impeached by the Irish parliament.
This issue is now before the courts in Ireland.
This is an extremely important matter for this Parliament, which is concerned because the European Union provides Guarantee Funds to the EIB.
Parliament must take notice of this, because if we allow Member States to contravene the law in this way it has serious implications for the European Union as a whole.
I would ask the President if he could instruct the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Budgetary Control to look into this issue, because it should be dealt with very quickly.
It could set a very bad precedent for the future for other Member States and for nominations to this body.
Mrs McKenna, I agree that it would be beneficial if you, should you so wish, instructed the relevant Committee.
Mr President, I would like to put a question to Parliament.
Yesterday, further hundreds of acres of forest were destroyed by fire in Italy, endangering the outskirts of Rome and the lives of European citizens as well.
A similar incident occurred a few days ago in France, on the Italian border.
These acts of arson, which endanger and destroy hundreds upon hundreds of acres of European forest, occur frequently during the summer in the Mediterranean European countries, with harmful repercussions for the economy and the tourist industry.
It is vital that Parliament intervenes, but a decisive intervention on the part of the Commission and the Council is also essential when we consider that the possibility of setting up a European civil protection service was even discussed at the Feira Council.
These fires represent a considerable hazard, damaging the forest stand and the environment throughout the European Union, but, most importantly, the economic effect on our endeavours to boost employment in the tourism industry in all the countries of the Mediterranean area will be extremely serious.
Mr Tajani, these are indeed recurring themes unfortunately, and are a constant concern within Parliament.
They are very sad happenings indeed.
ECB annual report
The next item is the report by Mr Radwan (A5-0169/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the 1999 Annual Report of the European Central Bank [C5-0195/2000 - 2000/2118(COS)].
Mr President, one and a half years have passed since the euro came into existence and the ECB took over the responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy.
During this period the euro system, that is the 11 national central banks and the ECB, had to prove its ability to implement the conceptual framework that had been thoroughly prepared during the previous years.
It has also had to prove its ability to achieve the goals conferred upon it by the Treaty establishing the European Community.
Looking back, these challenges have been met from both a policy and an operational point of view.
Therefore I have great pleasure today in presenting the Second Annual Report of the ECB.
It gives an account of the activities of the euro system during 1999 and at the beginning of this year.
I consider today's presentation to be an important demonstration of the ECB's accountability vis-à-vis the European Parliament, supplementing the exchanges of views held in your Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, in which I participate on a quarterly basis.
In addition to this regular dialogue, other members of the Executive Board of the ECB have attended committee meetings on several occasions in order to present a report drawn up under the responsibility of the ECB and to participate in exchanges of views on various issues.
In view of the large range of topics included in the Annual Report it will clearly be impossible to address all of them at our meeting today.
Therefore I shall concentrate on some of the most pertinent issues, which have also been raised in the resolution drafted by your Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
Reviewing the first year of the existence of the single currency, I should like to start by reporting that the primary objective of the ECB, that is the maintenance of price stability, has been achieved.
Indeed, with consumer prices in the euro area increasing by just 1.1% in 1999, inflation has reached one of the lowest levels in the past 50 years.
In line with its mandate, the ECB remains vigilant regarding risks to price stability, as evidenced by its monetary policy decisions in order to nip inflationary pressures in the bud before they materialise rather than to react once price stability is already in jeopardy.
The euro system will continue to pursue this forward-looking strategy in order to maintain an environment of stable prices, which is also conducive to sustained economic growth and job creation in the euro area.
I share the analysis of your motion for a resolution that governments should take advantage of the favourable economic environment in order to step up the efforts directed towards consolidating budgets and reducing public debt and go beyond the objectives laid down in the stability programmes.
At the same time, structural reforms in the labour product and capital markets should be pursued vigorously.
The comprehensive implementation of this policy agenda will contribute to subduing inflationary pressures and thereby support the ECB in accomplishing its tasks.
In your motion for a resolution, you also briefly address the potential implications of a 'new economy' .
I should therefore like to comment on the possible emergence of a new economy in the euro area.
Let me start by noting that there are various definitions of the new economy.
In my view, the most useful definition is that which characterises the new economy as a phenomenon which increases the growth rate of productivity over an extended period of time.
There is some evidence, although this is not uncontroversial, that a new economy is emerging in the United States.
By contrast, it is difficult as yet to find clear evidence of a new economy in the euro area.
Of course, there is a need to monitor developments further, with the emphasis on identifying new economic trends and potential structural breaks in traditional economic relationships as early as possible.
In any case it is important to stress that for the euro area the achievement of more flexible markets is a prerequisite if the potential gains from new technologies are to be realised in the form of substantially higher productivity growth.
We recognise that a crucial feature of the potential emergence of a new economy is increased uncertainty, particularly as regards the evolution of the production potential and the reliability of indicators which are derived from it, such as estimates of the output gap.
In this respect, the euro systems monetary policy framework is well equipped to cope with such uncertainties.
It provides the flexibility necessary to address changes in the economic structure with the aim of maintaining price stability over the medium term.
By relying on two pillars, the ECB strategy explicitly acknowledges uncertainty regarding the structure of the economy and the transmission of monetary policy within the economy.
In the context of this discussion, some observers have urged the ECB to keep interest rates low in view of the new economy.
In response, let me emphasise the following point: the new economy is primarily a supply side story.
An inappropriately lax monetary policy would not create better conditions for the emergence of a new economy.
On the contrary, by jeopardising the maintenance of price stability, such a policy could seriously endanger the current ability of the ECB.
It would thereby undermine confidence, raise risk premia in interest rates and damage the prospects for economic growth and job creation.
It is for precisely this reason that the ECB will, in line with its mandate, continue to preserve price stability in the euro area.
This ensures that monetary policy makes its full contribution to overall economic welfare while also providing an environment in which the new economy, should one emerge, will be able to flourish.
I should now like to turn to another issue, which has been frequently discussed within the framework of our regular dialogue, namely the issue of transparency.
I have already referred to the regular dialogue between European Parliament and the ECB, the transcripts of which are published on the websites of our institutions.
Moreover, at the press conferences held after the first meeting of the governing council every month, I present the ECB's assessment of the economic environment underpinning our monetary policy decisions.
You will also be aware of the broad variety of ECB publications, in particular our monthly bulletin, and numerous press releases issued and speeches made by members of the executive board of the ECB.
These are also as a rule made available to the public via the ECB's website.
This wide range of communication tools, in which the arguments both for and against a decision are presented, is in substance similar to summary minutes.
It should also be borne in mind that through regular press conferences and the rapid publication of the transcripts of the questions and answers on the ECB website detailed information about the governing council's reasoning is made available very shortly after the meetings.
We therefore avoid the delays that are inherent in the publication of all forms of official minutes.
We always take our decisions from a euro area-wide perspective.
This is fundamental to the conduct of a truly single monetary policy.
The publication of ECB reports on the economic developments of individual euro area Member States, as is suggested in your motion for a resolution, has to be considered against this background.
We clearly do not want to blur the ECB's focus on the euro area as a whole.
The resolution also calls for the publication of macroeconomic forecasts by the ECB.
Let me reassure you that preparations for publication continue in earnest.
I still envisage that publication of forecasts will commence towards the end of 2000, in line with the statement I made last September at the European Parliament's plenary session on the previous ECB annual report.
I should like, however, to sound a note of caution.
Forecasts are only one input into the decisions of the governing council.
Forecast publication by the ECB should not be viewed as a panacea which will meet all the communication challenges faced by the ECB as a new institution in a testing multilingual and multinational environment.
Forecasts themselves have important shortcomings.
For example they are surrounded by considerable uncertainty and they may quickly become outdated if the external environment changes.
We are aware of these shortcomings.
Therefore, as is made clear in the ECB's monetary policy strategy, monetary policy decisions cannot be made only on the basis of a central inflation forecast.
It is the comprehensive analysis of the monetary and macroeconomic situation and the economic disturbances affecting the euro area economy which is the relevant input to forward-looking policy decisions.
The ECB's approach to communication has always placed a premium on honesty.
To continue in this vein it is my view that we must publish forecasts in a manner which accurately reflects their limited role in policy decisions and their inherent uncertainties.
Any other approach would not be transparent and would therefore be potentially misleading.
I now turn to a related issue, namely the publication of the ECB's economic and econometric models.
I should make it clear that the ECB does not rely on a single econometric model but uses an extensive set of models.
The results obtained from the models are critically evaluated, using expert judgement.
Policy-makers use analysis undertaken using models developed by the ECB staff, in some cases with input from staff of national central banks, as one input among others into their policy assessments and decisions.
The ECB has established a working paper series where technical economic research, produced inter alia under the responsibility of ECB staff, can be reviewed and assessed by the public and external professional experts.
The respective authors are responsible for the content of these papers.
Therefore they do not necessarily reflect the view of the ECB or of the Eurosystem.
Through this and other channels there is a professional dialogue and exchange of views between ECB staff and many outside experts, which is of mutual benefit.
Several econometric models have already been published in the working paper series of the ECB.
For example, an econometric study of the demand for M3 in the euro area, conducted by ECB staff, was published in September 1999.
Other models will be published in the near future.
An area-wide model used at the ECB, which models the aggregate behaviour of the euro area economy, will be published in this working paper series by ECB staff, probably at the end of this year or early next year.
I should now like to turn to the contribution of the ESCB, the European System of Central Banks, to the maintenance of financial stability and to prudential supervision.
In this regard I should like to mention the Banking Supervision Committee which is promoting cooperation between the ECB, the national central banks and the supervisory authorities of the 15 Member States.
The main focus of activity of the Banking Supervision Committee is the analysis of structural developments and the monitoring of potential vulnerabilities in the banking sector.
The Banking Supervision Committee also provides the forum for the exchange of relevant information between the euro system and the supervisory authorities.
Finally, this committee may also act as a forum for supervisory cooperation not related to the tasks of the Eurosystem.
The need for multilateral cooperation amongst banking supervisors has increased since the establishment of Economic and Monetary Union, for two reasons.
Firstly, EMU has introduced an unprecedented geographical separation between the area of jurisdiction of monetary policy and that of prudential supervision.
Secondly, the introduction of the euro itself has fostered further integration of the banking and financial sector.
Against this background I perceive the Banking Supervision Committee as the main forum in which multilateral cooperation amongst banking supervisors can be enhanced.
Regarding the issue of cross-border retail payments, which has been raised by the European Parliament on various occasions, I recall that in September 1999 the ECB published a report entitled Improving Retail Cross-border Payment Systems - the Eurosystem's View.
The report called on the banking sector to provide substantially improved services by 2002.
Since the publication of that report the banking sector has subscribed to the Eurosystem's objectives in principle.
It has begun to cooperate closely with the Eurosystem in order to identify the practical impediments to the achievement of these objectives and in order to investigate and, where possible, agree on effective solutions.
I fully share the European Parliament's concern that very little progress has been visible to customers.
However, there are strong indications that banks are making considerable efforts to prepare the ground for a more efficient handling of cross-border credit transfers.
In particular, progress is under way in the areas of standardisation and simplification of the balance of payments reporting requirements.
The ECB will prepare a further progress report by this autumn in which it will update its assessment.
The Eurosystem would prefer to maintain its present stance of cooperation but will if necessary step up the pressure on the banking sector.
However, it would be unrealistic to expect the service level for cross-border payments to reach that of domestic payments in all respects by 2002.
I emphasise again that the introduction of the euro has indeed been a milestone in the ongoing process of European integration.
The ECB, as the guardian of the single currency, will continue to pursue its stability-oriented monetary policy in order to fulfil its mandate and to deliver the policy results that European citizens rightly expect.
Mr President, Mr Duisenberg, ladies and gentlemen, the 1999 report before us from the ECB is both the first ECB report for a full year and also the first report since the introduction of the euro.
As has already been mentioned, the stage we are now at is that the euro has already been introduced, but the public will only have the bank notes in their hands on 1 January 2002.
Mr Karas will be dealing with that point in detail later on.
However, it is important for us to win the confidence of the public by the time the euro notes are introduced.
The increase in consumer prices over the last year of just over 1%, that is well within the ECB target of 2%, provides a good foundation for this.
Mr Duisenberg, I would like to sincerely congratulate both the ECB and you personally on that.
Because of your stability-oriented policy, the countries in the euro area can boast a historically low level of price inflation.
If the policies of the ECB are to be successful, it must be politically independent.
This does not mean that there is no accountability, but rather that a high level of information and transparency is required.
I would like to sound a positive note by mentioning the European Central Bank' s regular reports to Parliament' s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, as well as the information published on the Internet, which you have already been referred to.
But a young institution like the ECB has to win the confidence not only of the financial markets but also of the public.
I therefore very much welcomed the fact that you addressed the public direct in May, and I think that should happen more regularly.
The public is being flooded with information about the euro and I think that the information is not always eye-catching and informative.
We need to counter that trend here today.
The policy needs to be presented so it can be easily understood, and that would help to win people over to the euro.
At the same time, a low inflation rate is a policy for the economically disadvantaged in our society.
That is why it is important for the ECB to tailor its decisions to primary objectives.
For example, as I see it, we cannot accept an inflation rate of over 3.3% simply because it makes it easier to achieve secondary objectives such as economic growth and employment policy.
Those who are disadvantaged suffer particularly from creeping inflation, which I therefore regard as being socially unacceptable.
The areas of economic growth and employment are primarily a matter for the Member States.
This is exactly the reason for part of the weak external value of the euro.
We need to make greater progress with reforms such as flexible labour markets, restructuring social security systems and liberalising financial markets if we are also to make the euro area more attractive as a financial centre and as a centre for investment.
Mere declarations that we want to become number one in the world economy, like the one made at the Lisbon Summit, are not enough.
The Member States have got to take action themselves here.
That is why the objective of debt reduction and balanced budgets needs to be achieved as quickly as possible.
But it is also important for the European Central Bank not to completely forget about the external value of the euro.
On the one hand there is a risk of higher prices, of importing inflation, which is at present being aggravated by higher oil prices of course.
On the other hand, and this brings me back to the subject of 'information and the citizen' , many people see the external value of the euro as an indicator of how stable it is.
With this in mind we must make sure that this factor alone, external value, does not weaken confidence in the euro.
I accordingly welcome the most recent correction in interest rates, that is the increase by 50 base points, as a step towards a medium-term monetary policy with a view to creating confidence and calm both in the financial markets and amongst the public.
Another sign in the eyes of the public that the euro is a good thing would be a marked reduction in charges for cross-border payment transactions, which you have already mentioned.
In this case I believe it is important for the banks to set their sights far higher and make more rapid progress.
For banks simply to refer to the standardisation of systems is not enough here.
The introduction of the euro did not come overnight and it was not a surprise.
I myself come from the world of information and communications technology.
I know that if you put a subject right at the top of your agenda and really put some pressure on, you can get something done more quickly.
I therefore call on you to get the European Central Bank to add to this pressure, so that our banks make greater efforts in this field.
Lastly, I would like to talk about the imminent eastward enlargement of the European Union.
First, I would like to make it clear that I am not talking about a treaty amendment, as was now and again suggested during the debate.
What I have in mind is to examine the process ahead of us.
No one is disputing that there is a three-stage process, from EU membership, to participation in the exchange-rate mechanism, and finally to full membership.
However, a minimum level of economic convergence is needed to achieve this, and also to create a level playing field for the applicant countries and the present EU Member States.
It is important not only to observe the criteria, but also to allow some leeway with regard to this compliance with the criteria.
We cannot allow decisions that we have made in the past to keep tying our hands when it comes to the present and future process, over a period of five to ten years.
We must maintain this process - this scope for interpretation.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all my colleagues and the committee secretariat very sincerely for their support with this report.
Mr President, Mr Duisenberg, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to congratulate our rapporteur, Mr Radwan, on the excellent report he has presented here.
And I would like to thank you, Mr Duisenberg, very sincerely for your report as President of the European Central Bank.
The thing that has particularly agitated the public during the first 18 months of the euro' s existence has been the exchange rate against the dollar.
The ECB itself eventually had to pay some attention to this question, because there started to be a risk that imported inflation would become a reality here in Europe.
What caused this initial drop in the exchange rate?
We have to recognise that the international financial markets noticed that we in Europe have been slow in tackling some of the structural reforms needed.
Secondly, the euro is a new currency.
A new currency has to win the confidence that other currencies already enjoy.
Thirdly, there was a not inconsiderable gap between our interest rates and those in the United States, which meant that investors felt more inclined to invest in the United States than in Europe.
It also has to be recognised that the ECB' s policy has very consistently been different from that of the US Federal Reserve Bank.
In this case, the guidelines Mr Duisenberg has been operating under are not the same as Mr Greenspan' s.
For example, in the United States the inflation rate has topped 3% in recent months, without the Federal Reserve Bank taking any special countermeasures.
Over here, the upper limit is set at 2%, and for very good reasons.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr Duisenberg, on having pursued a very consistent stability policy, and on having given a very clear signal when the ECB made its most recent decision on interest rates.
You spoke just now about new technology, about the new economy.
The objective of the European Central Bank will remain the same, even with the new economy, and that is to maintain price stability.
Mr President, Commissioner Solbes Mira, President Duisenberg, ladies and gentlemen, I should like, if I may, to deal swiftly with various questions in relation to the work of the European Central Bank.
First, the 1999 annual report.
I think we need to acknowledge that the Central Bank did a good job in 1999: inflation remained very low, providing the euro with a high degree of stability, and our citizens' purchasing power remained the same.
We should also, I think, congratulate President Duisenberg and his team for the smooth introduction of the euro as bank money.
I think that was an achievement which deserves to be highlighted.
As far as the current year is concerned, the figures are not quite as pleasing.
Inflation has risen again, driven by the increase in oil prices.
The Central Bank has responded by tightening credit terms, not that rates are currently overly high in Europe.
Nonetheless, the Central Bank's strategy has not always been completely clear or highly legible.
In fact, there have been a lot of copycat decisions between the European Central Bank and its big sister, the Federal Reserve in the United States.
When the Federal Reserve hikes its base rate by 25 points, the European Central Bank follows suit; when the Federal Reserve adds 50 points, the Central Bank does likewise a few weeks later.
But the situation in the United States is quite different from the situation in Europe and sometimes I get the impression that the European Central Bank is giving in slightly to market expectations and appeasing the markets with increases of 25 or 50 points and I worry somewhat when I read reports by financial analysts predicting increases of over 100 points by the end of the year.
Inflation is there, sure enough, Mr Duisenberg!
But I note that it is falling and I do not therefore think that waiting for the markets is the right approach.
You are there, Mr Duisenberg, to serve the entire European economy, not to serve the financial markets, and I must say that the European Central Bank has been most discreet so far on the subject of the blatant irrationality and permanent casino atmosphere of the financial markets.
I have just listened to a statement by Mr Issing, criticising the sheep-like behaviour of the financial markets, especially in connection with the relative weakness of the euro.
I think that this weakness is, indeed, completely relative and that we should not read too much into these fluctuations, even if they do relate to our economy.
I hope to see better coordination between European policies.
I want a stronger European economy, not in opposition to, but in cooperation with the Monetary Fund, on the understanding that each of them retains its freedom of decision and action.
Mr President, unfortunately I have run out of time and I would like to have said a great deal more, especially on enlargement.
Allow me to say just two words on Mr Radwan's comments.
Every country which is to join the European Union should be a member of the Economic and Monetary Union.
We want to apply the Treaty, but the whole Treaty and nothing but the Treaty.
My final word, Mr President, is this: if I had to write a report for Mr Duisenberg, it would say 'good, but could do better' .
Mr President, I would like to congratulate Mr Duisenberg on a successful year in running euro monetary policy.
Clearly what matters is internal price stability, and the external value of the euro is of much less significance.
Indeed that was one of the reasons for creating the euro in the first place: it was precisely to protect the European economy from the volatility of the foreign exchanges to which Mr Goebbels has just referred.
I am particularly pleased, too, that Mr Duisenberg has reiterated his promise to publish forecasts and econometric models, and I entirely understand his caveats.
I hope that when he publishes the macroeconometric model he will do so in a form which makes it available and easily usable by outside researchers, perhaps on CD-ROM.
However, in connection with Parliament's view of last year I would urge Mr Duisenberg to reconsider a formal framework for the publication of summary minutes.
As he said, much of the debate which happens within the Council is filtering out in the form of discussion within the monthly bulletin, but this is not the same as a regular report with a formal framework in which it is discussed.
That would help anchor expectations within the market, as well as fulfilling the important accountability mandate of the ECB.
It is also clearly crucial the ECB should look only at the euro zone as a whole in terms of its inflation and price stability objective.
It is essential to point out that different growth trends exist within the different national components of the euro zone economy, and that this implies different sustainable wage growth rates over time.
That is why it is important that there should be an overall discussion of what potential sustainable growth rates of wages are in each of the component parts of the euro zone economy, and why this will actually help deliver low inflation combined with low unemployment.
Those are the main points I would like to make.
I would also very much like to back Mr Goebbels' remarks about the importance of enlargement, namely that we should not have two standards - one for us and one for them.
I very much hope that we will continue to apply the criteria of the Treaty, no more and no less.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I do not intend to re-open with Mr Duisenberg the debate which we held in committee a while back.
The Group of the Greens totally disagrees with the policy of raising interest rates, which has been applied since the end of 1999.
We are as displeased by the second period of management by the Bank, starting in the last quarter of 1999, as we were satisfied with the first, not because the Bank overestimates the importance of variations in exchange rates against the dollar - it does in our view, but that is by the by - but because the debate on exchange rates obviously masks the Central Bank's aversion to growth and its serious underestimation of the potential rate of growth of the European Union.
Yes, there are difficulties with a rate of growth of 3% but these difficulties imply that there should be more, not less investment and, hence, lower not higher interest rates.
What I would like to stress today is the scandal that is the second part of paragraph 11 of the Radwan report.
To dare to say that the French 35-hour law is responsible for the fall in the euro because it has weakened European competitiveness overall is an intellectual lie, pure and simple.
It was after this law was announced that the Toyota factory - and many others - decided to open in France.
If the MEPs consider that the Toyota factory does not know what it is doing, that is their right; that these MEPs claim to suggest such absurd rules to national governments and European social policy, frankly, seems to us...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, the European Central Bank report under discussion covers 1999, its first year in operation following the start of the third stage of EMU and, for this very reason, the European Parliament's criticism of the European Central Bank's annual report should be even stricter and even more demanding.
The European Parliament is the only institution in the Community which is entitled to exercise any, albeit ex-post, control over the European Central Bank and its policy.
From this point of view, the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs does not meet the expectations of the citizens of Europe, in that it fully supports the policy of the European System of Central Banks and, on several counts, is going beyond that policy by calling for even greater liberalisation.
The claim that the international standing of the euro and its weakness against the dollar are due to delays in making the necessary structural changes at the expense of the job, goods and services markets and to delays in advancing on the public sector of the economy, dismantling employment relations and abolishing the labour, social and insurance rights of workers has caused a public outrage.
In its quest for much-vaunted monetary stability, which I consider to be its only duty, the policy of the European Central Bank has been highly contradictory; in pursuing a single objective, i.e. to control inflationary pressures, it has swung like a pendulum from one extreme to the other, with successive reductions and increases in the interest rate which, in the final analysis, have had acutely negative repercussions on growth in productivity and employment.
The workers paying the price for this seriously negative neo-liberal policy have no confidence in it, nor do they share the European Central Bank's ambition or the support given to its policy by the European Parliament, the other institutions of the European Union and the governments of the Member States.
The much-vaunted new economy will certainly not serve the interests of the workers.
In this sense, we oppose both the policy of the Bank and the support given to it by the European Parliament.
Mr President, I should like to thank Mr Radwan for the quality of his report on the first financial year of the Central Bank since the introduction of the euro.
His efforts are commendable.
One senses a diffuse anxiety seeping through his report which contrasts happily with the steadfast optimism of the various advocates of the euro, together with reaffirmation - somewhat timid but reaffirmation nonetheless - of a few basic principles, all of which are superfluous.
Mr Radwan will go down in history for having reminded us that the independence of the Central Bank is not to be equated with accountability but, on the contrary, implies maximum transparency, mainly in order to make up, he should have added, for its lack of legitimacy.
Alas, Mr Radwan, you see all the symptoms, but you cannot bring yourself to name the genetic disease afflicting the euro and provoking the scepticism of the markets, which have devalued it by 20%, indifference on the part of the economic players, who have yet to adopt it, the distrust of the citizens: in the last survey, 41% of Europeans already thought that the euro was a bad thing for them and, admit it, there were signs of panic among the euro supervisory authorities, 18 months before the planned withdrawal of the national currencies.
Add to that the increasing hostility of the British and the persistent distrust of the Danes, which I hope to see confirmed on 28 September.
The initial cause of the punishment currently being inflicted on the European currency stems, of course, from the conditions in which it was born.
Conceived in haste by France and Germany following German reunification, followed by nine other countries, the so-called single currency was immediately put out for adoption by the political authorities to an independent bank, poor little Cosette sent to the Ténardiers in Frankfurt!
One can understand why the child is sickly, under the circumstances.
According to the Cardinal of Retz, in politics, you often end up with the opposite of what you were seeking.
It is the independence of the ECB, advocated in order to reassure the markets, which is worrying them.
The Federal Reserve was born when the United States was over a century old and after the American Civil War and it acts not totally, but relatively independently within what I would call a single pool of feelings, i.e. within a single country.
With no such foundation, the Central Bank is not independent, it is isolated.
Its message is doomed to failure.
It can only speak the language of the markets, what one French journalist calls eurodosh, not the language of the people, as a result of which the euro is merely a currency of loans which has become the toy of the markets instead of being the business of the Europeans.
Perhaps your euro will rally, Mr Duisenberg, but it will not be thanks to you.
It will be because the dollar has fallen.
So, for pity's sake, between now and then, do not out of wounded pride throttle a European economy which has already paid a heavy price in the chase for the euro in terms of growth and employment throughout the 1990s and which does not want to pay a second, equally heavy price in the chase for a strong euro.
If you do, then do not complain if governments come running back and fight you for your premature independence and illusory sovereignty or, in other words, if Jean Valjean finally comes and takes Cosette away from you.
Mr President, President of the European Central Bank, Commissioner Solbes, on behalf of the Italian Radicals of the Technical Group of Independent Members, I believe that the objective which the European Central Bank set itself - which is the objective enshrined in the Treaty and in the best economic doctrine, that is to curb inflation - has in actual fact been achieved.
This can only be reason to applaud the activity of the Central Bank itself as well.
However, we cannot allow this result to distract us from the many storm clouds gathering overhead.
The first issue is public finances: improvement in the relationship between public deficit and GDP, which, in the space of a few years, has fallen to below 2% in the euro area, disguises the fact that, in many countries, in many instances, this result is due purely to favourable interest rates and to the fact that taxation has risen instead of fallen.
The long-term structural reductions in public spending are of secondary importance and, moreover, the national budgets of many countries remain at around 50%, which is too high a level to control without risk of adding to the deficit in the event of crises or shocks.
In particular, the question of the hidden debt must be raised urgently - and in this regard the Central Bank could and should make a far greater contribution than it does at the moment.
This debt arises from the public pension systems in many countries, particularly but not exclusively in Italy.
The demagogic generosity of these systems has a very high cost which someone is going to have to pay very soon, and its effects will soon make themselves felt on the stability of the euro.
There is the problem of transparency in European Central Bank decisions: something has been done about it but not enough, in my opinion, and on this matter I refer to the words of Mr Huhne, with whom I am in complete agreement.
President Duisenberg stated - and I agree with him - that the problem of the new economy, the late arrival of the new economy in Europe and of the productivity of labour in Europe is not, cannot and must not be treated as an interest rates issue.
It is a question of structural reforms and must be dealt with as such.
There is a problem of privatisation and liberalisation in many sectors.
There are countries such as France - large countries therefore - which have put the brakes on with regard to the liberalisation and privatisation chiefly - but not exclusively - of the telecommunications sector.
There is the problem of the flexibility of the labour market.
Mandel, one of the forces behind the euro, when speaking of Europe a few months ago, said that the governments are making the market too rigid.
Hiring and firing must be liberalised, for the simple reason that controlling dismissals only serves to limit the possibility of hiring new staff.
Instead of expecting Central Bank policy or taxation policy to resolve some of the problems of the European economy, European policy should resolve the issues it is able to, such as the issue of restructuring and flexibility in the economy and in the labour market, immediately.
I will end by thanking Mr Radwan for this excellent report and say that I agree with the greater part of its content.
Mr President, Mr Duisenberg, Mr Solbes, I share the satisfaction Mr Radwan expressed in his report regarding the importance of the objective of maintaining price stability, which the Central Bank achieved by bringing the rate of inflation in the euro area down to minimal levels.
Furthermore, I share the rapporteur' s satisfaction in noting that the ECB has stood by its commitment to publish information regularly on the financial variables in its possession, the economic forecasts and the econometric models used as the theoretical basis for the monetary policy it has implemented.
It is important that the principle of transparency is affirmed and it is a good thing that the ECB has set communication standards which could be an excellent point of reference for the activity of the central banks of the individual countries.
However, let us guard against interpreting the principle expressed in Article 105 of the Treaty too freely, for Article 108 reads: "When exercising the powers and carrying out the tasks and duties conferred upon them by this Treaty and the Statute of the ESCB, neither the ECB, nor a national central bank, nor any member of their decision-making bodies shall seek or take instructions from Community institutions or bodies, ... or from any other body."
The monetary policy is certainly a lever which is capable of determining a country' s economic performance, for better or for worse, but it is for this very reason that we must not give the ECB responsibilities which cannot fall within its remit, either under the Treaty or in the light of the basic rules of economic policy.
The poor development of the macroeconomic variables in some of the countries of the euro area has been linked, very superficially but incorrectly, to the creation of the single currency: imbalances and unfavourable trends in some countries cannot be blamed upon the euro and still less upon the Central Bank' s monetary policy, but they can be attributed to the absence of an unambiguous economic policy in Euroland and the lack of structural reforms at the level of the individual national systems.
Mr President, Mr Duisenberg, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is ten years now since the inception of monetary union.
Today we are reviewing an annual report based on a successful monetary policy.
In institutional, organisational and monetary policy terms, the European Central Bank has acted prudently while showing the way forward, even if not everyone would agree with all the decisions made by the ECB.
However, more could be done to improve the transparency of monetary policy.
This is not just a question of improving communication, it is also a matter of providing clearer explanations.
That is why I am pleased, Mr Duisenberg, that you have today promised once again that we will get inflation forecasts and that progress will be made with publishing the econometric models.
And of course I would still like us to see the summary minutes of meetings, so that we can follow all the arguments.
The annual report states very clearly that the euro has made its mark at international level and is already the second most important currency in the world.
The report also clearly emphasises that the European Central Bank has achieved its priority objective of ensuring price stability.
However, it seems to me that the ECB' s secondary objective is not yet totally clear to everyone.
After all, the rate of inflation is low and under control despite the increase in oil prices.
This is very different to the situation prevailing at the time of the oil crisis in the 1970s.
The ECB must therefore finally make it clear how and subject to what conditions it intends to support the Union' s economic policy and the objectives of achieving economic growth and employment.
After all, money exists to serve people, and not the other way round.
For that reason support is needed for the macroeconomic framework, and the ECB has a role to play here.
As yet, the ECB has still not provided an explanation as to why price stability is more strictly defined in the euro area than in the US, and why it does not provide greater protection for the fledgling European growth process.
Europe needs a sustained period of high growth if we are to successfully combat unemployment.
After all, full employment is once again a possibility at last.
An ECB stability-oriented monetary policy has every chance of giving an impulse to investment and growth, and thus making a real contribution to achieving an appropriate and properly balanced policy mix.
What contribution can the ECB make, and does it intend to make?
Why does it not follow the example set by the US Federal Reserve Bank in supporting the upturn in the economy?
Or could it be - and I would like an answer to this - that the European Central Bank is opposed to growth rates of over 3% because it thinks they could jeopardise its stability policy?
Mr President, Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I should like to thank Mr Radwan for a splendid report.
Pages 60 and 61 of the ECB' s annual report contain a discussion of the situation in Denmark in 1999.
It is pointed out that, in 1999, the Danish krone was stable and marginally stronger than the central rate in ERM 2.
This situation has, unfortunately, changed because there has been pressure on the Danish krone in recent months.
Speculation against the Danish krone is occurring primarily because Danish opinion polls suggest that there may be a 'no' vote in the forthcoming referendum on 28 September.
If there is, in fact, a 'no' vote in this referendum - and I very much disagree with my French colleague who has just spoken and who, if I understood him correctly, is hoping for just such a vote - then speculation against the krone may be expected to increase, in which case Denmark will have need of that ECB support in defence of the krone which is provided for in the ERM 2 agreement.
I would therefore ask you, Mr Duisenberg, to clarify what the limits will be for the Danish ERM 2 agreement and to answer the following questions.
Firstly, what conditions must Denmark fulfil before the ECB will intervene in support of the krone?
Secondly, how much in the way of foreign reserves will the ECB, in practice, spend on buying up kroner in order to support and defend the Danish currency?
Thirdly, for how long a period will the ECB be prepared to support the krone?
And fourthly and finally, can you tell us whether the ERM 2 agreement is to be in force for an unlimited period of time?
Mr President, no one denies, Mr Duisenberg, that you and the European Central Bank are operating a very competent and successful monetary policy.
Nevertheless, people' s concerns about the euro' s low exchange rate need to be taken far more seriously, because it is one of the root causes of inflationary trends and higher interest rates.
However, the real and very fundamental criticisms I want to make relate to other areas.
The report welcomes the improvement in the ECB' s information policy.
Yet we are refused the information we really need - publication of the minutes of meetings - on the grounds of the ECB' s independence.
But the ECB is not privately owned.
It should be fully accountable to the people who own it, the citizens of the European Union.
It is one of the European Union' s most powerful institutions and this complete surrender of policy and democracy to the ECB cannot continue.
There is a second problem that worries me.
Yes, and why not?
There is a second problem that worries me.
This narrowing of monetary and financial policy down to price stability is reflected in paragraph 9 of your report, Mr Radwan, where the rather revealing wording states that developments in labour markets and social security systems should support the ECB' s stability policy, rather than the reverse, which would be more appropriate in view of the dramatic problems in these fields.
Lastly, I wish to raise a third question, which I will at least touch upon.
There is not a word in the report about the unparalleled over-expansion of international speculative financial markets.
In my view, this will result in inflationary trends in the medium term, and at present it is the cause of a totally unacceptable shift away from companies dependent on labour and real economic factors and towards speculative profit making.
I hope that it will at last be possible to have a serious and essential debate with you about this trend and about instruments capable of influencing it, such as the Tobin Tax.
(Applause)
Mr President, Mr Duisenberg, ladies and gentlemen, I think that the Radwan report is particularly important, because it cannot be read in isolation from the next item about the euro information campaign.
I am glad that 11 of my 12 amendments were accepted in committee.
I had three principal aims in mind with those amendments.
Firstly, to enhance and underscore the independence of the European Central Bank.
To my mind, this independence also implies freedom from instructions, and this is justified because the ECB has a clear remit, which is to maintain price stability.
My second aim is to call on the ECB, through this House, to continue to pursue its stability policy so as to ward off the increasing risk of inflation.
My third aim is to give a signal to all the applicant countries that membership of EMU is conditional not on political concessions, but on meeting the convergence criteria.
So this report is also important as regards the information campaign, as I have already said, because the media' s overemphasis on the euro' s external value, which has a psychological impact on public confidence in the single currency, needs to be countered to a greater extent by the demonstrable success of economic and monetary union, to which everyone must give greater prominence.
We must not allow information on the technical changeover to be overshadowed by information about the political objectives and the successes achieved so far.
By way of conclusion, I would therefore like to say that the euro, as this report demonstrates, is a project for growth and employment, for a successful single market and for enhancing Europe' s identity.
The euro is a project for price stability and lower inflation rates, for increasing competitiveness and improving public finances, so that we finally put a stop to the process of selling out our future for budget policy reasons.
Mr President, the first annual report by the European Central Bank gives us a chance to thank the executive board of the European Central Bank for its hard work and to congratulate it on its successful administration in connection with the introduction of the euro.
Theirs was no easy task.
These people worked extremely hard to attain our common objectives and we should acknowledge that, even if we disagree with them on certain crucial points of the monetary policy which they have applied over the year in question.
The points on which we disagree, and which the rapporteur has glossed over or failed to mention in his report, do not, in my book, include the criticism which has been voiced on account of the fall in the exchange rate of the euro.
The rapporteur quite rightly reminds us here that the fluctuations in the euro's predecessor currencies were far greater than those recorded so far for the euro, so there has been no deterioration there.
The rapporteur ascribes the fall in the exchange rate to a lack of dynamism within the European economy and he is probably right.
However, his comment raises the question of the extent to which the monetary policy applied for a year or more is the right policy for restoring the dynamism which we all agree the economy needs.
Unlike the rapporteur, who fully endorses the arguments of the Central Bank, many of us believe that its monetary policy has been dogmatic, excessively conservative and prone to inflationary risks.
We could even forgive it all that, because conservatism and perhaps even a little dogmatism go with the job of central banking.
But the Central Bank has no right to publicly present the fight against inflation, which is its obligation under the Treaty, when it itself is free to define inflation as it pleases.
The Bank cannot tell us, 'We have put an end to inflation and inflation is what we say it is, what we judge it to be, and we judge it in a subjective and arbitrary manner, in isolation from the rest of the economy and, more importantly, in isolation from support for employment, which is also the obligation of the European Central Bank' .
This attitude towards economic policy verges on the dangerous, especially nowadays.
Economic recovery in Europe has mopped up all our spare productive potential and needs new investments if it is to continue.
Is the recent increase in interest rates on the pretext of the risk of inflation the most suitable policy for encouraging investment?
Can the inflation target of 0% to 2% be reconciled with the need to extend the investment economy or should the twelve countries in the euro zone be considering a political revision of the inflation target, in which case the Bank will be able to pursue a target independently, but the target will be set by and will be the political responsibility of the European governments?
Mr President, whatever the value of the euro, the primary objective of the European Central Bank, as you have reminded us, Mr Duisenberg, is to maintain price stability without worrying about the economic and social consequences which come in the wake of these decisions.
That is why the ECB can increase its interest rates, at the risk of slowing down investment and dampening growth.
This hike follows on from the increase in American rates.
The persistent weakness of the euro against the dollar is also the result of the huge drain on capital leaving the European Union.
According to experts, nearly 950 billion French francs net poured out of the euro zone in 1999 in the form of direct investments abroad, i.e. 43% more than in 1998.
In short, the euro is used mainly for borrowing in order to finance speculative projects, even as far away as the United States.
The decision to compete with the United States by promoting the financial markets leads up a blind alley.
It needs a boom in employment, training, research and salaries to enable us to develop a resolutely modern European social model.
To do so, social and monetary sides must join forces.
But the ECB is the only master on board when it comes to monetary policy.
In the name of the fight against inflation and strict compliance with the Stability Pact, it even goes so far as to call the governments of the Member States to order, but never has a word to say in criticism of the speculation sweeping the financial markets.
It advocates wage restraint, flexibility and job insecurity.
It fans the flames of privatisation in order to boost competitiveness and the return on capital.
It also advocates 'modernising' social protection and reducing unemployment costs, thus applying the same logic as the agreement in France between employers and two trades union, an agreement which punishes the unemployed and makes them feel guilty.
We must re-open the debate on the remit of the European Central Bank in order to find a new credit policy which takes account of employment criteria.
We cannot merely tack a social chapter on to neo-liberal economic policy.
The alternative in a truly social Europe would be to substitute a growth, employment and training pact for the stability pact.
And if we are to implement this approach, it is vital that we strengthen control of the ECB by the European Parliament and the national parliaments.
Mr President, when it adopted the Radwan report, the majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs missed a rare and valuable opportunity to draw attention to reasons for the weakness of the euro that cannot be laid at the door of the European Central Bank.
The sheer nonsense that we have heard here demonstrates how important the ECB' s independence is.
The argument that the euro' s weakness is also a consequence of Euroland' s enormous bureaucracy, which - in the words of acknowledged experts - has a Socialist tendency and limits individuals' freedoms, was rejected by a majority of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for clearly ideological reasons.
The same fate was suffered by other amendments to the effect that the euro area is totally overloaded with heavy taxes, thus penalising entrepreneurialism.
Rigid structures, the slow pace of liberalisation in important sectors of the economy and differences between inflation rates in individual euro Member States, which are already a cause for concern, are the reason why the improvement in public finances in many Member States is not the result of a sustained reduction in public expenditure and structural reforms, but rather a consequence of low interest rates and a heavier tax burden, which represent a threat to the Stability Pact.
I would like to have seen all these points included in the report.
It would also have been a good thing for this Parliament if it had had the courage to recognise in this particular report that the present weakness in the single European currency is chiefly due to a lack of economic flexibility.
Nevertheless, I am glad that at least some reservations have been voiced about certain decisions taken recently in the euro countries, for example on working hours, which instead of making the labour market flexible have made it rigid, and are also contributing to the euro' s weakness.
I do not mind saying this, even if Mr Brie, the chief ideologist of Germany' s old communists, whose party wrecked a whole state and who would do better to keep quiet here, does not like it.
This is an unequivocal signal to voters in the euro area to give the all too numerous Red-Green governments their marching orders, if they...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, Mr President of the Central Bank, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I cannot resist the temptation of replying to Astrid Lulling.
Independence, yes, but independence in relation to what?
If you think that the reduction in working hours might explain the fall in the euro, then that is your business, but it seems to be the result of ideological prejudice rather than objective observation of the state of the French economy.
Mr President of the European Central Bank, as you know, the recent 50-point increase in the base rate which you introduced, following hard on the heels of the increase at the end of April, has incited widespread debate in numerous Member States in which growth has resumed; it is feared that this increase in the base rate will upset this trend, which is essential if we want to resolve the problems facing our fellow citizens.
However, we are delighted at the prospect of a revision in the reference value which allows growth in the money supply to be evaluated.
This revision would appear to be overdue.
As for the deterioration in the exchange rate between the euro and the dollar, not everyone sees it as a drawback, but many wonder as to the causes.
Allow me to share my conviction with you.
The lack of any real coordination between our economic policies is the main cause.
If we want to rectify this situation, we need greater coordination between our economic policies and we will not achieve it unless we strengthen euro 11, or rather euro 12.
It is within this framework that you will manage to strengthen the mutual confidence between governments which is needed if progress is to be made in this direction.
I hope that the French presidency will succeed in pushing this issue forward.
I also hope that the Central Bank will help it to do so in a positive spirit.
Progress has been made as regards transparency and we are delighted about that.
You know that this Parliament imagines that we can go further still.
And then, Mr President, allow me to question you on one final point.Finally I ask the Commission and the Council to take note that we welcome the principle of labelling beef by country of origin and that we call on the French presidency to set an example by making an immediate commitment to accept all beef so labelled from all EU countries and let the consumer decide.
Mr President, Commissioner, can I first of all say I very much welcome this opportunity to follow the debate on this issue, but quite frankly I think it has tried our patience for a long time and most of us would like to see it resolved as soon as possible.
We have to ask ourselves what we are trying to achieve and whose fears we are trying to allay.
There is no doubt that consumers are tremendously concerned and I think we have to be able to allay that concern so that consumers can feel confident that the food they buy, anywhere in the European Union, will be fully traceable and good for whoever purchases it.
For that we need an effective system of traceability and control that will restore confidence.
I come from an agricultural background and it seems to me that what you need to control is the whole life span of the animal from the moment it is born to the time it is slaughtered.
If you can achieve that then you will go a long way to allaying the consumers' fears.
You can put in controls that will be so bureaucratic that they just will not work, so we have to concentrate on what is workable.
Categorising beef as steers, bullocks or heifers will not do anything to allay the fears of the consumer.
This is taking foolishness to the extreme and I ask you to reflect and take on board the views of the committee and the view of this Parliament on this particular point.
Mr President, since the issue of Regulation 820 in 1997, we have been discussing rebuilding a relationship between the consumer and the production world, and I have to say that a great deal has been achieved on both sides.
Much work has been done to ensure that the consumer is in possession of the correct information.
That said, I am briefly going to return to some of the issues raised by my fellow Members, each of which illustrated the situation in their own country.
In Italy, selling unspecified adult cattle on the market would mean suppressing a sensibility which is linked to our cultural and food traditions, and so we would find ourselves in quite a difficult situation.
Apart from anything else, considering that the price per kilogram of a cow carcass is considerably lower than that of a bullock carcass and even lower than that of a heifer, it would be difficult to justify the different sales prices to the consumer, who will naturally buy the unspecified adult meat out of ignorance.
Therefore, we are drawing up a law giving the consumer the right to know what he is buying and at what price, according to principles of transparency, clarity and information.
The work on the traceability of all the information regarding the animal' s country of provenance and country of birth and, in particular, where the animal was fattened, is therefore excellent.
Indeed, we would like the traceability criteria to be extended to minced beef, which is becoming a very popular product.
We feel that a precise reference to the point of slaughter and to the provenance of the minced beef would contribute to maintaining this relationship of trust that we are building between producer and consumer.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the fact that the second reading in this House is taking place so quickly is a clear sign that all of you, and in particular the rapporteur, Mr Papayannakis, regard this subject, a very important one for consumers, as a key priority and that it is indeed your objective that compulsory labelling should come into force on time on 1 September.
I would therefore first of all like to sincerely thank the rapporteur and everyone who cooperated with him for the excellent and rapid progress that has been made with this.
Timing has always been vital in this area, and it still is.
You all know that the introduction of the compulsory labelling system had to be deferred last December because agreement could not be reached within the time frame available.
This deferral expires on 31 August, which in practice means that it runs out at the end of this month, because Parliament does not sit in August and no further sittings can be called.
We must all ensure that the pledge we made to all European beef consumers and also to producers and processors is respected.
In order to avoid further postponement or, even worse, a legal vacuum on labelling, we must therefore come to a final decision this month.
Before I talk about the amendments tabled for tomorrow' s vote, I would like to make a couple of brief comments about the Council common position approved by the Council on 6 June.
As you know, I pressed for an informal trialogue on the issue of the legal basis.
This took place on 3 May.
The Members participating in that meeting also asked for appropriate explanations regarding the draft of the Council common position.
Once a number of further changes to the text requested by Parliament had been made, it was possible to reach an agreement based on which the following Agriculture Council approved the Council common position.
This was then formally transmitted to Parliament in mid-June together with the Commission' s communication.
This goes to show how well the codecision process could actually function on agricultural matters.Despite the shortage of time, the Council produced what I regard as a workable compromise taking account of the amendments you adopted at first reading.
This reconciled the consumer' s right to guaranteed origin with the need for a practical system.
Like Parliament, the Council also recognised that compulsory labelling needed to be introduced earlier than stipulated in the original proposal.
Furthermore, the Council even complied with Parliament' s request to delete all references to EU origin.
Lastly, the Council also took on board the request for stricter labelling requirements for minced beef, and tightened up the wording of the rules proposed by the Commission.
It was only possible to achieve all these joint solutions between the Council and Parliament because the Member States agreed that no more national beef labelling schemes would apply after 2002.
The greatest achievement was reaching agreement on a uniform Community-wide labelling scheme for beef.
We should not therefore jeopardise this common interest and this move towards integration again.
As we have now heard from the Committee on the Environment, we are not yet out of the woods, politically speaking.
There are now amendments to be considered in plenary sitting, and approving some of these amendments would have far-reaching consequences, above all in terms of timing and as regards the adoption of the regulation.
For example, as several speakers have noted, two amendments on labelling minced beef have been tabled.
This issue has been scrutinised in great detail both here in Parliament and also by the Council.
You will see that the Council has taken your comments on board and has tightened up the wording of the rules, and has in fact made them even stricter than stipulated in the original Commission proposal.
One of the two new amendments reiterates the view that producers of minced beef should give precise details of the origin of the beef they have processed.
Ladies and gentlemen, given the industrial conditions under which minced beef is produced nowadays, this would quite obviously be asking too much.
Although the industry agrees with watertight guarantees of origin, it is already having great difficulties in giving details about the point of slaughter and of preparation for minced beef products.
This demonstrates that the regulation will also have a similar impact.
So it will certainly not be possible to put the new proposal into practice.
If the worst came to the worst, it could even lead to some companies, especially in the smaller Member States, going bankrupt and the market for minced beef being completely renationalised.
That is the effect it would have.
And you cannot convince me that a Polish cow imported into Austria would be a problem for Austrian consumers.
Because I can tell the honourable Member that if a consumer buys minced beef in a butcher' s shop in Austria, he has the piece of meat minced in front of his own eyes, and in that case there are no problems either with origin or anything else.
What we are talking about here is really industrial processing of minced beef to make burgers and similar products, and nowadays that is a continuous industrial process.
If you start interfering in that, then companies like this will use products originating solely in their own country and nothing else.
And that would result in the opposite of what we are trying to achieve.
The other amendment proposes making it compulsory to give the date minced beef was produced, and this is not the first time we have debated this idea.
However, the label already features a more direct and clearer way of giving the consumer such vital information - the use-by date, which shows how long the minced beef can be used for.
I do not therefore believe that this new proposal would improve or add to information for consumers.
The common position also provides for such information to be given under the 'simplified procedure' if anyone requires this.
I therefore suggest that we should stick to the provisions on minced beef as laid down in the common position.
I am sure that if you take a closer look at the text you will see that the rules stipulated in it are strict enough and that our objective of improving transparency has been achieved.
I would now like to turn to the much discussed issue of category.
As you know, this formed part of the original Commission proposal, and I think there is a lot to be said for giving this information.
It leads to greater transparency and I believe it is important for consumers.
I can only tell you that where I come from, you pay 50% more for veal than for beef.
So as a consumer, I would like to know what I am paying 50% more for.
There is also a price difference of about one third depending on whether I am buying beef from a cow or beef from a young bull.
In that case it is surely in the interest of consumers to know what they are paying more for and to be given a guarantee that when they pay a higher price, they are actually getting what they paid for.
Let me explain now what we are actually proposing here.
Categories have already been compulsory in the Community for 20 years as far as whole carcasses are concerned.
The existing categories are: calves, young bulls, bullocks, heifers, cows and older bulls.
This is also intended as the basis for introducing categories in this case.
We simply want the labelling already applying to whole carcasses to apply to individual cuts as well.
That is all.
We are also willing to make distinctions for meat prepared in different ways.
For example, it is not necessary to make a precise distinction for casserole meat, since as I see it is enough to know if you are buying veal or beef casserole meat.
That is what this is about, and that alone!
If you say that the Commission does not even know what form the final system will take, then I have to reply that this is a typical chicken-and-egg situation.
We cannot lay down Commission rules and implementing provisions until a Council regulation is in force.
The category detail is a matter for the implementing provisions.
So you cannot demand guarantees from the Commission as to exactly how the whole system will operate, because we will have to discuss this with the Member States in the Management Committee first.
What you are calling for here is not legally possible, unless you want to make the whole system part of the Council regulation itself.
But that would be another kettle of fish.
That is why I think that the procedure proposed here is correct.
But I can give you one assurance, if you wish: the Commission will be backing the categories that I have mentioned, but not anything more complicated.
We have to be clear about one thing: if we do not introduce these categories, the result will be a return to national labelling systems in this area too.
That can surely not be in Europe' s interest.
Of course, politically speaking there is more than one way of looking at this issue.
Although the Commission, and I think I have made this clear, does not agree with those who think that providing this information is impracticable, pointless or prohibitively expensive, I cannot say that a system without this kind of provision is out of the question.
But what the Commission wanted to avoid at all costs was a return to national schemes, which in practice would lead to a total renationalisation of markets, thus undermining the common market.
Surely that is not the idea.
So I believe that we should adhere to the common position in this respect as well.
I would now like to make two brief points.
Mr Hudghton asked if it would be possible to display information regarding the area of origin, such as the Orkney Islands for example, on a voluntary basis.
Such voluntary information on area of origin is possible, as long as protected designations of origin are not involved, because it logically follows that protected designations of origin must be protected as such.
That brings me to the last argument put forward by various Members, that is to say the failure to introduce technical requirements.
If we were to gear our decision-making to when it occurs to the last Member State that it is now ready to establish technical requirements, then we would be gearing the process to those who are dragging their feet on compulsory beef labelling.
We cannot accept that, it would be counterproductive.
The market will in fact penalise those who were not prepared to establish the technical requirements for beef labelling promptly.
I would therefore ask you to bear these considerations in mind when you vote tomorrow.
I can also assure you that this system will not be as complicated in practice as many of you here imagine.
This is a mock-up of how one of these labels will look in future.
And there is still room for the price and any other information consumers specifically require anyway.
You see, it can work!
Commissioner, this debate is going to go on until we have completed the conciliation process.
Colleagues, I recognise there is a difficulty.
You should corner Mr Fischler individually if you wish to speak to him.
I have been involved in the meat industry for a number of years myself.
The matter is not yet satisfactorily resolved.
Mrs Jackson, do you have a point of order?
I am simply pointing out that the Commissioner should not give the impression that there is no room for conciliation on this.
We have room for conciliation and the advantage, if we adopt these amendments tomorrow, is that Parliament would be openly engaged in the final form of this proposal, which otherwise we will not be.
The matter of raising conciliation will be after the vote tomorrow.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon.
Proposal for a regulation on a Community patent
The next item is the Commission communication on the proposal for a regulation on a Community patent.
Mr President, I am very grateful for this opportunity to inform Parliament about a decision which was taken by the Commission this morning relating to a proposal for a regulation to create a Community patent.
That is in line with a request from the Lisbon European Council, which called for such a Community patent to be in place by the year 2001.
Parliament explicitly supported this initiative in its contributions to the extensive consultation process which the Commission launched through its Green Paper on Innovation in Europe in 1997.
We need a Community patent in order to stimulate innovation, which is a key factor for growth, competitiveness and job creation in Europe.
Our industry, as well as our research and scientific community, have stressed for some time now the need for a patent which is affordable, valid throughout the Community and which offers legal security.
That is an ambitious goal.
Our proposal meets this ambitious goal as it aims at creating just such a patent.
The Community patent will co-exist with, and complement, existing systems by offering a more attractive alternative for those businesses, both big and small, operating within the internal market.
Our proposal builds extensively on the existing European patent system which governs the rules and procedures leading to the grant of European patents, and this approach requires that the Community should adhere to the European patent convention.
By virtue of the Community patent regulation, patents delivered by the European Patent Office in Munich may become Community patents.
The Community patent as proposed by the Commission will have the following characteristics: a Community patent will have a unitary character, it will be valid throughout the Community and it will be the subject of a single set of rules.
This will reduce the uncertainty linked to fifteen different national legislations and, of course, after enlargement, many more.
Legal certainty will be considerably reinforced by the creation of a centralized judicial system which will guarantee the quality and coherence of case law relating to Community patents.
The creation of such a centralised jurisdiction requires a change to the EC Treaty.
We now have a window of opportunity with the ongoing Intergovernmental Conference.
We must not miss that opportunity and I should like to count on the vigorous support of Members of this Parliament in order to ensure that the IGC takes up this issue in all earnest.
Finally, our proposal will help to reduce considerably the costs of patents in Europe by not requiring supplementary translations of the patent once it has been delivered in one of the three languages of the European Patent Office.
May I insist on the need for an ambitious approach.
Previous attempts to create a Community patent, in particular through the Luxembourg convention of 1989, failed because of a lack of ambition on the two key issues: firstly, the cost and secondly, the litigation.
We must convince Member States of the need to change the Treaty to create a centralised jurisdiction for Community patent litigation.
When looking at our proposal, one should also anticipate the consequences of enlargement on the costs and litigation in this respect.
If we are anything less than ambitious in this field, we shall simply not provide our industry, our research and development experts with the modern patent which they need.
Mr President, Commissioner, the proposal for a regulation on a Community patent gives us the chance to review cooperation, as you have just said, between the European Patent Office and the Community institutions.
The patent recently issued to the University of Edinburgh poses the problem of the status of the EPO and how to control it.
In the light of what has now been referred to as a mistake, it would appear that Directive 98/44 on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions is inaccurate and ambiguous, especially Articles 5(1) and 5(2).
Should the Commission not propose a revision of this directive in order to preclude the possibility of patenting the discovery of a gene or genetic sequence?
We must not skimp on this question, especially now that we are introducing a Community patent.
I am very happy to hear that the Commission has decided to limit the number of languages that can be used for the Community patent.
At the moment translation costs are the biggest problem when we try to reduce the costs and speed up the process.
I warmly welcome the proposal and hope that the IGC is ready to make the necessary changes to the Treaties.
But I would like to ask a specific question concerning the process in EPO.
I was under the impression that the process itself would remain more or less the same in the new system.
Why is it that at the moment the EPO uses the system of many experts instead of the system of one expert, which is in use in Japan and the United States?
There the patent is granted when one expert has given their opinion.
That is also a factor in making the process in Europe more costly and slower than that of our competitors.
Mr President, I would like firstly to congratulate the Commissioner.
I believe that this is a great achievement.
As he has said, this is probably the most ambitious internal market project we are currently dealing with and I am happy to say this on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, and as rapporteur on this issue.
It is ambitious, Commissioner, because, in addition to what you have said, there is a fundamental reason, based on the principles of the internal market, for having a Community patent.
If we want our internal market really to be a domestic market for companies and consumers, the current fragmentation suffered by patents, resulting from national borders, makes no sense.
Having said this, it is an ambitious and difficult project, because, as you have mentioned, it requires a change to the Treaty and to the constitutions of at least four or six Member States.
Therefore, Commissioner, I pray that there will be excellent cooperation between us, which we are going to need, and the capacity for negotiation so that this project can be taken to its conclusion.
Mr President, thank you for giving me the opportunity to reply to the remarks that have just been made.
May I start by thanking Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi for the broad support that she has given the decision by the Commission to promote the Community patent.
As far as Mrs Kauppi is concerned, may I say that the reason that the European Patent Office in Munich uses not just one but a number of experts is that it wants to ensure that the quality of the patent which is granted by the European Patent Office is of the highest quality.
Without wishing to be unduly eurocentric, patents granted in other parts of the world, in particular one part which is across the water, if I may put it that way, are not of the same quality as the patents granted by the European Patent Office in Munich.
So in this case I am afraid that we must continue to place security and quality above purely financial considerations.
That is the reason why the European Patent Office uses more than one expert.
On the first question, the Commission is aware of the concerns that have been raised in France and elsewhere about the directive and in particular about possible inconsistencies between two paragraphs of Article 5 of the directive.
The President of France, Mr Jacques Chirac, has written to President Prodi on this question.
May I stress that in my opinion there is no contradiction between the first two paragraphs of that article, the wording of which I believe relies heavily on suggestions made by this Parliament.
The first paragraph provides that the human body at various stages of its formation and development and the simple discovery of one of its elements, including the sequence or partial sequence of a gene, cannot constitute patentable inventions.
This paragraph is clearly in line with the basic principle that discoveries are not patentable.
However the second paragraph of Article 5 states that an element isolated from the human body or otherwise produced by means of a technical process, including the sequence or the partial sequence of a gene, may constitute a patentable invention, even if the structure of that element is identical to that of a natural element.
Here the invention arises from the isolation of a particular gene from its natural surroundings or by its production by means of a technical process.
Of course to be patentable, that invention would still need to satisfy the criteria of novelty, inventiveness and industrial applicability.
In respect of this last requirement, industrial applicability, the directive makes it clear that the industrial application of the gene must be specified in the patent application.
A note setting out the Commission's position on this issue has been placed on our website.
Needless to say the Commission will reply to President Chirac's letter and take a position on the issues he has raised.
Our proposal on a Community patent, which is the subject of the discussion this afternoon, does not affect the existing regime, which is governed by the directive of 1998.
That directive is due to be implemented by the end of this month and it should also bind the European Patent Office.
Mr President, Commissioner, it is important that you emphasised the coexistence of the national patents, European patents and Community patents.
I still wonder, however, how decentralised the research regime will be with regard to the Community patents.
It was expressly mentioned in the reply from Parliament in the Green Paper that you mentioned.
I am also pleased that we will achieve legal certainty.
I think, however, that it could have been achieved in a different way and without creating a Community patent.
One question that is important to deal with here in Parliament, and that will definitely be something that affects the linguistic diversity within the EU, is also whether we will guarantee equality between small and medium-sized enterprises that operate in all parts of our Union.
I also think it is important that in all parts of the Union we are able to retain the knowledge that is associated with research patents.
When we recently discussed the research White Paper, we all took the view that it was vital to move forward on this topic because it was important not only to do very good research in Europe, but also to optimise the conditions for its industrial exploitation.
So on that account I welcome Commissioner Bolkenstein's statement.
The word 'centralisation' is unfortunate in this context because it suggests a single centre of what is already a polycentric community.
I take it his real meaning is that there will be one court for the whole Community, not that it will necessarily be in a place which will be geographically central.
Finally, I gather that it is proposed that software might be patented.
My Group would be very unhappy about such a proposal.
It seems to us that copyright is the right way to protect software and that introducing patents in this sphere would be unhelpful and contrary to good legal principle.
We welcome the fact that this is going to be a great spur to innovation and development and the competitiveness of European industry in the future if it does get through the IGC and onto the statute book.
Following up Mrs Fraisse's question and your response to that, the borderline must be established as to what is acceptable for patenting and what is not.
In the biotechnology area there is still this grey area.
You purported to have reached an absolute decision on this.
Is there any room for manoeuvre or is that the absolutely determined and settled position of the Commission as you said in your earlier answer?
- May I explain that the Commission's proposal, if accepted by Parliament and by the Council, does not take away any possibilities that at present exist.
So if the Commission's proposal is accepted there will be three ways of getting patents.
First of all there will be the national patents which will be delivered in the national language and will be granted by the national office for the granting of patents.
That exists now and will continue to exist.
The second possibility that will continue to exist is the European patent granted by the European Patent Office.
The European patent is not to be confused with the Community patent.
The European patent is a basket of national patents, so an inventor would apply for a patent, for example, for Benelux, France and Germany, five countries out of 15.
If the application is approved he would get a patent for those five countries, and jurisdiction would be spread over the courts of those five countries.
That possibility - that is the reality at the moment - will continue to exist.
The third possibility we are now discussing is one patent of unitary character, in other words it is granted and then it applies to the whole Community.
That is why it is called the Community patent.
May I stress that this is an option inventors have, they can go either for a national patent or for a European patent or for a Community patent.
The Commission does not intend to take away any possibilities that exist at present.
Let me address Mrs Thors who asked about decentralisation in this field.
We cannot have it both ways.
We cannot have our cake and eat it.
In other words, if we want a Community patent, granted at a single place, namely Munich, which at one go applies to the whole Community, we must have a central jurisdiction to judge litigation for patents.
That is why the Commission has proposed that a tribunal to judge litigation in the case of intellectual property be set up, and the logical place for that tribunal to exist is in Luxembourg.
That is also what I would like to say to Mr MacCormick.
We are not concerned here with any geographical centrality - although I must admit I do not know whether Luxembourg is or is not in the centre of the European Union.
Certainly with the enlargement of the European Union the geographic centre of the Union would shift eastwards.
We have chosen the place where the European Court of Justice is located for the Community's tribunal on intellectual property.
May I come back to Mrs Thors and say that as far as small and medium-sized enterprises are concerned, the Commission proposal does not take away any possibilities for small and medium-sized enterprises to partake of inventions published by the European Patent Office.
75% of patents are delivered in English, and the current language in the world of intellectual property, in the world of patents, is English.
Secondly there are national patent offices.
Let them use their capacity to enlighten small and medium enterprises about what is going on in Munich and what has been published in English, French or German.
In that way they can stimulate and help the small and medium enterprises existing in those respective countries.
Lastly, on the matter of patents for biotechnological inventions, which was raised both in the previous round of questions and just now again, may I stress that the decision taken by the Commission this morning does not change anything in the area that was alluded to by both speakers.
The question then arises: does the Commission have room for manoeuvre in this respect?
Only those people who have no ideas never change their ideas, so it would be bizarre if the Commission had no room for manoeuvre.
We are considering that, we have received the letter from the President of the French Republic, we shall answer that letter obviously, there is already a note which is available on our website and we shall do our best to steer a course which is the most sensible one.
Mr President, I would like to follow up Mrs Kauppi' s question, in relation to the strategy on the level of invention.
A high level of invention has the advantage that it is easy to defend in court, because revocation proceedings are of course a huge problem.
A low level of invention has the advantage that many companies and inventors can submit their inventions and obtain a patent very quickly.
That is why I believe that the strategic level Europe is to adopt is a vital issue, because the Japanese, for instance, have now adopted the principle of a low level of invention and accordingly have a flood of applications.
Europe and the European Patent Office in fact have a very high level of inventiveness.
I believe that this is enormously significant as an instrument of economic policy.
Mr President, Commissioner, I too would like to congratulate you on presenting this proposal.
Indeed we all hope that in the interests of the competitiveness of the European Union, this unending Community patent saga will now have a happy ending.
That is why it was right - and I would like to specifically support you here - not to overburden this proposal with sensitive issues such as patent protection for biotechnology products.
I also entreat my fellow Members not to raise issues of principle on language matters.
This is a special field subject to special arrangements.
Commissioner, with regard to jurisdiction, you just mentioned in passing that the relevant jurisdiction would of course be in Luxembourg.
I hope that was not a reference to a possible location for the European Patent Court.
It would possibly make more sense for it to be located in Munich together with the European Patent Office, because all the necessary expertise is available there, which would facilitate cooperation.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate Commissioner Bolkestein warmly on the initiative he has shown, the energy he has displayed and the success he has achieved in respect of the European Community patent.
I would like to ask him four questions.
As I understand it, some Commissioners, as well as people other than Commissioners, have problems with the proposed language system.
I am not fanatical about languages, but I do wonder why there should be three languages and not five, as is the case in the Community Trademark Office.
Would this cause a real problem?
Secondly, the decision to convert the office in Munich into an EU agency has to be approved unanimously by fifteen governments.
Is that a problem?
Thirdly, on the position of the European Parliament, we do not really have much of a say.
Does this mean that the European Parliament, which has worked harder than anyone else to achieve a European Community patent, will not be involved, or at least be updated in good time and on a regular basis?
Finally, what is the latest on the future expansion of the Community patent?
Six questions have been put by three Members of your assembly.
Perhaps I may deal with them one by one.
Firstly, on the matter of thresholds, the only threshold I am aware of is a threshold of quality and we must continue to provide patents which satisfy definite criteria of quality.
Earlier this afternoon I replied to a question by Mrs Kauppi where she asked why the European Patent Office did not satisfy itself with just one expert and the reason I gave is that we need the highest quality patents and therefore it is sometimes necessary to use more than one expert.
I do not think we should adulterate the quality of the patents delivered by the European Patent Office and therefore we should maintain the threshold as it is.
The same Member of Parliament asked about jurisdiction.
Once again, a Community patent needs a Community jurisdiction and it seems to us that this court which will consist of specialised judges but which of course forms part of the whole court system of the European Union would be best placed in Luxembourg, but that is purely a matter of the location of the court.
On competitiveness, may I say that is one of the prime considerations why we engaged in this whole exercise.
Business and the research community want a single patent available at one go for the whole Community and one that is cheap.
The average cost of European patents is three times the cost of an average Japanese patent and five times the cost of an average American patent.
Obviously this is to the detriment of European competitiveness.
As far as the languages are concerned, and here I come to a question put by Mr De Clercq, if we followed the Luxembourg Convention of 1989, which meant that all patents had to be translated into 11 languages, the cost of that translation alone would be EUR 17,000 on average, whereas the system the Commission is now proposing will cost EUR 2,000.
That is also the reason why the Luxembourg convention was never operative.
It was concluded but it was not ratified in the Member States required and therefore it never became operative and that is because we were not ambitious enough either in the jurisdiction or in the costs.
Mr De Clercq says why can we not have five languages.
The reason is that the construction of the Community patent is such that the European Patent Office grants a patent for the whole Community and therefore we will leave the whole process up to the granting of the patent as it is now.
After that it becomes valid throughout the Community and then there is a court to sit on litigation, but up to the granting of the patent itself the European Patent Office will continue to work as it does now.
May I point out that the European Patent Office is not a Community agency.
There is a European Patent Convention and 15 Member States have signed the Convention but a number of other states have also signed it so the Commission cannot tell the European Patent Office what its language arrangements should be.
Therefore when Mr De Clercq says why could the European Patent Office not become an agency of the European Union my answer is that the European Union must sign up to the European Patent Convention and should negotiate that but it is no longer realistic to expect the European Patent Office to become a Union agency.
The penultimate point, raised by Mr De Clercq, was about the codecision procedure.
That will remain as it normally is and therefore Parliament will play its normal role in considering the mandates and the aims of the Commission when these issues are decided in full this autumn.
Lastly, when enlargement takes place the Union will become bigger, obviously, and the Community patent will then apply to the countries that have acceded to the European Union.
There is no other way of keeping and maintaining a Community patent.
Once again, the two other possibilities will continue to exist, so there will continue to be a Polish National Patent and there will also continue to be a European Patent which may if the applicant wishes, include Poland.
Let us hope that most European businesses and most European research experts will promote the shift from the European Patent to the Community Patent so that the competitiveness of the European Union is improved as much as possible.
Thank you very much for your replies, Mr Bolkestein.
That concludes the Commission' s statement and the subsequent debate.
Question Time (Commission)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0532/00).
We will examine questions to the Commission.
First part
Question No 25 by (H-0549/00):
Subject: Cybercrime Work is in progress to tackle cybercrime (Council of Europe, the G7' s Lyon Group).
In addition, the Commission has recently made proposals and is now considering taking new measures at Community level to combat crime.
Apparently the Commission is discussing a paper with the Member States without even informing Parliament that it is doing so.
One of the measures under consideration is a requirement for service-providers to gather and store traffic data and, upon request, supply it to the authorities.
Does the Commission realise that such a measure could present enormous risks to personal data protection and the protection of sensitive commercial data and would facilitate industrial and economic espionage?
Does the Commission realise that such a measure might destroy users' confidence in the Internet?
Does the Commission realise that such a measure would be inconsistent with the Commission' s recent eEurope initiative, the aim of which was to encourage the use of the Internet both by private individuals and by businesses?
Mr President, Mrs Cederschiöld, Members of Parliament, since December 1999 the Commission has undertaken informal consultations with representatives from Member States' law enforcement and personal data protection authorities and from European industry, mostly Internet service providers and telecommunications operators, with a view to drafting the communication announced in its annual work programme on possible options for further action by the European Union against computer-related crime.
The Commission considers that any solution to the complex issue of preservation of traffic data should achieve a fair balance between the different needs and interests of those involved, while fully ensuring fundamental human rights with regard to privacy and personal data protection.
There are quite different, important concerns to be taken into account.
On the one hand, privacy protection authorities have considered that the most effective means of reducing unacceptable risks to privacy, while recognising the need for effective law enforcement, is that traffic data should in principle not be kept only for law enforcement purposes.
On the other hand, law enforcement authorities have stated that they consider the preservation of a minimum amount of traffic data for a minimum period of time necessary to facilitate criminal investigations.
Adequate security of any preserved traffic data will have to be ensured.
Industry should be helped in the fight against crimes like hacking and computer fraud, but not be confronted with measures that are unreasonably costly.
Furthermore, industry will have a key role to play in contributing on a voluntary basis to the process of creating a safer information society.
Users should have confidence in the safety of the information society and feel protected from crime and from infringements of their privacy.
The e-Europe draft Action Plan, prepared by the Commission and very recently adopted by the Santa Maria da Feira Summit of the European Council, includes the establishment of a coordinated and coherent approach to cyber-crime by the end of 2002 in order to ensure greater cooperation on these key issues.
In the same context of the e-Europe initiative, as well as in the multiannual action plan on safer use of the Internet, the Commission plans to support a number of actions aimed at stimulating the use of the Internet and promoting security and confidence among the users.
I would like to say thank you very much for a nice reply, which, however, did not quite answer my questions.
We perhaps, therefore, need to discuss this in the future in order to get a complete answer.
We all want to combat cyber crime.
It is important that it is crime that is curbed and not the new economy.
To this end, all parties concerned must be involved in this consultation and present their views in good time.
This not only applies to the EU institutions and Member States, but also to the consumer and industry, so that we do not find ourselves in a situation of inconsistency in which one hand is doing something relating to the eEurope initiative, while at the same time we are doing something else in connection with crime.
It is a question of creating confidence in development if e-commerce is to work.
Therefore, the work cannot be carried out in secret.
Rather, it is important that we obtain analyses in this area of the consequences of the proposals.
In Feira it is precisely consumer confidence that is being identified as a key factor for the development of e-commerce.
I would like to conclude with a follow-up question: when will we get an assessment of the consequences for consumers, industry and economic espionage, which may otherwise be in danger of developing?
I share the view of the honourable Member in the sense that we cannot conduct this exercise in a secret way.
It is not the intention of the Commission to do anything in secret generally and more specifically, in this area.
On the contrary, we are trying to promote broad consultation on this issue, which is a very difficult one.
Nobody has yet found the right answer.
We have to follow the discussions that are going on in several international fora, for example the special convention the Council of Europe is preparing on cybercrime and the discussion on OECD.
We also need to follow very closely the evolution of the legislative amendments that are being introduced in several Member States, dealing with the very sensitive question of retaining traffic data for the purpose of law enforcement.
As I have said to Mrs Cederschiöld, the e-initiative action plan will also include a list of actions aimed at reinforcing security for the users of the Internet and also on the specific question of e-commerce.
According to the timetable fixed by the Summit of Santa Maria Da Feira these actions will be implemented in the next few months and we will get the assessment that the honourable Member mentioned in her question.
I was impressed by the Commissioner's balanced response to this question but it does not fit particularly well with the UK Government's proposal that the secret services - MI5 and MI6 - should perform surveillance of all Internet traffic.
They intend to demand the surrender of encryption codes and to penalise those who fail to surrender them even if the codes have been lost and are unobtainable.
Does the Commission consider that this proposal is, firstly, consistent with civil rights, as enunciated for the Community, and, secondly, in the interests of the development of Internet use in the European Union, as rhetorically advocated by everyone, including in particular the British Prime Minister?
I share your view that the question of having a strategy for encryption at European level is a key tool in enhancing security in the use of the Internet.
But as you can imagine, in this new field we have to address the need to reinforce security on the basis of the subsidiarity principle, in the sense that we have to recognise that each Member State is entitled to adopt its own national legislation to guarantee law enforcement at national level.
What we in the Commission do is to coordinate efforts at European level to guarantee law enforcement.
Our approach is to guarantee minimum common levels of law enforcement at European level, which does not prevent Member States introducing more stringent or national legislation.
Nevertheless a comparison of national legislations would be an important factor when we adopt common rules at European level.
I cannot give you a broad picture at the moment because in several Member States, such as the UK, legislation is still under preparation and has not yet been fully adopted by the national parliaments.
Question No 26 by Mr Watts will not be replied to since it is included in the agenda of the current part-session.
Question No 27 by (H-0543/00):
Subject: Non-allied status of certain EU Member States At the Feira European Council discussions are being held on the EU' s defence dimension, and the matter is also up for discussion at the IGC.
Some EU Member States do not belong to the NATO military alliance.
What is the Commission' s view of the position of these Member States in any future EU defence cooperation?
The European Union has made remarkable progress in shaping a European security and defence policy over the past year.
From Cologne via Helsinki to Feira we have gone from an ambitious vision to concrete targets, first military and now also civilian headline goals and the establishment of new specific structures.
This very welcome development has given substance to the objectives of the 'Petersberg principles' as set out in the Amsterdam Treaty.
Like their incorporation into the Treaty a few years ago this has only been possible with the full and active support of all Member States.
It is too early to say whether any further Treaty change in this area is required at this stage.
There has been no formal discussion of the European Union's defence dimension in the IGC framework so far.
The presidency report to Feira indicated that the conclusions of Cologne and Helsinki could be implemented without it being legally necessary to amend the Treaty unless the Council's decision-making powers were to be altered or the Treaty's provisions regarding the WEU needed to be amended.
The presidency has suggested that the issue of a revision of the ESDP provisions in the Treaty should remain open to examination as required before the Nice European Council.
As for the specific question of the position in any future defence cooperation of EU Member States that do not belong to Nato, this is first and foremost an issue to be addressed by the Member States concerned.
What is clear is that the military headline goal agreed at the Helsinki European Council will require a concerted and coordinated effort by all Member States.
As to the shape of individual national military contributions, these will be discussed at the pledging conference to be held in the autumn under the French presidency.
Again, how non-Nato EU states view their role and what their contribution to the defence dimension of the European Union should be is rightfully for these Member States to say.
But it may be helpful to distinguish between two component parts of the overall European security and defence equation, the Petersberg tasks of peace-keeping and peace enforcement on the one hand and territorial defence on the other.
The European Union's stated aim is to be ready to support action within the framework of Petersberg tasks.
All EU Member States have agreed this and are ready to contribute to it.
The excellent record of the European neutrals in the field of peacekeeping and crisis management operations has come very much to the fore in the new European security context.
All four Member States which are not also members of Nato are contributing actively and constructively to the development of CFSB in general and to the European security and defence policy in particular.
Their contribution to the last IGC was indeed crucial to the inclusion of the Petersberg tasks in the new Treaty.
Finally, I have no doubt that their contribution in this area - materially as well as in the ongoing discussions shaping the new structures of cooperation will continue to be both active and ambitious, be it in the military or non-military dimensions of conflict prevention, conflict resolution and crisis management.
Mr President, Commissioner, I thank you for your full reply.
I would still like to have a more specific idea of those principles that were decided upon at the Feira meeting.
There the concept of flexibility was adopted for the intergovernmental conference.
I would ask you whether it is your interpretation that this concept has now been extended to Pillar II issues.
As I said, I do not think it is necessary to have any treaty change.
That is my personal view, but I am sure that will be considered by Member States during the course of the next few months.
One issue which, of course, bears directly on the flexibility under Pillar II to which the honourable gentlemen referred is the whole question of Article 5 of the WEU, which is not being transferred to the EU, and this may of course have been behind the question.
What is being transferred is the Petersberg tasks alone, with of course the institutional and administrative mechanisms which are at the disposal of the European Union.
There are various possibilities about what will happen to the collective defence clause but it is not, given my responsibilities, really a question for me.
Pillar II issues have to be addressed to the Member States but, given our related responsibilities under Pillar I, we take an interest.
Question No 28 by (H-0555/00):
Subject: International Criminal Court The Commission, and particularly the Commissioner for humanitarian aid, played an important role in the setting-up of the new, permanent International Criminal Court (ICC) in June 1998.
The adoption of the Rome Statute - on which the ICC is founded - was an important step in breaking the tendency towards the systematic use of rape as a strategy of war.
The Statute is the first international accord to stipulate that rape, sexual slavery and forced pregnancy may be treated as crimes against humanity and war crimes.
However, to become a reality, the Rome Statute must be ratified by 60 States.
Although all the EU Member States have signed the Statute, only Italy, unfortunately, has ratified it..
What initiatives does the Commission intend to take to ensure that this important Statute is ratified?
The Commission is aware that so far two Member States, Italy and France, have ratified the ICC Convention.
However most Member States will ratify the Convention during this year, including some already this summer such as Germany, Austria and the Netherlands.
Other Member States will shortly present legislation to their parliaments.
The Commission supports NGO initiatives that promote the establishment of the ICC.
In 1999 about EUR 1.5 million was allocated to such activities in line with the budgetary comments for budget line B7706 of Chapter B77.
Mr President, it is, of course, gratifying that several EU countries are about to ratify this agreement.
It is in fact two years since we adopted the agreement.
At the same time it only needs a fifth of the 60 countries to ratify it in order for the treaty to come into effect.
It is, of course, very doubtful whether it will be done in time for December this year.
It is, however, extremely important, because the treaty from the Rome Conference is the first international agreement that establishes that rape and forced pregnancy can be treated as war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Experience from those courts we have set up, namely the war crimes tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia, clearly show that the present system is inadequate for dealing with the type of crimes I have just mentioned.
However, in order for the ICC to be able to work, broad international support is necessary.
My question to the Commission is therefore: Have you any plans at all to try to persuade important countries such as the United States, Russia and Japan to also sign the agreement from the Rome Conference?
First of all I wholly endorse what the honourable Member has said about the importance of the statute's inclusion of crimes of sexual violence as crimes against humanity when, as has been the case, they are committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population.
What we have seen in that context and in other criminal activities is of course the most powerful argument for us getting ahead with ratification of the convention by as many countries as possible.
I think I am right in saying that 160 nations decided to establish the international criminal court and the statute of the court was approved by about 120 states, so there should be no problem in moving from the 50 who have ratified to the 60 figure which we require in order to move things forward.
We have certainly pursued the importance of ratification with the United States.
We do not, as the honourable Member will know, accept the US position on the ICC.
We continue to argue our case with them and we will argue it with Russia and Japan and other countries as well.
It comes up fairly regularly in our bilateral contacts and I would make sure that it did if that were not the case.
We think this is potentially an extremely important institution, particularly in view of some of the appalling things that have happened in the last few years.
The sooner the court can sit, the better for everyone.
Mr President, does the Commission think it possible that the European Community will be associated with the Rome Convention?
If it is, what would be the relation between the Court of Justice of the European Communities and the ICC?
There are questions of our judicial personality or lack of judicial personality which have a direct bearing on that.
What we are concerned about at present, and this is very much where the Commission comes in - is encouraging all our Member States to ratify and encouraging some of our partners and colleagues in the international community to do so as well.
That has to be our objective in order to make sure that the provisions that were so widely supported in Rome actually lead to the establishment of a functioning court as soon as possible.
Question No 29 by (H-0560/00):
Subject: Sensitive Alpine corridor Given that the Alpine region is an exceedingly sensitive area which is suffering, environmentally, to an ever increasing extent from transit traffic between the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean (on the Brenner route alone, the volume of traffic has been increasing annually over the past ten years by an average of 5.8%, with the result that, in 1999, 33 million tonnes of goods were carried via the Brenner), will the Commission indicate what it plans to do in order to alleviate this enormous burden on the environment of and on the people living in such sensitive regions?
The Commission is fully aware of the environmental problems in the Alpine corridors, but points out that it must act in a balanced way in order to take account of the different interests at play in this kind of situation.
The Brenner is one of the crucial transit routes via the Alps and is therefore a good example of the need to act in a balanced way, with regard to both railways and roads, in order to protect the environment and, at the same time, guarantee the free movement of goods.
As regards the railways, the Commission - as the honourable Members know - supports the measures adopted by the Member States to develop and implement the Brenner railway project.
The Brenner high speed railway line has been included on the list of maximum priority Community projects and has received considerable Community funding via the Trans-European Networks.
With regard to the roads, we must stress that an increase in road traffic in no way automatically implies more pollution.
For example, the Eco-point system has shown that the emissions of polluting gases from lorries in transit through Austria have dropped despite the increase in the number of journeys made.
In general, the Commission will continue to seek solutions to the environmental problems caused by traffic.
In this respect you should be aware that the Commission has committed itself, in this year' s working programme, to producing a communication on traffic in the sensitive regions of the European Union, which include the Alpine region.
The result of this communication will have an influence on the future actions envisaged which, according to the initial guidelines, will include a coherent package of supplementary measures to reduce the effect of traffic in sensitive areas: technical standards to improve environmental and safety requirements, instruments for setting tariffs in order to adjust the levels relating to transport to the real cost of transport in all its forms, and an increase in the efficiency of transport, especially by improving intermodality, and increasing the competitivity of rail transport.
Mr President, I would like to thank the Commissioner for her comments and for her willingness, which she expressed several times before this House, to take into due consideration the environmental impact on an alpine area which is made particularly vulnerable by its altitude and its geographical location.
We have proposed new solutions in draft form, which have also recently been put forward to the Commissioner.
I consider that this proposal could be a pilot solution for the new projects and the concept of European Union transport as a whole.
I hope that the willingness hitherto displayed by the Commissioner will be mirrored throughout the rest of the Commission and that her intentions will receive majority backing from the European Commission as well.
Commission.
(ES) Mr President, I simply wish to thank the Member for this intervention and say that, of course, we are going to go ahead with the Brenner project, although, given its technical difficulties, it is not a project which can be carried out overnight.
However, I hope that, before concluding the period set for the 14 Essen projects, the Brenner project will be under way.
Mr President, we all know that there is an atmosphere of crisis on the Brenner, and I think that it is imperative to discuss plans for extending it and to look at pricing again, because we simply have to get a hold on the situation.
My question is this: do you have any actual plans - we have already had the Green Paper - to put efficient transport pricing, particularly on the Brenner model, into practice?
Commission.
(ES) I do not know exactly what you mean by efficient price.
If you are talking about a price which discourages transport, the problem is that high tariffs are being paid to cross certain specific areas, when there is currently no alternative.
Therefore, until the implementation of the agreement with Switzerland - and I hope that will be next year - which has been ratified by the Swiss people, an agreement which will undoubtedly open up alternatives to the current routes and will allow some of the north-south traffic to use certain corridors through Switzerland, there are not many alternative routes, especially because certain routes have had problems with tunnel accidents in recent times.
In this respect I believe that the main effort should be made with regard to creating better rail connections, which may be real alternatives, which may really even transport lorries by rail.
This is one of our current objectives.
However, such a complex and accident-prone area, geographically, requires projects, which we are working on, which need time to develop.
This in no way means that we have abandoned them.
On the contrary, we are continuing with the idea of taking them forward with the support of the Commission and the support of the countries involved.
This is the reason for the creation of a public interest association, seeking public-private funding, given the size of the project and possible future viability.
Second part
Questions to Mr Nielson
Question No 30 by (H-0524/00):
Subject: The use of Community funds by Turkey The 22 January 2000 edition of the Turkish 'Hürriyet' newspaper reported that some of the funds provided by the European Union to assist the victims of the earthquake which occurred last year were used to purchase 35 automobiles to a value of TRL 500 billion to facilitate travel by Turkish MPs.
Can the Commission state what was the total amount of funding granted by the European Union to Turkey following the disastrous earthquake last year and what measures were taken to ensure that the Community funds were properly used?
What is the Commission' s position concerning the above allegation contained in the 'Hürriyet' , a Turkish newspaper with a very wide circulation?
More specifically, will the Commission demand the return of those funds which were used for purposes other than that for which they were intended, in flagrant violation of Community rules, in order to satisfy consumerist requirements of Turkish MPs rather than providing assistance to the victims of the tragic earthquake?
First let me pass on the information that the European Commission via the Humanitarian Aid Office, ECHO, allocated a total amount of EUR 30 million to aid the victims of the earthquakes in Turkey last year.
The programmes were started in August and are still ongoing.
As to the specific question relating to an article in a Turkish newspaper on the 22 January, I can say that there is no Community funding involved in what this article relates to.
We have received assurances on this from two different sources.
Written confirmation has been received from the Commission's representation office in Ankara that the article in question makes no reference to European Union or any external source of funds.
Also there has been confirmation from ECHO's office in Istanbul that the Turkish Parliament Foundation is a private organisation established by, and financed by, the parliament members individually.
The way the money is being used is decided by the council of the parliament after being voted by the members.
The background for the newspaper article was that a unilateral decision was made by the head of the Turkish parliament to allocate funds to the earthquake area.
These funds had earlier been earmarked for the purchase of 35 cars for members of the parliamentary council and the council members objected to this reallocation considering that the original decision to buy new cars should be reinstated in the interest of cost-effectiveness.
The funds in question actually belong to the Turkish Parliament Foundation and this is financed by the members of parliament in Turkey.
So we have absolutely nothing to do with this matter and for that reason I cannot promise any kind of follow-up action either.
My warmest thanks to the Commissioner for his detailed reply to my question and for his reassurance that the funds provided by the European Union were not used to buy cars for use by certain Turkish MPs.
What bothers me is the fact that the Hürriyet, which is, I believe, the most widely read Turkish newspaper, did not meet with any denial on the part of the Turkish Government and, as we all know, freedom of the press is something of a problem in Turkey.
Journalists who go off the straight and narrow and report this sort of information are not just reprimanded, they are usually thrown in jail and sometimes even killed.
But I do want to believe that the reply given by the Commissioner following a thorough investigation by the European Union authorities in Turkey paints the right picture.
If indeed no such thing has happened, allow me to make a little joke by saying that, in that case, instead of giving these cars to Turkish MPs, they should give them to the MEPs in the regions, who are unable to use their cars and travel by public transport.
I would ask Members to limit themselves to new questions or supplementary questions.
I understand the importance of your assessments, but we must abide by the Rules of Procedure.
Question No 31 by (H-0540/00):
Subject: Developing countries and farm animal welfare What steps is the Commission taking, both through the Community' s development programme and its influence on the world stage, to encourage developing countries not to adopt industrial animal husbandry systems, as these pose serious threats to poverty alleviation, the environment, human health and animal welfare in developing countries?
The question reads 'Does the Commission coordinate with EU Member States and other international institutions on the problem of industrialisation of animal husbandry' and the answer is yes.
The Commission participates actively in the Livestock Environment and Development initiative.
The members of the steering committee here are Denmark, France, Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, the UK, the USA, Costa Rica, EFAT, the World Bank, the FAO, Senegal, India, China and Kenya.
The initiative's targets are the protection and enhancement of natural resources as affected by livestock production while alleviating poverty.
Earlier work under this initiative has identified on a global scale the consequences of increased pressure on grazing and mixing farming systems, and the dangers of the shift to industrial modes of production.
It has highlighted the close and complex interaction between government policies and the environmental impact of livestock production, and identified a large number of technologies which are available to mitigate the negative effects in all different production modes, provided the appropriate policy framework is in place.
So this is something we are giving quite some attention to.
The problem is that it is very big and it will probably be growing, but we are participating actively in the best international efforts to do something meaningful.
I thank the Commissioner for that helpful answer and I am very pleased to hear that these issues are being taken seriously.
I wonder though if the Commissioner would say whether or not he would agree that intensive agriculture is not likely to be the way forward for north or south when we consider that the world population at the end of this century will be 10 billion.
If they were all to aspire to eat a US diet we would need four planets the size of earth to produce the extra 9 billion tonnes of grain required.
And, in particular, would he agree, or disagree with the FAO when they say that the trend of further intensification of demand in production is inescapable?
I find that a very worrying statement coming out of the Food and Agriculture authority and would like to know very much whether or not the Commissioner agrees that such intensification is inevitable or would he agree that there are other alternatives and that those are alternatives that all of us ought to be promoting and pursuing?
The problem is that, as groups of people in even quite poor countries earn a better way of living, their diet changes.
This is a very clear pattern and demand for more protein is also increasing.
These statistics, the extrapolation if you will, should be taken quite seriously.
On the other hand, many projections have been made about where we would be today, which are definitely not being fulfilled.
We adopted in the Community already in 1989 a directive on the protection of animals kept for farming purposes.
In addition, a protocol annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam relates to the protection and welfare of animals, and these policies and ideas are of course taken into account in the Community's development aid in the livestock sector.
We have never supported any husbandry industrialisation project, but we have been supportive of an intensification of traditional farming systems of benefit to smallholders, and environmental conservation has always been taken carefully into account.
We are using and taking seriously environmental analyses of the consequences of these activities wherever we are supporting agriculture.
Mr President, what exactly does the Commission consider to be defined, and I quote from the question, as 'industrial animal-husbandry systems'.
Would it not be unreasonable to discourage developing countries from employing modern, efficient, cost-effective and humane systems of animal husbandry?
The distinction is as difficult to make in a developing country environment as it is in Europe.
This is clear to everybody.
However, the poverty dimension in what we are trying to support and promote means that more intensified small-scale production is what we are supporting.
As to the problems related to genuinely industrial-scale activities in this sector, we are working with the group of other donors and countries involved whom I mentioned, in order to do this as sustainably and acceptably as possible.
Question No 32 by (H-0567/00):
Subject: Mr Gavin Howard and the Programme de Développement de la Région Nord (PDRN II) EEC (DG VIII) In a letter dated 2 February 2000 to Commissioner Nielson, I asked the Commission to resolve the compensation problems of a UK national, Mr Gavin Howard, who had previously worked as a technical adviser on an EU-sponsored project in the Central African Republic in 1996.
As a result of events well beyond his control, much of his equipment and many of his belongings were ransacked while he was working on the project.
Since 1996, he has sought compensation for the losses that he suffered whilst working for the EU, since he maintains that he was covered by EU insurance.
Full details of this case have been previously forwarded to Mr Nielson's private office.
Will the Commission agree to compensate Mr Howard for his losses?
The mutiny which took place in 1996 in the Central African Republic caused considerable hardship and personal danger to a number of people working there.
Thankfully they were safely evacuated.
Mr Howard was under contract to an association of consultants.
It is for Mr Howard's employer to consider any payment to him which might be possible or provided for under the terms of the contract.
Compensation for the loss of personal belongings out of EDF funds is not justifiable in a situation of force majeure.
Mr Howard was not directly contracted as a staff member by us but was working for a company.
I regret the delay in providing the honourable Member with the information requested.
The answer I have given today will be confirmed in writing shortly.
Well that did not hurt, did it?
I have been waiting for that reply since 2 February and I simply cannot understand why it has taken the Commission so long to come up with that negative.
I accept the negative, but the fact of the matter is that I am a Member of the European Parliament.
I have been waiting five months for that reply.
Why?
My reaction to this is that I cannot understand it either but from the moment I was directly informed about this we started reacting.
I would unfortunately have to put this one in the category of cases showing what some of the problems are between the services in the Commission.
Question No 33 by (H-0573/00):
Subject: Humanitarian aid for the Chechen people How much humanitarian aid has the Commission sent to date to the civilian population in Chechnya - including expellees in neighbouring countries - and how has it sent it, and what is the programme for the remainder of the year?
- Since the beginning of the present conflict the European Commission, via its humanitarian aid office, has allocated a total of EUR 12.6 million in humanitarian aid to the victims of this on-going emergency.
This total amount is composed of two decisions taken in the autumn of 1999, one of them relating to EUR 2.4 million, the other for EUR 10.2 million allocated under the 2000 budget.
A little more than EUR 10 million are currently under implementation.
ECHO is constantly monitoring the further development of the situation and a contingency of EUR 4.8 million for the northern Caucusus has been set aside within ECHO's annual budget, so financially we are prepared to do more.
If the evolution of the situation should require, these additional funds then can be mobilised.
Among ECHO's implementing partners are the UNHCR, the ICRC and several European NGOs.
During the first months of the crisis, humanitarian operations mainly focused on the important concentrations of internally displaced persons in Ingushetia and to some extent on the limited number of victims who have found refuge in Georgia and Daghestan.
More recently operations have increasingly been focusing on Chechnya itself.
Unfortunately humanitarian aid work in some areas of Chechnya strongly affected by the hostilities is still not possible, as lack of security makes these areas inaccessible.
ECHO programmes in the northern Caucusus cover a broad range of aid sectors, for example, food, medical aid, shelter, water, sanitation, essential relief items and psycho-social assistance.
Planning of future assistance has to take into account the volatility of the situation on the ground.
In order to facilitate programming, ECHO carried out a technical assessment mission in Chechnya in May.
Pending a positive evolution of the general working environment, a further increase in operations inside Chechnya itself will be a major priority.
Bearing in mind that a quick return of all the displaced persons currently residing in Ingushetia becomes more and more unlikely, it will also be necessary to duly take into consideration an adequate follow-up to the on-going operations in this area.
Commissioner, thank you very much for your detailed reply.
I would like to ask a supplementary question: what is the position on funds already spent?
What proportion went direct to the Chechens affected and what proportion was channelled via Russian institutions, authorities and organisations?
- It all went to the people who were supposed to be the beneficiaries, in spite of the fact that I was very careful to announce to Parliament that this would have to be what we call a remote-controlled operation because of the situation there.
We have been able to do it in a fashion which we are quite happy with.
We have not been using Russian organisations in a way that gives any concern.
So we are quite pleased.
What we are not pleased with has been the lack of more direct access into Chechnya.
Thank you very much, Mr Nielson.
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commissioner has elapsed, Question No 34 will be replied to in writing.
Questions to Mr Barnier
Question No 35 by (H-0523/00):
Subject: Additionality principle On 12 April 2000 the European Parliament adopted a resolution in which the additionality principle is described as a fundamental instrument in the application of the Structural Funds.
Is the Commission aware of any case in which the Member States have failed to apply this principle?
I should like to give Mr Nogueira Román as accurate an answer as possible on this extremely important question, which he is not the first to raise, i.e. the application of the principle of additionality during the management and implementation of the Structural Funds, for which I am responsible.
Mr Nogueira Román, I pay close attention to the information which we request and which the Member States send to us on this question.
I am able to tell you that, to date, the Commission has not identified any Member State which has failed to apply the principle of additionality when implementing the Structural Funds, as defined in the general regulation, especially since Berlin.
However, to be perfectly objective, I do realise that, since this principle was introduced in 1989, difficulties have arisen as regards the transmission of information to the Commission by a number of Member States, from the point of view both of the methodology used and the regularity and frequency of the reports.
In view of these problems and in order to solve them, the Council decided, at the Commission's proposal, to simplify the control and application of additionality for the new programming period starting this year and ending in 2006.
As a result, Mr Nogueira Román, additionality is now only verified three times during the period, rather than annually.
In the same spirit, each Member State is allowed a certain degree of flexibility in setting the starting point for average expenditure between 1994 and 1999.
At this stage, I am, objectively-speaking, satisfied with the ex ante verification of additionality prior to the adoption of programming documents for 2000-2006.
But that does not mean that I shall relax my vigilance, nor does it mean that I shall stop asking questions; as I have reminded several governments, I shall continue to monitor the application of additionality closely.
Most Member States have sent in appropriate information, especially regarding funding.
This information indicates, generally speaking, that their own structural public expenditure has been maintained and, in most cases, that there will be an average substantial increase in this expenditure between 2000 and 2006.
Madam President, Commissioner Barnier, I would like to thank you for your proposal.
As you will understand, my question - based as it was on the moral conviction that many States, including, I am quite sure, Spain, are not observing the principle of additionality - was in part a rhetorical one designed to elicit a response from you.
In any case, as it is obvious that failure to observe the principle of additionality has very serious adverse effects in countries which are less economically developed and have higher levels of unemployment, I would like to ask if you are willing to put in place new and much needed conceptual policy administration instruments which would genuinely, and with the full force of the law, prevent a practice which makes a mockery of the use of Community funds and the very objectives of social and territorial cohesion within the European Union for which you are responsible as a member of the Commission.
Mr Nogueira Román, your question specifically targets the countries or regions with the most difficulties.
I should like to point out that several of the least developed countries benefit from both regional policy funds and the Cohesion Fund.
It is true, Mr Nogueira Román, and there is a text with which I must comply, stating that the Cohesion Fund is not subject to additionality requirements.
It is not subject to this principle because, may I remind you, the Cohesion Fund was and still is there to help less developed Member States catch up and, in numerous cases, accede to monetary union.
That is one part of my reply.
Now you are calling on me in your question to use the general regulation at my disposal and really ensure that the principle of additionality is applied.
I must admit that there is a weakness in the regulation as regards possible sanctions for countries which do not comply with this principle.
That is why I put in so much effort, in a preventive sense, when we approve the Community support frameworks, when we approve the SPDs, when I meet the ministers who come and see me, when I go and see them in the field, almost every week in some region of Europe, in stating my attachment to a number of principles.
The principle of additionality, the principle of partnership, compliance with major policies - we shall discuss that later with Mrs Frassoni - and compliance with the major European policies, especially environmental policies.
It is true that the general regulation for the Structural Funds makes no provision for specific sanctions for Member States which do not apply the principle of additionality.
However, in application of article 11 of the general regulation, the Commission makes and will continue to make approval of Community support frameworks, SPDs for 2000-2006 and mid-term approval and reprogramming conditional upon our departments being sent information on the principle of additionality and compliance with it by the Member States.
There you have it;
I have been frank with you.
I admit that there is a weakness from the point of view of sanctions for those who do not comply with additionality.
At the present time I am being particularly clear and attentive and I can assure you everyone will have an extremely precise mid-term meeting.
The problem may also be that even where a state formally complies the idea of the structural funds does not make the difference that it should.
Mr Barnier has said that from 2000 to 2006 there will definitely be an increase in expenditure but nothing guarantees that the state increase in expenditure will be focused on the areas which the Community has taken as targets for structural funding.
Indeed, Mr Barnier has made it absolutely plain that the Community does not and cannot inquire into that point.
So it seems to me a little bizarre that we spend ages trying to build up exactly correct structural maps in the full knowledge that nothing under the additionality principle actually guarantees that the Member State will increase expenditure in the region in question.
That does seem to me to be a radical fault in the concept of additionality and one that needs to be reformed.
Mr MacCormick, thank you for highlighting this point.
Ladies and gentlemen, you must expect a Commissioner to implement the policy which you want and to comply with the texts and regulations laid down by you and the Council.
In this specific case, I said 'a weakness' .
When I say 'weakness' , Mr Nogueira, Mr MacCormick, I do not just note that it exists, fold my arms and say: 'That's how it is, there is nothing I can do!'
I am not a fatalist.
So, as soon as we start preparing the new regional policy for 2006 and 2013, I shall ensure that account is taken of these weaknesses and shall submit my proposals.
There is probably another point which needs revising, as Mr MacCormick has pointed out, and that is that we need to check if the principle of additionality is being applied and we can only do so at national level for both Objective 1 and Objective 2.
That is our problem.
We can confirm that the principle is being applied at national level and, at the same time, that it is not being applied in a region where it is needed.
That is what Mr MacCormick has highlighted.
Again vigilance is my watchword and has been, especially vis-à-vis the United Kingdom.
I ask questions, I draw attention to specific cases pointed out to me, as the honourable Member has done.
Nonetheless, I must also say that the regulation does not allow me, on this precise point, to issue instructions.
I can do no more than demonstrate that I am keen to enter into dialogue and that I am available, in the case which you have pointed out to me and in every other case, to do so as actively as possible, while at the same time complying with the general regulation of the Structural Funds.
Question No 36 by (H-0528/00):
Subject: New Structural Fund programmes and biodiversity The Commission is negotiating the new 2000-2006 Structural Fund programmes.
On 16 March 2000 it issued a note on biodiversity and the Structural Funds in the light of the fact that Directive 92/43 and Directive 79/409 have been only partially transposed by the EU Member States and that Structural Fund investment could therefore threaten biodiversity.
How can the Commission guarantee that biodiversity and the Natura 2000 network are protected and not threatened?
Which Member States have caused difficulties in the implementation of what the Commission has requested?
What powers does the Commission intend to use in order to ensure that biodiversity is not threatened when the new programmes are implemented?
- (FR) I am pleased to have someone to reply to on this extremely important question which touches on the coherence of the policies for which the Commission is responsible, especially the coherent implementation of the Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund policies with other Community policies, particularly in the area of environmental protection and improvement.
Several Member States have yet to send in lists of zones to be protected under Directives 92/43 and 79/409, more generally known as the Natura 2000 Directives.
The Commission has instituted proceedings before the Court of Justice against the Member States most in arrears.
On arriving at the Commission, and because I am in charge of regional policy and also because I was Minister for the Environment in my own country and have an irrevocable passion for and commitment to these issues, I decided to take a close look at the problems of coherence, in a continuing bid to prevent and anticipate.
But our predecessors, Mrs Bjerregaard and Mrs Wulf-Mathies had already worked on this and I and my colleague Margot Wallström decided to get on and regulate this procedure.
That is why, in agreement with Mrs Wallström, I submitted guidelines to the Commission which were approved on 14 March.
I personally sent these guidelines to each of the Member States on 28 March.
I would draw your attention to the fact that these guidelines only apply to the Member States which still have not notified the sites for protection under the Habitat and Birds directives by the time the Commission approves the programming documents for the new period 2000-2006.
This guideline calls on Member States to take immediate action to present their lists of sites protected under Natura 2000 as quickly as possible and, in addition, to undertake to ensure that sites protected under Natura 2000 are not damaged when projects cofinanced by the Structural Funds are implemented.
In the event of any irregularities in connection with the conditions of implementation, i.e. if undertakings to submit lists of protected sites are not honoured, the Commission will formally notify the Member State in question of its intention to take any suitable measures immediately, in accordance with the provisions of the general regulation on the Structural Funds or the regulation on the Cohesion Fund.
Thus, the Commission will be able to have recourse, in compliance with the principle of proportionality, to provisions governing the suspension of payments, unless special circumstances apply.
Because these guidelines were only recently adopted - when the Community support framework for Portugal was approved on 14 March - and the new programming period 2000-2006 is only just starting, I am honestly not in a position to quote specific examples.
I am talking about putting these new provisions into practice in specific Member States; let me also tell the honourable member that, to date, the overall situation concerning the submission of lists of Natura 2000 sites to the Commission is unsatisfactory, at least in five Member States: Germany, France, Ireland, Belgium and the United Kingdom.
These are the countries on which we are keeping a very close watch, as I mentioned earlier in connection with another matter.
I am totally dissatisfied with the response because it was not out of idle curiosity that I wanted to know which Member States had caused difficulties but in order to get an idea of the extent of the failure to indicate the areas of biodiversity.
However, the response was satisfactory in the sense that if, out of all the possible measures, that of suspending the money flow is actually implemented, it will be the most effective step that can possibly be imagined.
A person's wallet is the most sensitive part of their anatomy.
Question No 37 by (H-0544/00):
Subject: Progress of negotiations on the Greek Community support framework Can the Commission say how far the regional development plan (RDP) submitted by the Greek Government differs from the decisions taken to date within the scope of the negotiations between the Commission and the Greek Government (significant amendments), how the negotiations concerning the regional and sectoral programmes are progressing and also what progress has been made on the setting up of managing authorities which, pursuant to Article 9(n) of the framework regulation on the Structural Funds, 1260/1999, are responsible for managing the programmes?
Questions to Mrs Wallström
In response to the question put to me by Mr Hatzidakis, I should like to stress the Commission's delight at the ambitious scope of Greece's regional development plan for the new period 2000-2006.
This plan will promote the structural reforms needed so that Greece can honour its commitment within Economic and Monetary Union.
Negotiations to establish this Community support framework have allowed certain aspects of the strategy for the regional development plan to be strengthened, especially with regard to education, vocational training and environmental protection.
At the moment, Mr Hatzidakis, the challenge which we must take up together is to genuinely achieve these objectives by ensuring that the Structural Funds and the corresponding national funds are managed efficiently.
The Commission has drawn the attention of the Greek authorities - I personally have done so twice on two visits to Athens within the space of nine months - to the need to set up efficient administrative structures before Community appropriations are transferred.
The most important thing is to set up management authorities and, as a matter of priority, the management authority for the Community Support Framework.
The Commission has welcomed the intention of the Greek authorities to adopt a new specific legal framework by the autumn, to regulate all these matters.
I personally - since I shall be in Greece for an official visit to Athens and Crete in October - shall have an opportunity to specify and verify this point.
Negotiations on the adoption of the Community support framework are in the final stages, even though a number of points have yet to be finalised, with regard mainly to the distribution of financial allocations and the definition of the implementation system.
We expect and we hope, Mr Hatzidakis, that these points will also be quickly finalised.
Negotiations on the adoption of operational programmes have started in parallel with the final stage of negotiations on the Community support framework.
These negotiations are progressing normally and I trust that we will be able to approve certain programmes by the end of August.
Mr President, Commissioner, I have before me the development plan for 2000-2006 sent to you by the Ministry of the National Economy last autumn.
On page 1-119 it says that if the 2nd Community Support Framework had been completed between 1994 and 1999 in accordance with the relevant plan, this would have increased the average annual rate of growth in the Gross National Product for the 1994-1999 period by 0.6%.
This would have meant additional GNP in the order of GRD 1.6 trillion over and above what we actually had.
The government accepts this and, between the lines, I think that you accept that there are problems with the public administration in Greece.
More importantly, I think that you will have problems with the management committees and I should like you to tell me specifically what you intend to do with the Management Organisation Unit and relations with the Ministry of the National Economy, which could be better?
What is to be done about outsourcing the external employees whom we need?
Will there be incentives and penalties from now on in order to ensure that the Community Support Framework is applied correctly to those who need it?
More importantly, what is to be done about the gaping wound in the Social Fund in Greece which, in my view, is no more than a black hole which just swallows up Community funds?
Yes, Mr Hatzidakis, even without reading between the lines, I think that, from one period to another, there are always lessons to be learned, progress to be made, mistakes to be corrected and, judging from how the second Community support framework was implemented in Greece, I think there probably are lessons to be learned.
The Commission is well aware of the problems, especially those which you have just pointed to in connection with the operational nature of the Management Organization Unit.
We think that Greece, which is now a full member of the Economic and Monetary Union, is more conscious of its administrative weaknesses and of the need to rectify them than it was in the past because all this is essential, as you have quite rightly said, if maximum profit is to be derived from the new third Community support framework now getting under way.
As far as we are concerned, Mr Hatzidakis, we shall monitor how implementation progresses very closely, both within this framework and within the context of our regulatory powers and I shall not fail, if necessary - let us not talk of sanctions - to do my duty.
As far as more efficient management is concerned - over and above what has already been done under the previous Community support framework, - I would remind you that the Greek authorities have agreed to draft a bill adapting administrative practice to the rules of the Structural Funds.
This law is based on the provisions included in the Community Support Framework.
The same authorities will also need to appoint qualified people, define administrative responsibilities and ensure that there is proper information and training for staff at all levels.
The computer system for integrated management will also need to be fully operational.
We have stressed, Mr Hatzidakis, the importance which we attach to translating agreements into an efficient organisation on the ground, well in advance of payment of the first appropriations by the European Union for the new programming period.
That is the assurance which I wanted to give you.
Mr President, despite Commissioner Barnier's highly specific and detailed reply and the acknowledgement of the shortcomings of Greek public administration, an acknowledgement which is a common ground and which everyone accepts, including the government, there is another problem: decentralised local authorities administer these funds and it is hard for the central public administration to intervene, resulting in inaction and wastage or in funds being used for the wrong purpose.
Is Mr Barnier aware of this problem?
What can he do in this direction?
Of course he would need to make representations mainly to the government and focus his efforts on the extent to which the government is able to influence regional local authorities.
Mr Marinos, not only have I studied this question, but I also intend to go and visit people and see the problems in the regions in every Member State for myself.
I do not intend to sit ensconced in my office and content myself with receiving ministers passing through Brussels.
I want to go and see for myself.
I spent last week in a region of Finland.
As I said to Mr Hatzidakis, and at his invitation, I shall be going to Crete, to one of the Greek regions, in October.
This is the way to accept one' s responsibilities, not by repression and not by sanctions.
I do not want to point my finger or make a priori judgments.
I prefer education.
That is why, for example, I convened a seminar at the beginning of June to which all the management authorities throughout the European Union in charge of Objective 1 appropriations were invited.
500 administrators attended, from all the management authorities, from the whole of Europe.
And I shall do likewise, in the autumn, with the Objective 2 management authorities.
We have also invited Mrs Theato, the chairperson of the Committee on Budgetary Control, and the Court of Auditors, to help with this financial and managerial education programme.
I referred earlier, during my reply to Mr Hatzidakis, to training.
Before getting caught up in regional management - I must also respect this notion of decentralisation - I want to check with the Commission's normal contacts, i.e. the Member States, that all the systems really are in place.
So I shall be checking with the Greek government that everything is in place at the level of this new Community support framework.
And the framework to be implemented must of course include a proper evaluation system for each region, especially proper management and disciplinary systems, as well as the principle of responsible decentralisation.
I think that you understand my position on this issue, but I must first work with the national governments, because that is how the Structural Funds need to be managed at this stage, within the framework of the general regulation.
Thank you very much for your cooperation, Mr Barnier.
Question Nos 38, 39 and 40 will be replied to in writing.
We will proceed, late, to the last 20 minutes of questions to Commissioner Wallström.
As the author is not present, Question No 41 lapses.
Question No 42 by (H-0521/00):
Subject: Reclamation work in Dublin Bay Reclamation work is taking place in Dublin Bay in an area submitted for designation as an SPA last July under the Wild Birds Directive.
The boundaries of this extended SPA were altered, following representations by the Dublin Port Company to Duchas, so as to enable the company to carry out its proposal to infill 52 acres of Dublin Bay in order to expand the port, chiefly on economic grounds.
However, according to documents secured by an NGO, Dublin Bay Watch, following a request under the Freedom of Information Act, it emerged that objections made by a local authority were rejected by Duchas on the grounds that 'the proposals to designate an extension would proceed unless a scientific case was made' .
Final designation and submission to the Commission of the altered SPA occurred last February.
Dublin Bay Watch has complained to the Commission and provided extensive evidence.
In the light of this information, will the Commission initiate legal proceedings against the Irish Government for altering the boundaries of an SPA, and will it urge the Government to redesignate the entire SPA as it was first advertised in July 1999?
Does the Commission intend to withdraw EU funding of such a project and prohibit any work which would seriously affect an SPA?
Does it believe that the public consultation process was adequate in this instance and in line with the EIA Directive?
As a result of several complaints the Commission is aware of the controversy surrounding this reclamation project for Dublin port.
In particular, it knows of the concerns about the exclusion of an area of about 20 hectares from the 1999 extension to the Sandymount Strand and Tolka estuary special protection area in Dublin Bay classified under the Community's Wild Birds directive.
While included in the 1999 proposal for extension of the SPA, the area in question was omitted when the extension was finally adopted at the end of 1999.
By way of background: the 1999 proposal for extension followed a Commission request to the Irish authorities to enlarge the SPA.
It was particularly concerned to ensure that major Community investment in sewage treatment for Dublin would take place within the legal framework provided by SPA status.
The legal deadline for completing Irish SPAs expired in 1981 and the Commission has for some time been concerned that the Irish SPA network remains incomplete.
In April this year the Commission notified a letter of formal notice to Ireland under Article 226 of the EC Treaty in which it drew attention to the general failure to complete the Irish SPA network.
Dublin Bay was mentioned as a partially classified important bird area.
The Commission is not aware of any intention to use Community funds in relation to the port reclamation project.
As regards public consultation under the environmental impact assessment for the port reclamation project, the Commission would prefer not to comment pending the investigation of the complaints it has received.
I can understand that you do not want to comment until you have investigated the complaints but I would urge you to put pressure on the Irish government.
For decades they have ignored their obligations under EU directives.
As regards the special protection areas they have completely ignored their obligations.
In this case they have basically done what they want.
They change the boundaries whenever they feel like it.
The public consultation, in my mind and in the mind of many of the local people in the Community, is completely and totally inadequate.
This is just one more example of the way that the Irish government is behaving in relation to its obligations under EU directives.
I would like to ask you, Commissioner, are you going to push much further with the Irish government and explore every possible avenue.
I welcome the recent decision on fining Greece and I would like to see the same thing happen with the Irish government if they fail to comply with directives.
It seems the only thing they are willing to listen to is the threat of fines.
Unfortunately the taxpayer will have to pay the fines but real pressure has to be put on the government at this stage because they have got away with it for far too long.
As you know the Commission has taken the first step in a general legal action that includes Dublin Bay.
I would like to mention that two qualifications need to be made.
First the 1999 extension to the Sandymount Strand and Tolka estuary SPA clearly includes most of the important areas not included in the original SPA.
Secondly, while the Commission has until now treated Dublin Bay as still partially classified on the basis of evidence that qualifying inter-tidal areas may still have been omitted it will need to consider any evidence offered by Ireland that the site is sufficiently classified.
Of course, we will do everything possible to help the Irish or to put pressure on them to live up to the rules and regulations concerning this.
I am sure that we will have to continue the legal proceedings against Ireland.
Question No 43 by (H-0529/00):
Subject: Management of toxic waste Environmental organisations in Greece have alleged that toxic and hazardous waste is being buried without any controls.
Of the 264 571 tonnes of hazardous waste produced in 1999, a mere 0.12% was shipped abroad for incineration.
There are no controls on the disposal of waste produced by the lead-acid accumulator recycling plants.
Greek Electricity Board (DEI) condensers with substantial amounts of Clophen have been abandoned at Aspropyrgos.
In Attica there is only one incinerator with a capacity of 0.5 tonnes of hospital waste a day, even though some 20 tonnes of such waste is produced a day.
As regards PCBs, Greece has no processing facilities and it is unknown what happens to them.
Over the last ten years no substantial steps have been taken to ensure the proper management of this waste.
Article 16 of Directive 78/319/EEC states: 'Every three years, and for the first time three years following the notification of this Directive, Member States shall draw up a situation report on the disposal of toxic and dangerous waste in their respective countries and shall forward it to the Commission'.
Will the Commission say how many such reports has Greece forwarded so far on the basis of the above directive, and what do these reports say?
What stage have the relevant Greek authorities reached in implementing Directives 75/442/EEC, 78/319/EEC, 94/67/EEC, 91/157/EEC and 94/62/EEC?
Does it intend to impose fines in the event of violations?
As the Commission does not have the means to inspect Greek waste management facilities the most important tools for the Commission to check the practical implementation are reports, plans and programmes requested in the different waste directives.
The Commission has very little information on waste management in Greece.
Greece did not report on the implementation of waste management legislation between 1989 and 1997.
However at the end of last year Greece answered four questionnaires regarding the implementation of four waste directives.
According to that answer 280 000 tonnes of hazardous waste were generated in Greece - the year is not indicated - of which 95 760 tonnes were recycled, though Greece indicated that it has no installation for the processing or disposal of hazardous waste.
The hazardous wastes are reported to be either temporarily stored or exported for final disposal in other countries.
The Commission is of the opinion that a number of Community requirements are not being complied with by Greece and has taken action under Article 226.
The most important aspects concern the absence of management plans according to Article 7 of Directive 75/442 on waste, Article 6 of Directive 91/689 on hazardous waste and Article 14 of Directive 94/62 on packaging and packaging waste, the failure to transpose Directive 94/62 and transmit data according to Article 12 concerning the packaging waste industry, the absence of a programme according to Article 6 of Directive 91/157 on batteries and accumulators containing certain substances and non-compliance with Articles 4 and 11 of Directive 96/59 on the disposal of PCBs and PCTs.
A first report according to Directive 94/67 on the incineration of hazardous waste has to be provided for the period 1998 to 2000 by the end of September 2001.
Despite the fact that you did not reply to me in Greek, which I imagine is a bit harder, thank you very much for passing on your findings.
But the question remains.
Is there absolutely no way of establishing where these huge quantities of waste go?
You yourself referred to some 115 000 or 175 000 tonnes - I cannot find the figures - the final destination of which is unknown.
Secondly, having identified all these infringements, do you intend to refer this to the Court which, unfortunately for my country - gave us a recent example by finding Greece guilty of another, older infringement?
I remind you what action the Commission has taken to address the failure of Greece to correctly transpose and apply Community waste legislation.
There are two codecisions, one dated 8 July 1999 and one dated 13 April 2000.
There is an application before the Court.
There is an additional recent opinion sent on 11 August last year and there is a letter of formal notice sent on 10 April this year for failure to apply a number of articles properly.
Of course we are worried.
This is a general problem in Greece, the implementation of Community waste legislation.
Of course we would also like to know where this waste has gone but we can only ask Greece for those statistics.
Unfortunately Greece has not done this properly.
First I should like to say that I have submitted a written question along the same lines as that put by my fellow member Mihail Papayannakis.
Secondly, I should like to say in all honesty that, as a Greek citizen, I am shocked by what you have said.
In other words, that we do not know and the Greek Government does not know, no-one knows what has happened to over half our toxic waste.
From what you have said, I think that my fellow countrymen in Greece should be worried, and with good cause.
I should like to put two questions to you.
The first is: what sanctions will be imposed on Greece?
Do you think it is sufficient merely to take recourse to the Court, which could take three or four years to reach a verdict?
In the meantime, what about public health in Greece?
Toxic waste is an extremely important issue.
My second question is this: assuming that Greece is convicted for the waste, for the waste management in Hania in Crete, can you tell us, in general terms, where you think the problem with the application of environmental legislation in Greece lies?
Which specific areas of Community legislation are causing problems?
Because I know, for example, that there are also problems with the management of nitric compounds.
Mr President there is reason to be worried because we know there are problems in some of the Member States with illegal trading and illegal disposal of hazardous wastes.
Of course the Greek Government and maybe also the local authorities should be asked how this has been handled.
From the Commission side we can continue the legal proceedings and the legal procedures as they are set out for the Commission, but I think what is most effective in cases like this is open debate in the European Parliament.
Of course we will keep an eye on this and keep up the pressure on Greece to report to us because that is the instrument we have available.
Question No 44 by (H-0547/00):
Subject: Polluted land Heavily polluted, former industrial land has created a number of severe problems.
Water spreads the pollution into other parts of the natural environment and, in order to construct housing or other buildings on the land, it must be decontaminated at great expense.
Does the Commission have any plans for dealing with this problem and is it prepared to put forward a strategy for doing so?
Commission.
(SV) The pollution of industrial land is a big problem in Europe.
According to the report from the European Environment Agency on the state of the environment, the Topic Centre on Land Cover 1998 estimated that there are 750 000 polluted or potentially polluted places within the EU.
Current EU legislation, like that which is proposed, focuses on the prevention of pollution.
Directive 96/61 concerning integrated pollution prevention and control, the IPPC Directive, states that Member States must take all necessary measures that are required in order to restore industrial land that is no longer in use.
Such measures must already form a part of the operational situation.
This directive must be enforced completely before November 2007.
Another instrument which may help to prevent future pollution of land is the directive that we are currently working on in relation to environmental liability.
To deal with pollution that occurred in the past, certain Member States have developed special financial instruments - there are taxes or different funds that have been set up for this purpose.
It is already clear that this type of clean-up costs, or will cost, Member States very large sums of money.
At EU level, the European Regional Development Fund can contribute a certain amount of support.
I might also add that I can see how big a problem this is in the candidate countries.
The Commission is, however, not as yet planning any form of global or European clean-up strategy.
As far as the past pollution of land is concerned, the proximity principle ought to be applied, because national, regional or local authorities are in the best position to deal with these issues.
Also, this type of pollution is not a transnational issue, and the problem is not first and foremost an administrative one, but a financial one.
I would like to thank Commissioner Wallström for her reply.
It could of course be said in actual fact that this type of pollution can be transnational, because we know that water carries pollutants along with it, particularly chemicals and heavy metals.
The countries, particularly in the central parts of Europe, are so close to each other that it is difficult to say where the pollutants originate from.
I think that a common strategy would be needed to deal with these issues.
That is actually what I was after in the question that I raised.
In her reply, Mrs Wallström has now said that there will not be a strategy in this area.
The question is now whether the Commission is prepared to support research, further experiments and development in the respective Member States in order for us to cope with these problems, which are immense.
Commission.
(SV) Of course, it is important for the respective Member States to make a list of the existing industrial land that is polluted and the best way to tackle this problem.
As I have already said, we see this as a very great concern also from an economic point of view for many of the candidate countries, where this is often mentioned as an immense problem.
Up to now we have mainly regarded this as a local and national issue.
In order to be able to clean up in the best way possible, we need to consider what sort of pollution is involved and what the local conditions are like.
We have nothing against creating a strategy, if the Member States also want that, but in that case we must also get hold of the resources to deal with it.
As it looks so far, this has not been something that we have given the highest priority to, but naturally I think that it is very important for a proper inventory to be made and for a plan to be drawn up by the Member States, and why not also research and development in the area in order to find the best methods for cleaning up polluted industrial land.
Mr President, the Commissioner has already partly answered a question that has been on my mind, but perhaps I will ask an additional question on the matter.
This same problem concerns former landfill sites that are later used for housing.
The Commission may have information on the extent of the problem in the Member States.
Does the Commission think it possible that some kind of strategy could be found regarding these built-up areas?
Commission.
(SV) I can only repeat that the Commission is, of course, prepared to take on such a task, but in the present situation, I do not perhaps think it is something that we can do with existing resources and in a sufficiently radical way, because it requires considerable resources.
It is very evidently a problem that must be dealt with at national, regional and local levels.
However, if the Member States should so desire, we obviously have nothing against taking on this task.
I think that we are already doing this when we see that there is great necessity for doing something.
For example, in connection with the follow-up of the disaster in Baia Mare, we are trying to identify where the hot spots are and to see if we can identify dangerous places where we really need to keep our eyes open to ensure that no new disasters happen.
When it comes to the pure clean-up work, I certainly think that the proximity principle ought to be applied.
Question No 45 by (H-0548/00):
Subject: Fireworks factories On 2 June 2000 an explosion occurred at the Liborio Fernandes fireworks factory in the Portuguese village of Lanhelas.
Nine people were injured, and the village was badly damaged.
A similar explosion has just occurred at the Pyroma de Feugueyrolles factory in France.
These two explosions, which occurred only a few days after the tragic incident near Amsterdam, not to speak of the persistent explosions in Spain, are a reminder of the danger posed by these factories when they are located in residential areas.
The manufacture of fireworks has become all the more dangerous since the old craft methods gave way to industrial methods.
This means both the stockpiling of more explosive substances and greater reactivity.
What measures does the Commission intend to propose in order to impose or strengthen safety standards aimed at eliminating the risk of explosion in these firms, to prohibit the location of such firms in residential areas, to prevent the transport of explosives from posing a threat both to the transporters and to the inhabitants of the areas through which they pass?
The Commission is most concerned about the recent accidents in fireworks storage and production facilities.
The manufacture and storage of pyrotechnic substances is covered by Council Directive 96/82 of 9 December 1996 on the control of major accident hazards involving dangerous substances, the so-called Seveso II directive.
This directive obliges operators of establishments having dangerous substances within certain threshold limits to establish a major accident prevention policy.
It also obliges them to set up safety management systems and emergency plans and to demonstrate this to the public inspection authorities by submitting a safety report.
Moreover, the Seveso II directive contains the new provision recognising that the implications of major accident hazards should be taken into account in the land use planning policies of the Member States.
These are obliged to pursue the aim of the directive, that is, the prevention of major accidents and the limitation of their consequences for man and the environment.
This has to be done through controls on the siting of new establishments, modifications to existing establishments and new developments such as transport links, locations frequented by the public and residential areas in the vicinity of existing establishments.
In the long term land use planning policies shall ensure that appropriate distances between hazardous establishments and residential areas are maintained.
Member States shall also ensure that all competent authorities and planning authorities responsible for decisions set up appropriate consultation procedures.
The inclusion of this provision can be regarded as a major step forward in the process of major accident mitigation.
A review of the Seveso II directive is already under way.
After a full investigation of the accidents that occurred, the Commission will evaluate the threshold limits assigned to pyrotechnics substances as part of the review.
A proposal for amendments to the Seveso II directive should be ready by the beginning of next year, that is 2001.
This can only be done when we have evaluated the experiences following the accident in Enschede as well as the accident in Romania.
This process will be carried out in close cooperation with the Member States, the European Parliament and other interested parties.
The transport of explosive materials is covered by Directive 94/55 on the transport of dangerous goods by road.
This directive makes obligatory the provisions of Annex A and B of the European agreement concerning the international carriage of dangerous goods by road for road transport within or between Member States.
Annex A contains the provisions concerning the packaging and labelling of dangerous goods and Annex B contains the provisions concerning the construction equipment and operation of the vehicle as well as the minimum training requirements for the driver.
The application of this legislation guarantees a high level of safety for the transport of dangerous goods including explosives.
You have told me that there are directives, but to our mind they are probably not applied, since accidents are increasing in number and becoming more and more dangerous, now that these factories have replaced old production crafts with industrial methods.
It appears perfectly obvious to me that factories such as this, companies such as this, really should not be located near residential areas.
The tragedy in Enschede, in the Netherlands, illustrates this all too clearly and in Portugal, which I referred to in my question, 159 houses in the village of Lanhelas in the province of Minho were hit by the explosion.
Some were completely destroyed, others were partially destroyed and the victims' protection association that has been set up has estimated the damage at over EUR 1 billion.
I think that we urgently need to get these directives applied and to introduce others prohibiting firework factories near residential areas.
Yes, of course, Mr President, we are also extremely worried about what has happened and that is why we are looking at the Seveso II directive in order to see if it is necessary to complement it with new rules to cover establishments like the plants involved in the recent accidents.
And, of course, we also have to look at the land use planning because the establishments in question were not covered by the Seveso II directive because the thresholds were not the right ones.
We will be looking at this as soon as we have evaluated all the information about these accidents.
We will not sit on our hands.
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed, Questions Nos 46 to 78 will be replied to in writing.
(The sitting was suspended at 8.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.).
EMAS (Eco-Management and Audit Scheme)
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5­0165/2000) from Mr García-Orcoyen Tormo, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, concerning the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Regulation on the voluntary participation of organisations in a Community Eco-Management and Audit Scheme(EMAS).
Mr President, Commissioner Wallström, we thank you for being here at this time in the evening.
The Community Eco-management and Audit Scheme is not exactly the most popular of the environmental issues but, nevertheless, it is a fantastic instrument for making progress in the field of integrating economic activities and the preservation of the environment.
By adopting a system of environmental management, companies - whether they be industrial or service companies - learn to integrate environmental considerations into the normal management of the company, discovering the many and significant advantages, not only environmental but also economic, which this offers them, amongst other things, because they improve their competitive position.
It therefore seems to me very significant that this regulation is currently being reviewed and that new elements are being incorporated into it which are extremely useful for the environmental improvement of processes, services and products.
The creation of more incentives for European companies to have access to the system, the participation of interested parties - especially workers -, the strengthening of reliability vis-à-vis third parties and an increase in the transparency of information are the main objectives of the amendments which I took up on first reading in Parliament and which were approved unanimously in the Environment Committee.
Nevertheless, the committee also approved certain amendments which were contrary to the opinion of the rapporteur, and I have continued to disagree with them.
In this respect, I wish to refer to Amendments Nos 5, 6, 10 and 17, on the controversial issue of the use of the best available technology, as an instrument for environmental improvement, being obligatory for countries which wish to be included in the EMAS register.
Let us remember that EMAS is a voluntary market instrument.
Let us remember also that one of the main objectives of the current revision of the regulations is to make the system more accessible to small and medium-sized businesses and also the service sector.
Let us add that until now the initiative has been relatively successful when compared to the other alternative formula, the ISO 14.001 standard, which is more flexible in many ways than EMAS.
Let us bear in mind that the best available technology, as defined by the Directive on Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control, is only applicable to large industrial plants and not to the service sector or to small and medium-sized businesses.
In this light, I believe that you will agree with me when I say that, although I am absolutely in favour of development and progress with regard to the Directive on Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control (IPPC), this is not the time, and EMAS is not the right instrument, to demand that companies who want to join the scheme adopt the best available technologies.
In fact, the large plants, as stipulated in the IPPC Directive, will continue to be obliged to be included in the EMAS register, since they will have to abide by the environmental legislation in force - Amendment No 12 - which obviously includes compliance with the IPPC Directive in the cases where companies are affected.
I would also like to insist on Amendments Nos 41 and 50, which my Group would be prepared to accept as long as it is made clear that the word 'representatives' refers to people chosen as such within each company and in no event to organisations, whose participation would hinder and delay the process of adopting the system.
I hope that tomorrow other groups will offer oral amendments in this respect.
There are two other amendments which I would like to comment on: Amendment No 19, for which I have requested a separate vote up to the paragraph which reads "public structures and public contracts" , up to this point leaving the Commission' s text intact.
I believe that the Commission is preparing - and in this sense I would be grateful for a comment from Mrs Wallström - a proposal on the inclusion of the environmental principle as a necessary consideration when awarding public contracts, and I therefore think it appropriate to await the approval of that proposal.
With regard to Amendment No 22, on the incorporation of the Commission, the Council and Parliament, within a period of four years, into the EMAS system, I have consulted the Commission in writing and I would like the Commissioner to reply to it.
Lastly, Amendment No 25 refers to the harmonisation of EMAS with the ISO standard, which is very important to the dissemination of each instrument, and we are very happy with the harmonisation agreement relating to them.
Mr President, our experience of the Community eco-audit scheme has been very mixed.
In Germany and Austria a great number of businesses have taken part in it, whereas the uptake from businesses in other Member States has been very low.
The aim of the present revision must therefore be to make the eco-audit scheme more attractive.
For that reason it is important that there should be scope to involve companies from the service sector and to support small and medium-sized enterprises.
All that, however, is not enough, in my view.
More needs to be done, particularly in terms of reducing the administrative burden and establishing ways of projecting the public profile of the service.
From discussions at various company headquarters it has emerged that EMAS has an internal impact and that workforces are playing a far greater part in protecting the environment, but the time has now come to improve the external impact of the system.
In all the reflections on how to improve EMAS, one thing has to be remembered, namely that EMAS is a voluntary system which companies can join.
It must not therefore be encumbered with concepts such as best available technology.
These are binding specifications which set excessively difficult targets.
All we shall achieve by adopting them is to make businesses quit the system.
That surely serves no purpose at all.
The system has proved useful so far, and we should build on the valuable experience that has been amassed.
If we cherish certain environmental ideals, I am certainly willing to pursue them too, but that will take us down the road of directives and regulations.
We cannot realise such ideals by opting for a voluntary system like EMAS.
One last point that seems important to me if the eco-audit is to be a practicable mechanism is the frequency of its validation.
The proposal envisages renewal of the validation at yearly intervals.
That, to my mind, is far too frequent.
Companies have to spend nine months on the preparation of an environmental report.
They cannot do that if annual validation is required.
I therefore propose an interval of two to three years, and I hope you will support this proposal.
Mr President, EMAS is to be revised, and my Group and I are very much in favour of its scope being extended.
I do believe, however, that the examples of Austria and Germany to which the previous speaker, Mr Schnellhardt, has already referred, show that it is no coincidence that the countries where participation levels are highest are among the proponents of the tabled position, in which adherence to the existing environmental provisions and the use of the best available technology are seen as key instruments for improving companies' efficiency in the use of natural resources and their protection of the environment.
Accordingly, I should like to give my wholehearted support to those amendments that call for the use of the best available technology as well as to canvass your support for Amendment No 12, which lays special emphasis on compliance with existing environmental provisions.
I am well aware, of course, that there must be incentives to encourage wider participation in this scheme.
For all that, I believe that the credibility of this eco-audit scheme can only be guaranteed if we set our own high standards rather than pursuing the opposite strategy of alignment with the ISO standard.
My Group also attaches particular importance to the participation of employees and their representatives.
I accept the rapporteur's proposal - we came to an agreement on this today - that an oral amendment be moved tomorrow in order to make it clear that we also accept the compromise on the involvement of employees and their representatives, in other words the reduction of such involvement to the works level.
In my view, this will represent a major step forward in the implementation of EMAS, not only in terms of its democratic credentials but also from a managerial point of view.
I shall waive the remainder of my speaking time, which should certainly put me in the President's good books!
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, the intention behind EMAS is an excellent one: encouraging companies to have more respect for the environment.
Seven years after its creation, however, EMAS is a success only in some countries.
There is still a long way to go, and today we need to identify the reason for this limited result.
EMAS is complex, too complex.
The regulation imposes heavy constraints on those companies which do agree, voluntarily, to participate.
This complexity is such as to discourage SMEs, which, as we all know, are bending under the weight of bureaucracy.
Yet they are the engine of Europe' s economy.
We should be making them our number one priority, hence the importance of the incentives our rapporteur was just talking about.
In the same spirit, I would also say that some amendments are in danger of erring through excess of ambition.
I mean Amendments Nos 5, 10 and 17 on the best available technologies, the BATs.
A requirement like that would mean sometimes insoluble problems for SMEs, which cannot always adapt to these BATs.
In any case their very definition is already a problem for some economic sectors.
So the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party will be voting against.
On the other hand, in the spirit of compromise, we are ready to support Amendments Nos 43, 44 and 45, which link these best available technologies, from the environmental viewpoint, with conditions that are economically and technically viable for businesses.
Finally, there is the question of workers' participation, which we naturally value highly and which the common position entirely authorises.
On the other hand, we reject Amendments Nos 41 and 50, because more restrictive measures here again threaten to discourage a large number of candidate firms.
Finally, I will simply say that quantity must not drive out quality.
The system is voluntary, so it must be attractive in order to survive.
Otherwise EMAS will be no more than a litany of good intentions likely to be impracticable for businesses and therefore completely useless.
Mr President, a number of speakers tonight have mentioned the issue of the best available technology.
I cannot understand the reluctance to accept this.
It really is an essential instrument.
If we are genuine about wanting to encourage firms to improve environmental policy and environmental performance, then it is necessary that the best available technology should be encouraged.
It makes no sense to me whatsoever to be reluctant to promote that.
If the best available technology is there, then the firm should be encouraged to use it.
We are never going to make any advances otherwise.
This is a voluntary scheme, but if firms genuinely want to improve their environmental policy and their environmental performance then any encouragement in that direction should be welcomed.
So far as the arguments against the best available technology are concerned, they do not stand up to scrutiny.
It is essential that this element, and the amendments in relation to best available technology, be supported by Parliament.
I would urge the Commission, too, to take this on board.
If we are serious about trying to encourage firms in the right direction then we have to encourage the best available technology.
Mr President, Madam Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I believe the regulation must be effective because it is a voluntary instrument.
To that extent, it is only right and fitting that we should try to guarantee the manageability of the system, which is why we have taken pains to reach the present agreement between the two major groups, Mrs Scheele, so that the validation is not limited to one year but can be organised in a pragmatic manner, particularly for small and medium-sized businesses.
It goes without saying that they cannot be expected to do a validation every year - that would be absurd.
We must find an effective and manageable solution to that problem.
But I also believe that we need a rational approach to the question of the best available technology, because it is surely unacceptable that two companies producing at entirely different levels - one to a low technological standard and the other to a high standard - should both be able to operate the eco-management and audit system and should both be certificated.
That is patently absurd and will ultimately mislead those who are liable to buy products advertised as EMAS-compliant.
For that reason we need to set a standard.
Perhaps the amendments we adopted in the Environment Committee go too far.
For that reason I am pleased that Amendments 43, 44 and 45 have been proposed as a means of covering the available forms of technology in a similar way to another directive and of limiting the initial scope of the regulation to industrial activity, since it is undoubtedly far harder to legislate for the service sector in this domain.
Accordingly, I would suggest that if we can reach agreement on the frequency of validation, we ought perhaps to be able to reach agreement on this aspect as well.
So the first thing to do is to establish the verification procedure; the application of that procedure will perhaps reveal various ways in which the system can be improved.
Mr President, I believe that tomorrow's vote will truly be a litmus test of whether we regard EMAS as an instrument of ecological progress or as a mere sham.
It must be made clear that EMAS accreditation is intended as a reward for those companies which are the real engines of ecological progress.
BAT - the best available technology - is the fundamental prerequisite of EMAS, because it would be downright absurd for a company to be regarded as an environmental trailblazer if it did not use the best available technology, and it is surely plain to see that anything else boils down to ISO 14000, in other words to our simply selling EMAS down the river, because it would then be ISO in another guise.
In that case we could forget the directive altogether, because it would correspond to ISO.
For that reason I fail to understand the misgivings that have been voiced, particularly with regard to small and medium-sized businesses, because it is precisely those firms which have the least onerous obligations in this respect.
Conversely, we have seen time and again that many small and medium-sized enterprises are far more innovative than their larger counterparts.
EMAS is an important voluntary instrument for companies, but paramount importance attaches to its coordination with environmental programmes.
Studies in Germany have shown that, unfortunately, EMAS organisations have not yet recognised protection of the climate, for example, as a major goal.
From that point of view I believe that we should not sell ourselves short here by putting EMAS on a par with ISO.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur, Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo, for her work on the Commission' s proposal concerning EMAS.
Before discussing the individual amendments, I want to touch upon three key issues, namely best available technology, the frequency with which the environmental statement is to be validated and the link between participation in EMAS and compliance with the requirements of compulsory environmental legislation.
The changes proposed by the European Parliament where best available technology is concerned should mean that all organisations which participate in EMAS should be forced to apply best available technology.
The Commission agrees with the principle that all organisations registered to EMAS ought to try to apply best practice within their areas of activity and work as effectively as possible on issues of technology, materials and organisation.
The concept of best available technology, which is expressly defined in the directive relating to coordinated measures for preventing and limiting pollution, is nonetheless only relevant to industry.
This has also been noted by the European Parliament in some of its amendments.
In view of the fact that EMAS is now being opened to all economic sectors, the requirement that best available technology must be used is likely to mean in practice that many sectors will be prevented from participating in EMAS.
For example, the European Parliament itself would not be able to participate because best available technology is not a concept which can be applied to public institutions.
A requirement of this kind would also be a major obstacle for small and medium-sized companies, which are not covered by the directive relating to coordinated measures for preventing and limiting pollution.
If the attempt were made to circumvent this derogation by means of EMAS, which is a voluntary system, this would probably mean that small and medium-sized companies would refrain from participating in EMAS.
When it comes to those amendments in which best available technology is confined to the area of application of the directive relating to coordinated measures for preventing and limiting pollution, it ought to be pointed out that it is not EMAS' s task to be an alternative way of ensuring that compulsory legislation is applied.
We all agree that it is important for organisations to comply with that environmental legislation which affects them.
It might be said that it is a minimum requirement that environmental legislation should be respected.
The purpose of EMAS is to help organisations to perform better and to exceed that minimum.
The objective is not, however, to provide supervisory authorities with absolute proofs that an organisation which is EMAS-registered is complying with all current legislation in all situations.
In view of EMAS' s systematic structure, organisations will clearly be well placed to comply with the environmental legislation.
EMAS is, however, a voluntary system.
If the European Parliament maintains its amendments, the basis of which is that compliance with environmental legislation must be guaranteed, EMAS' s role will be in danger of changing.
EMAS will instead become a replacement for environmental verifications carried out by the Member States' competent authorities.
I am convinced that that is not the European Parliament' s intention.
How frequently is the environmental statement to be validated?
The environmental statement is, of course, the visible public result of EMAS being implemented within an organisation.
That report must therefore correspond to the expectations of those in the surrounding area.
One such expectation is that the environmental statement should be reliable.
The simplest way of building up confidence in the conclusions of the statement is to carry out regular, impartial verifications.
An annual verification of the statement would therefore be more appropriate than a verification every third year, as in the majority of cases.
I would emphasise that the common position is flexible in this respect.
Account can, therefore, already be taken of special cases or special problems.
I am therefore afraid that, by dispensing with the principle of annual reporting in its amendments, the European Parliament may damage EMAS' s credibility, which is a prerequisite if the new EMAS is to be successful.
Allow me to turn now to the individual amendments.
The Commission has carefully examined the 50 amendments which have been tabled and is able to approve 11 of these.
How credible EMAS is and how attractive it is to companies are two crucial considerations if EMAS is to function.
The Commission is therefore delighted to be able to approve Amendments 1, 2 and 19 (3).
Another important question of which the Commission is also aware is that of how it may be ensured that EMAS is rolled out in the candidate States at an early stage.
The Commission is therefore able to approve Amendment 3 in principle, provided that the wording is made clearer.
The Commission is also very pleased to be able to approve Amendment 4 in principle, because it will help ensure that employees are more involved, something which has already been taken into account in the review of EMAS.
The wording ought, however, to be changed to avoid extra demands being placed upon companies, particularly upon small and medium-sized companies.
There seems to be a general concern about small and medium-sized companies, which also manifests itself in EMAS.
The Commission is therefore able to approve Amendment 19 (4) in principle, provided that it does not lead to the EMAS rules' being watered down for small and medium-sized companies.
Because EMAS is a voluntary system, it is important that there should be information about it.
The Commission is therefore able to approve Amendment 16 in principle, if it is extended to include all information and not only data.
The Commission is very pleased to see that the European Parliament itself is committed to applying EMAS and urges the other European institutions to do the same.
However, EMAS' s area of application extends to include more than physical assets, something which must be clearly shown in Amendment 22, which the Commission is able to approve in principle.
Amendment 25 will contribute considerably to making the EMAS requirements clearer, and the Commission approves this change.
A small addendum is required, however, so that the Commission is able, in a legally correct manner, to comply with the contractual conditions in the agreement that has been entered into with the European Standardisation Organisation.
Unanimity and openness are also important principles for EMAS.
The Commission is able to approve Amendments 30 (1 and 3), 32 and 33 (2).
Where the other changes are concerned, I want briefly to explain why the Commission was unable to approve them.
An important aspect of the proposal is the extension of EMAS' s area of application to include all sectors of trade and industry.
Those amendments which relate only to the industrial sector cannot, therefore, be approved.
These are Amendments 5, 6, 10, 17, 43, 44 and 45, according to which organisations must apply best available technology.
The Commission also considers it important that EMAS should be logically structured, easy to understand and sufficiently flexible to be able to be adapted for the various sectors affected.
The Commission cannot, therefore, approve Amendments 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 19, 21, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33 (1), 34, 35, 37, 41, 42, 47, 48, 49 and 50.
The additional benefits to the environment entailed by EMAS, compared with ISO14001, are a crucial aspect of the proposal.
The Commission is unable, therefore, to support Amendments 13, 30 (2), 36, 38 and 46.
Due to the introduction of longer intervals between verifications of the statements, these amendments would make it more difficult to obtain sight of, and to verify, the information concerning environmental performance.
Nor can the Commission accept Amendments 39 and 40, because the EMAS logo must be a sign of excellence for organisations, at the same time as it must not lead to confusion on the part of the public.
Given the way the directives relating to public purchasing look today, Amendment 19 (1) cannot be approved.
The Commission is pleased to supply information to the European Parliament upon request, but is unable to approve Amendments 18 and 20 because there is a lack of resources for this purpose.
Finally, the Commission is unable to approve Amendment 24 relating to committee procedures because of the legal changes implemented following the decision on committee procedures, according to which a prescriptive committee is required.
The Commission is convinced that the European Parliament' s amendments have, in both readings, contributed greatly to this review and increased EMAS' s potential for helping improve the environmental performance of trade and industry throughout the Union.
Thank you, Madam Commissioner.
May I depart from normal practice by asking you to pay greater attention to the allocated time slots.
Your colleague Mrs Reding is the very last speaker today.
She will no doubt be annoyed with me if she has to stay here until one in the morning.
Would you please therefore be so kind as to keep your remarks somewhat briefer on future occasions.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Limit values for benzene and carbon monoxide
The next item is the report (A5-0166/2000) by Mrs Breyer, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive relating to limit values for benzene and carbon monoxide in ambient air.
Ladies and gentlemen, Madam Commissioner, I shall try to be brief, because I do not believe that much of the substance of this directive is contentious within this Parliament.
The directive before us is the second offshoot of the Directive on ambient air quality assessment and management, and the proposal is part of an integrated package of measures designed to combat atmospheric pollution.
The essential feature of this second offshoot of the air-quality Directive is that it establishes benzene and carbon monoxide limit values for the first time in the European Union.
This is a very important step;
I would even call it a milestone in the history of air-quality legislation, because it is the first limit value to be imposed for a carcinogenic substance, namely benzene, which can, of course, cause leukaemia.
We know that petrol and oil are sources of benzene, and in the European Union 80 to 85% of benzene emissions result from petrol combustion in road vehicles.
There has never been a safety threshold, and so benzene emissions have always posed a health risk.
The precautionary principle that is enshrined in the EU Treaty, however, makes it imperative to establish a limit value at which the health risk is extremely low.
It therefore stands to reason that we are particularly supportive of the proposal for a limit value of five micrograms per cubic metre of air.
The common position is a definite improvement on the Commission's proposal.
I also very much welcome the fact that it incorporates many of the amendments adopted by this House.
One amendment in particular was absolutely essential and central in our view, for the Commission had proposed that Member States could be granted derogations almost at will.
It was effectively a blank cheque that could have been renewed over and over again, and by dropping this provision we have managed to achieve a compromise to which we too can subscribe.
In the implementation of the directive it will also be important, of course, to respond to the problems faced by the countries of the South and to arrive at an appropriate compromise.
The proposal also corresponds to the suggestion made by Mrs Schleicher at the first reading in the Environment Committee, namely that a single exception may be made, that it must be duly substantiated, that it need not be restricted to countries but can also apply to particular regions or geographical areas and that a concentration in excess of ten micrograms may not be authorised under any circumstances.
It is also very important in the light of our forthcoming enlargement to the East that we should emphasise that the European Union does not operate a two-speed environmental policy and that those Member States to which exceptions apply must make every effort to move towards compliance with EU requirements and must furnish proof of progress in this direction.
The Environment Committee has also tabled a number of other amendments, but these should not be contentious either, because they relate primarily to the obligation to provide information.
In these we have clearly emphasised that the new instrument of the Internet must be used as a means of improving the flow of information.
I have no doubt that these amendments will also have answered the question as to how information is to be communicated.
Moreover, we have also drawn attention to the fact that indoor pollution is also a major problem which should be addressed by EU research programmes.
We cannot present a credible case for the improvement of outside air quality unless we demonstrate a clear commitment to improving the quality of indoor air.
In addition, we have underlined very clearly that the Member States will also have to compile better documentation.
Another very important point is that the governments of those Member States to which derogations apply should also inform the public of this special dispensation and of the efforts that are being made to achieve our goal of five micrograms by the year 2010.
I shall close there - my time is up in any case.
What is important is that this directive should be swiftly implemented, and I believe we have worked hard towards that aim and that we are unlikely to encounter any problems in achieving it.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as Mrs Breyer has just indicated, we are dealing today with the second individual directive deriving from the framework Directive of 1996 on the assessment and management of ambient air quality.
The main aim of the proposed legislation is to establish limit values for atmospheric concentrations of benzene and carbon monoxide in order to improve the quality of our air and to avoid, prevent and reduce the adverse effects of these substances on human health and the environment.
It is true that the main source of emissions of both pollutants is road traffic.
Other major sources of benzene emissions are fuel distribution, oil refineries and the chemical industry, while all combustion processes emit carbon monoxide.
This directive is a very important contribution to the maintenance of clean air and to the global climate strategy.
The proposal was presented by the European Commission in December 1998.
The Finnish presidency made a determined effort to use the new legal scope offered by the Treaty of Amsterdam in order to have this proposed directive enter into force back in December 1999 after the first reading, with the amendments adopted by the European Parliament.
Our Group would have warmly welcomed that.
I need hardly say that our Group supported the amendments which emphasise the danger to certain sections of the population and which regard the proposed environmental measures as surpassable minimum standards.
The provisions on a single extension of the deadline and on compliance with the limit values that are required for climatic reasons in our southern Member States, provisions which are now contained in the common position, were introduced by ourselves at the time of the first reading, as was the maximum benzene concentration of 10 micrograms per cubic metre.
Mrs Breyer, of course, has already given some indication of the subsequent harmonious development of the common position.
This now contains the very wording that we wanted on this point, and its other provisions are consistent and provide for practicable measures to improve air quality in Europe.
Our Group accepts this common position and can support it as it stands.
This new regime guarantees that public health will be afforded a high level of protection, and it is flexible enough to be adapted at any time in response to technological progress.
Mrs Breyer has taken a great deal of trouble and has achieved much of what Parliament wanted at the negotiating table.
I must say, however, that in our view the amendments which have been reintroduced are superfluous; while they are justifiable, it is not worth putting the directive on ice again for the sake of these amendments, which would only delay the adoption process.
We consider it far more important - as you yourself said, Mrs Breyer - that, after a delay of half a year, this instrument should now enter into force as quickly as possible, so that it can play its part in improving the quality of the air we breathe in Europe.
For that reason, our Group does not support the amendments, because we hope that, by withholding our support, we can expedite the process of adopting this directive.
Mr President, first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur for this highly gratifying report and for her successful work behind the scenes; at the same time, of course, I wish to thank everyone else involved for their fruitful cooperation.
I am aware of the significance of this directive in terms of the development and enhancement of European environment policy.
It will be the first legal instrument to set a limit on concentrations of a carcinogenic substance.
Its significance lies not only in the fact that it is important to have a limit value for this particular carcinogenic substance but also in the fact that it sets a precedent for the future regulation of other carcinogens.
The main political aim at the first reading was to limit the scope for derogations from the prescribed limit values as far as possible, to make the rules as restrictive as possible, and I believe that we can be more than pleased with this solution, which was the fruit of our joint efforts.
My Group is also interested, of course, in the rapid implementation of this directive, and we wish to avoid a conciliation procedure.
I am also aware that the debate on this directive is not the right place to discuss indoor pollution.
Nevertheless, I do believe that it is appropriate to highlight the dangers of indoor pollution and to call for initiatives in that domain, such as additional research.
After all, there is evidence that people are exposed to hazardous substances, especially the carcinogen benzene, as a result of indoor pollution too.
This is why we support the amendments that have been tabled, and we trust that we shall nevertheless be able to avoid a conciliation procedure.
Mr President, the three previous speakers have already articulated the significance of these proposals.
We should also like to congratulate the rapporteur.
She has done extremely well with the lion' s share of her amendments and the amendments which have been adopted by the Commission and Parliament at first reading.
The question which remains is whether or not we want to go further than what has been accepted in the common position.
In our opinion, the rapporteur' s arguments are convincing and we will give them our seal of approval.
In the discussions we have had on this directive, a subject came up which could in fact have come up in other environmental issues as well, but it is important in my view to bring it to the fore in this context.
The question we always need to ask ourselves as European institutions is: why is this one of our concerns?
Why is it the case that a problem which can be very localised - this is, in fact, one of the very problems we are discussing at the moment - why is this something which we need to decide on in Brussels or Strasbourg and cannot delegate to national level?
I am not talking about the legal dimension, because, legally, we are bound to deal with this.
Eventually, it became clear to us that in this case, it would be useful if we, as European citizens, were to deal with this on the basis of a kind of equality before the law, offering the same level of protection to the same citizens.
But I can imagine that other people would argue against this, saying: no, it is important to be involved in this as a Union.
I would find it useful if the Commissioner, time-permitting, could comment on this briefly.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I want to thank the rapporteur and the committee for their good work.
Mrs Breyer' s report went a long way towards further improving the Commission' s proposal at first reading, which took place in December of last year.
The limit values which have been set for benzene and carbon monoxide in ambient air are based upon the World Health Organisation' s latest recommendations and are aimed at achieving a high level of protection of people' s health throughout the Union.
Adoption of this directive would mean that the Union would take the lead internationally where limit values for benzene and carbon monoxide are concerned.
I want to begin by explaining the Commission' s views on Amendments 2 and 3.
These concern the issue of providing information to the public, something which is of the greatest importance.
As you perhaps know, the Commission has now, in the course of the week, adopted a new directive which will further improve access to environmental information.
The Commission approves Amendment 2, which expressly mentions the Internet.
Amendment 3 (1) refers to the fact that the Member States should make a special effort to inform those who are affected by the extensions to the time limits within which the limit values for benzene are to be complied with.
The Commission agrees in principle with this requirement, but the common position expressed in Article 8.3 of Directive 96/62/EC, that is to say the framework directive on air quality, already obliges the Member States to compile this information and make it available to the public.
In order for the Commission to be able to approve Amendment 3 (1), the latter must therefore be substantially reworded.
Amendment 3 (2) contains a demand for free public access to the Member States' documentation concerning the selection of places from which to take samples.
In spite of the fact that the Member States already have this obligation under the Århus Convention, the Commission approves the Amendment.
I turn now to Amendments 1 and 4 which both concern the Commission' s review of the Directive in 2004.
The review will form part of the first report on the new integrated programme for clean air, which the Commission is in the process of drawing up.
The common position already states that the purpose of the review is to study the latest results and, if need be, further improve protection.
Because indoor air pollution can cause significant health problems, the Commission will take account of this issue in the review.
Amendment 1 may therefore be approved in principle, but must be reworded.
I turn finally to Amendment 4, which concerns an important issue.
The most difficult point in the negotiations in the Council was the limit value for benzene and the time limit for achieving this.
Against the background of the results of a current investigation into benzene, mainly the southern Member States considered that they were uncertain of being able to achieve the limit value of 5 g/m3 by 2010.
Despite this, Article 3.2 of the common position offers only one possibility for extending the time limit by five years under certain conditions.
Moreover, a concentration of 10 g/m3 must not be exceeded during that period.
I would emphasise that this is in line with Amendment 22, tabled at Parliament' s first reading.
Only through an addendum to Article 7.3, in which it is expressly stated that the Commission can propose further extensions in the light of the results of the 2004 review, was it possible for this agreement to come about.
From a purely legal point of view, this clause does not lead to the Commission' s right of initiative being limited or otherwise affected, but may be seen as an important part of the final compromise in the Council.
According to Amendment 4, the clause ought not to be there, something which could jeopardise the agreement with the Council.
The Commission considers that the compromise to which this could lead would involve unnecessary delay in adopting this important directive in which, for the first time ever, limit values are established for benzene and carbon monoxide in ambient air.
The Commission is therefore unable to approve Amendment 4.
Finally, I want to say that I believe the common position constitutes a valuable compromise to which I hope that the whole Parliament will agree, without the need for major changes.
Thank you, Commissioner Wallström.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Environmental inspections
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0164/2000) by Mrs Jackson, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, concerning the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Recommendation providing for minimum criteria for environmental inspections in the Member States.
Mr President, the idea that is fundamental to the report that I am bringing forward is that the proposal from the European Commission for a recommendation on this subject should be changed to become a directive and, as you will see from my report, this secured near unanimous backing in the Environment Committee.
The members of the committee agreed with me that a recommendation is far too weak an instrument in this instance.
I suppose a recommendation is really rather the equivalent of us all moving down into the centre of Strasbourg and attending the cathedral in order to make an act of collective prayer.
That really is all that a recommendation is.
There is no way in which the European Commission can go back to Member States and say that they have not complied with a recommendation because a recommendation merely says that they may do something, it does not say that they must do something.
The Commission is very worried about this report because it recognises that if we persist in insisting on a directive rather than a recommendation, the whole thing may founder in the Council.
I recognise the Commission's worries.
I did faithfully try in the Environment Committee to get the members to agree to a recommendation rather than a directive.
I got a very rude answer from them which I will not repeat to you but which is basically reflected in my report.
They want a directive and not a recommendation.
And, indeed, if the guidelines on environmental inspection which the Commission is so keen to see survive were incorporated in a recommendation, my committee feels that they will simply be ignored.
We want to see a directive which definitely commits the Member States to introduce environmental inspections operating on broadly similar lines.
I must underline that what we do not want to see, in case anybody hangs this round my neck, is a supra-national European environment inspectorate: lots of little men and women in blue uniforms with gold stars rushing round the Member States, reporting back to Brussels saying this is wrong or indeed, in the case of Germany, this is right.
We do not need that kind of supra-national inspectorate.
I believe, and my committee agrees with me, that the primary responsibility for enforcing European Union environment legislation should be firmly lodged where it belongs, with the Member States.
We cannot understand the Commission's readiness to propose only the minimum possible.
Neglect of European Union environment law forms an alarming background to this proposal.
Yesterday was a historic day in the history of the European Union, not, I hasten to add only because of the visit of President Chirac to Strasbourg, but because it was the day of the first report of a fine levied by the European Court of Justice, an actual fine of EUR 20 000 a day on Greece for failure to comply with a European Union environment directive.
But it is interesting to note that that case was actually launched thirteen years ago and relates to a directive which dates back even further.
At the moment there are currently nine other environment cases which have come back to the Court of Justice for a second time because countries have ignored earlier judgments.
There are no less than 157 cases still pending and I regret to have to say that in many cases the European Commission has not been able to act, to bring cases to the Court of Justice, because it does not know what is happening in Member States as the countries concerned have not reported back to Brussels on what they are doing about legislation.
One of the reasons that they have not reported is that the countries themselves do not know.
Why do they not know?
Because they do not have systems of environmental inspection which form the essential raft on which the whole edifice of compliance with European environment law is built.
We need the kind of directive that the Environment Committee would like to see.
A recommendation will do no good.
I hope that the European Commission has the courage, and I mean courage, to accept the European Parliament amendments.
I hope that the European Commission has the courage to go into the conciliation process arm in arm with the Parliament against, and it will be against, the Council.
I think some members of the Council are really quite wobbly in the direction of a directive rather than a recommendation.
The tiny concessions so far offered by the Council lodged in the preamble to this proposal are simply not enough.
Mr President, those of us who survived the conciliation procedure for the water framework directive must be delighted that here we have an issue which is entirely clear-cut and easily understandable.
The first issue is that we want equal and effective enforcement of environmental legislation across the European Union and we must all agree to that principle.
The question obviously is why we have not had that before.
Why have the Commissioner's predecessors not brought forward proposals before now and why are the proposals now introduced so miserably weak?
There is also a question for Member States.
What have they been doing signing up to environmental legislation if in reality they do not have the means to check properly that it has been carried out and have no intention of ensuring that it is properly enforced?
I have chemical companies in my constituency in the north-west of England.
Some of them, I am sorry to say, discharge polluting materials into air and water.
They get inspected.
Action is taken.
They are forced to clean up their act.
They pay the price for that.
But they are competing with chemical companies elsewhere in this European Union which are not having to carry out those checks, which are not having to pay the price and they are not able to compete therefore on a level playing field.
It is simply unfair.
The second issue is the clear conflict here between the Parliament and the Council.
Any student who wants to understand conciliation procedure or codecision procedure has a nice straightforward case study here.
We have codecision powers but we have the threat from the Council that if we do not fall into line then they will abandon the whole legislation.
Well, they might as well, as Mrs Jackson has said.
The message for the French Presidency is that we want tangible progress.
We do not want to see this abandoned.
There is room for compromise, presumably over the implementation date.
All the institutions in the European Union want the laws enforced properly.
It is time to give these warm but rather woolly sentiments some real meaning and action.
Mr President, may I first of all thank the rapporteur, Mrs Jackson, and the Committee on the Environment for its work on this proposal on environmental inspections.
I cannot resist the temptation to point out to Mrs Jackson that she reminds me of my promise to the Committee on the Environment not to propose new directives all the time, but rather to concentrate on implementation.
The bad implementation of environmental rules has nothing to do with the lack of such rules and directives.
We have a lot of these and we really want to achieve something.
We want to see results.
So we came straight to the key issue: was it to be a recommendation or a directive?
It will not be a surprise to you that the Commission cannot agree to the proposed change to a directive, for the following reasons.
The Commission's 1996 communication on implementing Community environmental law noted a disparity between Member States' inspection systems and recognised the necessity of ensuring that minimum inspection tasks were performed.
Maybe it is not such a bad idea to have those people in blue uniforms with gold stars to check on what is happening!
It recommended that guidelines should be established, leaving to the Member States the choice of structures and mechanisms, fitting in where appropriate with their existing systems.
A recommendation will achieve something.
Some Member States already have well-developed inspectorates or agencies, and the guidelines will ensure that they operate them in accordance with common standards without necessarily having to change their systems that much.
For those Member States which do not, the recommendation will be helpful to enable them in the first instance, with the possibility of Community funding for eligible Member States, to develop their infrastructure and capacity.
A directive might mean that some Member States will have great difficulty complying with it in its entirety from its coming into force, and this was not deemed to be practically or psychologically desirable by the Commission.
I am convinced that the 'carrot' rather than the 'stick' approach will achieve a better result at the present state of development of national inspectorates.
We have already achieved some progress in the area with the IMPEL inspectors' exchange programme and the other work that IMPEL has done on inspections, monitoring frequency of inspections etc.
This proposal should therefore be viewed as the first step in an ongoing programme, and the experience gained in this operation will help us to consider at subsequent stages how to broaden the nature, scope and application of the minimum requirements.
The proposal requires Member States to report back on the operation, and I will take a personal interest in this.
If it transpires that Member States are not applying it in practice then we will not shrink from bringing forward a proposal for a directive.
The attitude in the Council of the Member States, even those with well-developed inspectorates, was unanimously in favour of non-binding legislation at this stage.
Being realistic, if Parliament insists on asking for a directive we will end up with no instrument at all.
In that case we will have failed those Member States most in need of assistance and guidance, and the consequence will be no change in the status quo and no improvement in those Member States' implementation.
For these reasons the Commission cannot accept any of the proposed amendments relating to changing the form of the proposal from a recommendation to a directive.
The Commission cannot accept the following amendments of substance: Amendment No 5 to help Member States distinguish between national - for example non-EU derived - law and EU law.
Amendments Nos 6 and 11 which try to change voluntary reporting and advice schemes to mandatory ones.
Amendment No 12, second part, because it does not add anything.
The proposal already refers to reports being in a readily accessible database.
Amendment No 13, second part, relating to reports of site visits being available within two months of inspection because the common position's wording "as soon as possible" is preferable.
And Amendment No 14 which seeks to limit to brief data the compliance information in reports to the Commission, which is not sufficient for the Commission's purposes.
However, if the proposal is to remain in the form of a recommendation, the Commission can accept in principle Amendments Nos 2, 10, second part, and 15, second part, in relation to point 9.1.
They all concern the involvement of the EEA and/or IMPEL in certain activities relating to inspections.
These were accepted by the Commission at the first reading stage and included in the Commission's revised proposal.
Thank you, Commissioner Wallström.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Protection of forests
The next item is the report (A5-0152/2000) by Mrs Redondo Jiménez, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the following:
I. proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation (EEC) No 3258/86 on the protection of the Community's forests against atmospheric pollution [COM(1999) 379 - C5-0076/1999 - 1999/0159(COD)], and
II. proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation (EEC) No 2158/92 on the protection of the Community's forests against fire [COM(1999) 379 - C5-0077/1999 - 1999/0160(COD)].
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Council has presented the amendment of two regulations, Regulation (EC) No 3528/86 on the protection of the Community' s forests against atmospheric pollution and Regulation (EC) No 2158/92 on the protection of the Community' s forests against fire, by means of two regulations, 307 and 308 of 1997, on the basis of Article 43 of the former Treaty.
Parliament queried the regulations with the European Court of Justice on 30 April 1997, and this was resolved on 25 April 1999.
The judgement of the Court (joint cases C-164/97 and C-165/97) repealed both Regulations and stated that the Council should have used the former Article 130s, now Article 175 of the Treaty as the sole legal basis, but the effects of the repeal were suspended to enable the Council to adopt new Regulations with the same aim within a reasonable time period.
The European Commission and the Member States committed themselves, on an international level, at the Ministerial Conferences on the protection of the forests in Helsinki, in 1993, and Strasbourg, in 1990, to the continuous monitoring of the damage suffered by the forests.
Everybody is aware of the important role played by the forests in all respects, both economic as well as ecological and social, and of their role in relation to soil protection, climate, water and flora and fauna, creating balances which are essential to the development of sustainable agriculture and for the management of rural areas.
The Member States have established networks of systematic monitoring and observation posts for intensive and continuous monitoring of the forest ecosystems.
These studies require long periods of implementation and their results depend, according to the improvements in the knowledge of the cause-effect relationships between the changes suffered by forest ecosystems and the factors which affect them, on carrying out this work of monitoring, prevention and study over a longer period.
With regard to fires, work is underway into their causes, prevention measures and the monitoring of the forests.
As for pollution, work is being done on the establishment of observation networks, on carrying out a periodic inventory of the damage by means of a single methodology, intensive and continuous monitoring of the forest ecosystems and the implementation, by means of pilot projects, of methods of conservation and restoration of the forests affected.
Furthermore, the Member States must carry out a periodic assessment.
In the proposal approved unanimously in the Environment Committee, minor amendments are introduced which I would ask the Commission to take into account, since this would prevent us from extending the procedure.
This proposal asks that the Commission be assisted by a standing committee on forests, as it is in many other areas; that it present an analysis of the application of this regulation with regard to its ecological, economic and social aspects, as well as a cost-benefit evaluation; that an amendment be included on the Mediterranean forests as a specific ecosystem for the southern countries and because of its importance in combating desertification and erosion.
With regard to the budget for implementation, I have a reasonable doubt: for the previous period of these regulations, the Commission proposed EUR 40 million to fight pollution, for the five years, and EUR 70 million for fire prevention.
Now, for the next five years, the Commission proposes 34 million to fight pollution and 50 for fire prevention.
It has just reduced the amount by 6 million for the fight against pollution and 20 million for the prevention of fires, without taking account of the rise in the cost of living index or the incorporation of new countries, Austria, Sweden and Finland, which almost double the area of forest in the Union.
Therefore, our proposal would be to increase that budget to 44 million and 77 million for pollution and fires respectively.
I would ask the President, since Mr Cunha is not present, to allow me to use his two minutes, as he told me previously.
Here we have a proposal by the Committee on Budgets.
The Committee on Budgets is once again presenting amendments in which it wants no kind of notification to appear with regard to the budget for implementation.
I believe that the Committee on Budgets is trying to evade the codecision procedure, and I would propose to this House, and also to the Commission, that their amendments not be taken into account...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mrs Redondo, I have to tell you that Mr Cunha has just come in.
Mrs Redondo almost hijacked your speaking time, Mr Cunha!
Mr President, the importance of forests in the European Union is clearly illustrated by the fact that they cover 36% of our territory and employ 2.2 million people.
In several areas of the European Union, the forests are often the only viable economic option, because of poor soil or the lack of other natural resources.
It is also clear that the importance of forests is by no means limited to economic factors.
They encompass many other dimensions of social and environmental interest, such as the protection of the soil, the fight against erosion, the preservation of water resources, biodiversity, climatic stability etc.
Despite all of this, the forests have been a kind of 'poor relation' amongst Community policies.
It was only after many years, in 1998, with the efforts of the European Parliament, that the European Union finally managed to approve a strategy for the preservation and development of forests.
However, given forestry' s unquestionable interrelationship with agriculture and its territorial impact, it is extraordinary that the Commission has not been more ambitious in its proposals and that the Council has historically been so short-sighted.
Despite the fact that the European Union' s forestry strategy is a step forward in terms of ideas, it is yet to have any practical expression.
On the contrary, in some ways it has moved backwards, as demonstrated by this Community regulation on the protection of forests.
With regard in particular to the aspect which is of great concern to my country - the regulation on combating fires - it is regrettable that whereas in the period 1992-1996 the European Union benefited from an annual sum of EUR 14 million, this annual sum is now to be reduced to EUR 10 million, that is, by 40%.
Therefore, Mr President, I would like to suggest to the Council and the Commission that they increase this amount and, if possible, create a Community system for information on forest fires.
Ladies and gentlemen, I must ask for your cooperation.
We have calculated that, if we let every speaker overrun for just 20 seconds, we should still be sitting here at one o'clock in the morning.
We have a lengthy agenda, so I hope you will understand why I must be even stricter than I might otherwise have been on the question of speaking time.
Thank you very much, Mr President.
Mrs Redondo is presenting, under the general heading of forest protection, a report on two proposed regulations.
One refers to atmospheric pollution affecting forests, and the other refers to the prevention of fires.
I would like to tell Mrs Redondo that the delegation of Spanish Socialists is going to support her amendments.
We are going to support them because we agree with all the arguments which Mrs Redondo has put forward, and for other reasons which she has not had time to explain.
The basic regulations date from 1986 and 1992, and now the budget for implementation is lower, despite the fact that, since the accession of the Nordic countries to the European Union, the area of forest is greater.
Furthermore, however, atmospheric pollution has worsened as a result of acid rain, and of greater concentrations of dangerous products in the atmosphere.
We are also in a much worse situation in terms of fire prevention, because of climate change and the drought which we are suffering in many parts of Europe.
I would like to give just two recent examples.
This week there has been a Mediterranean forest fire on the border between France and Italy, a fire in the Ostia pine forest, near Rome, a fire in the Region of Valencia, where I live, and furthermore there has been one death, of a farmer who was trying to put out one of the numerous fires which have occurred this week as a result of drought and heat.
All of these arguments more than justify Mrs Redondo' s amendments, and our support for them.
I wish to tell the Commission - and I am sorry that Mrs Wällstrom is not here at the moment - that one of the European Union' s priorities with regard to the environment should not only be the fight against pollution and fires, but also, above all, a policy of caring for the forests.
That is why we are going to support her.
Mr President, Commissioner, I live in the middle of the Nordic forests, which form part of the enormous area of Europe covered by forests.
In the Nordic countries, we obviously do not have the same problems as in the Mediterranean area.
It is therefore incorrect to talk in this context about the forests of Europe.
The forests of Europe are very, very different from one another.
I could spend all night and all of tomorrow talking about the history of the forests and about the enormous importance Europe' s forest areas are going to have in a future sustainable Europe.
However, this report concerns the threats to our forests.
For the forests in northern and central Europe, the greatest threats are from airborne forms of pollution.
Unfortunately, we cannot prevent pollution by means of forest policy but only by means of environmental, traffic and agricultural policy, in short through general environmental policy.
Because most forests are damaged by discharges which come from a long way away, responsibility for the air and climate is global and European.
Fires do not constitute a problem for the Nordic forests.
On the contrary.
To obtain environmental certification, the owners of the forests have to burn down a certain area of them each year.
We need more fires.
We set fires for ecological reasons.
In the Nordic forests, there are a great many species of plant which have waxed seeds.
They have to be warmed up by a fire in order to grow.
In the Nordic countries, there are also insects which need burning ant hills in order to breed.
I believe that we should support the southern countries' need to fight fires, but that not all forests can be lumped together by talking in this context about European forests.
Mr President, it is indeed gratifying to note the steady increase in the attention devoted to forests and to the state of their health.
I do not believe, however, that it will suffice to allocate huge sums of money in the future - huge sums in relation to previous expenditure, but still less than is actually needed.
The most important thing, to my mind, is the need to change people's perceptions, not simply with a view to loosening purse strings but also with a view to engendering the level of voluntarism that is essential to the protection of our forests.
In the Alpine regions, for example, the institution of voluntary fire brigades is taken for granted.
Efforts should also be made to establish such bodies in the Mediterranean Member States, not only as a means of fighting forest fires at their source and creating protective infrastructures but also as a means of fostering public willingness to provide neighbourly assistance and voluntary service.
In this respect, I believe that people's mentalities will have to change, because money alone is not the answer.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, forests play an essential role in preserving the balance of our ecology and are a sustainable resource, albeit in the long term.
Forests are, furthermore, an imaginary, mythological and symbolic asset, which we should not forget.
Although there has been a certain recuperation of the area dedicated to forests in the European Union, every year thousands and thousands of hectares fall victim to acidification.
Year after year, huge areas of forest burn in Europe, annually destroying, on average, around 1% of the total forested area.
Biodiversity is also affected, and the situation of various plant species is worrying.
Therefore, the importance of these two regulations is unquestionable, despite the fact that the Community appropriations involved are very modest.
As has already been pointed out, the regulation establishing an action framework for the prevention of forest fires and the reduction of the area burnt is undoubtedly of particular importance to the south of Europe.
This regulation is specifically aimed at the cofinancing of systems for the prevention, monitoring and provision of information about fires, as well as for identifying their causes.
It is therefore extremely important.
Geographers understand this very well.
The most southerly part of Mediterranean Europe is threatened by a process of physical desertification, in the literal sense of the word.
The climatic phenomenon which originated in the Sahara desert has not stopped at the Mediterranean Sea and is spreading to the Iberian, Italian and Balkan peninsulas.
Mediterranean woodlands, which act as a curtain, reducing the impact of this phenomenon, are being mercilessly destroyed by these fires.
This issue of forests does not only concern the countries of the south, whose territories are affected, in the same way, of course, that the defence of the Nordic forests is not only of exclusive interest to the Nordic countries.
The countries of the south, more than any other part of Europe, urgently need a policy for the protection of forests.
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on her work and say that I support her proposals and her objectives.
Mr President, the content of the regulation being discussed here is based on the situation that existed at the end of the 1980s, but since then things have changed greatly.
More attention must be paid in the protection of forests to the effect of climate change.
We have succeeded in bringing traditional forms of air pollution under control in the last ten years, thanks also to EU directives, but at the same time, the risk of changes to global weather patterns getting out of hand has grown.
This development must also be looked at when reviewing the way the forests of the Union are monitored.
The regulation on the subject of the Community' s forests must be reformed, but Parliament cannot undertake financial commitments until the present regulation expires in 2001.
In this situation the suggestion that there should be an increase of tens of millions of euros for just a little over a year is not reasonable.
It is not sufficiently justified by the fact that the Union' s forest area has grown since the last round of enlargement.
The situation is so different between the north and the south.
For example, in Finland and Sweden we long ago reached the stage where the forest is used as it grows.
Here at Union level at the moment we are discussing many genuine legislative proposals concerning forests, including a common position on the emissions ceiling directive and on the directive relating to large incineration plants.
They must be supported, so that they are as successful as possible and so that we can do more to protect the forests as a result.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as you know, the Commission has presented two proposals for the amendment of the Regulations on the protection of the Community's forests against atmospheric pollution and against fire.
The purpose of these proposals is to adjust both Regulations in the light of the judgment of 25 February 1999 in which the European Court of Justice declared that Article 130s of the EC Treaty - which has now been renumbered 175 - was the proper legal basis for these instruments.
I should firstly like to say thank you very much to the three rapporteurs - Mrs Redondo Jiménez, Mrs Auroi and Mrs Sbarbati - who have been examining the Commission proposals that are under discussion today for their cooperation as well as for the amendments they have put forward.
This new legal basis automatically means that the codecision procedure under Article 252 applies and that the financial framework laid down in this Regulation becomes binding.
It was also necessary to bring the annual budgetary framework for these two initiatives into line with the amount of funds actually allocated by the budgetary authority in the period from 1997 to 2000 and with the amounts already earmarked in the preliminary draft budget for the year 2001.
That is why it is impossible for the Commission to accept Amendments Nos 6 and 12, which would involve an increase in the financial framework.
Nor can the Commission subscribe to Amendments Nos 5 and 11, which relate to the comitology and provide for the use of the consultation procedure in the case of both Regulations.
The Commission takes the view that this procedure would be inconsistent with the decision of 28 June 1999 on the comitology.
The Commission believes that the substance of the relevant amendments should be discussed again in connection with the revision of both Regulations, which is due to take place in 2001.
The Commission will present its proposals for their revision before the end of this year.
It has no problems, however, with Amendments Nos 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16.
Thank you, Commissioner Fischler.
You are the first Commissioner today who has not taken up his full allocation of speaking time.
We note that with gratitude.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
MEDIA/MEDIA Plus
The next item is the report (A5-0186/2000) by Mrs Hieronymi, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, concerning the following:
I. proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and the Council on the implementation of a training programme for professionals in the European audiovisual programme industry (MEDIA - Training, 2001-2005) [COM(1999) 658 - C5-0059/2000 - 1999/0275(COD)], and
II. proposal for a Council Decision on the implementation of a programme to encourage the development, distribution and promotion of European audiovisual works (MEDIA Plus - Development, Distribution and Promotion, 2001-2005 [COM(1999) 658 - C5-0119/2000 - 1999/0276(CNS)].
Mr President, I should like to begin by expressing my thanks to the Commission, to Commissioner Reding and to the members of all the relevant parliamentary committees for their wholehearted cooperation, and also to the Council under the Portuguese and now the French presidency for their cooperation during this stage of the legislative process.
We all share a common commitment to the MEDIA programme and its twin aims of strengthening the European film industry and creating sustainable jobs through the audiovisual growth engine.
That is why it is important to realise that European companies have hitherto been totally underequipped with the audiovisual material that would have enabled them to keep pace with this development.
The cross-border distribution of European films remains too limited.
In the cinema industry, American films have cornered some 80% of the European market, while only 7% of the cinema films shown in the countries of Europe have been made in other European countries.
About 74% of imported television feature films and series are from America, as against 14% from European countries.
Against this background the MEDIA programme, following on from its predecessors, MEDIA I and MEDIA II, is expressly designed to address this deficit in the circulation of European works and has three main support targets: the training of professionals in the audiovisual programme industry through MEDIA-Training and the development and marketing of audiovisual works through the MEDIA Plus programme.
What is new about the present programme phase is that it takes account of the online dimension of all audiovisual production and that it has introduced pilot projects on the use of digital technology.
To that extent, Commissioner, I can speak for all the participating committees and, I hope, for the whole House when I say that we support the proposals you have presented and hope that they all come to fruition.
I do wish to point out, however, that in some areas we have proposed amendments which we consider to be extremely important.
The first of these, as so often, concerns the budget.
The Commission is proposing EUR 400 million for a five-year programme in the audiovisual domain.
Four hundred million was the budget proposed by the Commission back in 1995, and unfortunately the Council rejected that proposal.
Whoever wants to grasp the opportunities offered by the digital revolution must be prepared to make the requisite investment.
That is why the figure of 400 million is too low.
The increase we are proposing is actually moderate; it would take the total budget to 550 million - 480 million for MEDIA Plus and 70 million for MEDIA- Training.
This increase alone, however, will not bring spectacular success.
We need two additional instruments.
The first is linkage with other EU programmes, and the second is scope to inject venture capital into the private market; this is done as a matter of course in the United States, and we appeal to the Council and the Commission to work with us to ensure that it finally becomes reality in Europe too.
The mobilisation of private capital is perhaps our key demand along with the pilot project relating to the European Investment Bank.
The second area is the question of the legal basis.
We know that this is a difficult question for the Commission, but it is our wish that the audiovisual programme should be based not only on Article 157 of the EC Treaty, the article concerning industry, but also on Article 151, which is devoted to culture.
This should also be made clear in the programme and be reflected in the legal basis.
Finally, let me just list some other important requirements.
The transparency and efficiency of the programmes should be promoted, funds should be concentrated on SMEs, independent producers and the Member States with limited audiovisual production capacities, and they should benefit the smaller linguistic areas.
Finally, my appeal to the Council and Commission is this: work with Parliament, so that together we can create a resolute lobby for European films.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are discussing a very important report here today.
I should like to begin by saying that this is an exceptionally good maiden report by our new colleague Mrs Hieronymi, who also did a truly first-class job in hammering out compromises in committee with our Socialist colleagues and with the Greens and Liberals.
So I believe we have cooperated well, even with the representatives of the European United Left.
Together with the Commission, we have also managed to make a good Commission proposal even better.
We do, of course, have a good general idea of what MEDIA I and MEDIA II have achieved.
MEDIA Plus, of course, will surely be even better - the mere addition of the word 'Plus' must tell us that.
I believe that, at a time when we have been talking about tremendously important educational issues in both Lisbon and Feira, we cannot make cuts in areas in which the products of the education system are supposed to find work.
That is why I consider it very important that we really do create opportunities in this field, and to that end we must invest more money in the audiovisual industry, especially in the training of professionals.
What is on offer here is therefore insufficient.
This is always the case; there is never enough money for culture or for education.
But at the end of the day we shall always be answerable to those people to whom we have promised the earth in our fine speeches.
What we find here is not enough to enable us to respond to the audiovisual revolution.
It will not enable us to develop a genuine European audiovisual policy to challenge the American hegemony in this domain.
Nor can it really serve to unlock the full potential of the audiovisual industry to create jobs and, of course, to produce a critical mass of cultural content.
I believe we have a duty to keep emphasising this fact.
To put it bluntly, a European audiovisual policy has yet to materialise.
That is why we must make an all-out effort here.
I believe that, as Mrs Hieronymi has said, we could impart a considerable amount of momentum with a little more money.
In the sphere of communications in particular, we can make a great deal of progress, including the creation of new jobs.
At the same time, I should like to reemphasise that the primary concern of every one of us is of course European culture in all its diversity, as is the need to make it visible beyond our national borders and to portray it universally.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Madam Commissioner, first of all may I thank Mrs Ruth Hieronymi for the marvellous manner in which she has cooperated with our committee and for the outstanding degree of cooperation in all the committees and across the political spectrum.
We have concentrated on the key points.
Everyone has made compromises in order to try and improve still further a programme which was already very good from the outset.
I speak now for the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs and wish to focus on two aspects of the programme.
Like the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, with which we reached agreement on these points, we also call for an increase in these limited budgetary resources and an addition to the legal basis - not a change, but an addition!
Why do I, or my colleagues in the Legal Affairs Committee, see a connection between these things?
I believe that everything is global, that art and culture, like everything else, are subject to these laws.
One reason why there has to be a European cultural policy is that the nation states are no longer able to pursue their cultural policies alone.
Where the European Union can intervene, as it is already doing in MEDIA Plus, it should be able to continue doing so with a greater volume of financial resources.
The Council should be called to account here.
I believe, Commissioner, that Parliament is actually playing into the hands of the Commission when we say that we want more money in order to be able to guarantee the pursuit of a European cultural policy, and that is also the reason why we should like an addition to the legal basis.
To prevent any misunderstanding, let me say that our aim here is not to subsidise the film industry but rather to ensure that more European films can be watched in Europe.
First of all, we have to win over this European territory in its entirety so that we can continue to operate efficiently.
I do not think that I need speak for my full two minutes if I can focus on these two points.
We should like more money, and we should like this addition to the legal basis.
No doubt you will be able to echo these sentiments, Madam Commissioner.
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr President, I associate myself entirely with the words of praise that have been showered on this report and shall come to the point without further ado.
We are now entering the third round of support programmes for European films, and this support remains absolutely vital, for the European audiovisual industry has undoubtedly been in crisis for quite a long time.
The following evidence may be added to what we have already heard.
About one in three of the films made in the EU is never shown in a cinema, and a large percentage of those that do make it into the cinema are watched by a total audience of fewer than 130 000.
A film will not normally start to yield a return on the initial investment until a million cinemagoers have paid to watch it.
Only one-fifth of European films ever leave their home country; of those that do, nine-tenths go no further than neighbouring European countries.
One of the strengths of the European film industry also accounts for its structural weakness.
Low-budget productions in the tradition of the film d'auteur often cannot be made without the aid of national support funds and frequently appeal to a limited audience of young intellectuals.
During production and afterwards, an adequate promotion and marketing budget is generally lacking.
Cultural and linguistic diversity are matchless assets but sadly often stand in the way of widespread distribution.
Great though the dream of conquering the U.S. film market may be, let us keep our feet on the European ground!
We must not neglect to strengthen our national markets, and we need to do more to develop the European market more effectively.
If some laurels can be reaped along the way, so much the better!
Competitiveness and marketability are commendable aims of MEDIA Plus.
The programme draws on the lessons learned from the experience of the preceding programmes, but although the Council and the Commission are well aware of the present situation, they are still afraid to take the plunge.
Big cinema needs big money.
One of the lessons that has been learned is that capping production costs as a condition of support is an obstacle to the creation of good films.
The funding of support programmes is not the only issue here.
There is also the question of allowing the provision of venture capital.
Here we are confronted with a sorry state of affairs.
European companies and banks do invest considerable sums of money in the programme industry, but they tend to invest in America rather than Europe.
That is why, back in 1995, the Green Paper on strategy options to strengthen the European programme industry in the context of the audiovisual policy of the European Union proposed the establishment of a European guarantee fund, which the Council stubbornly rejected - the German Government, sad to say, being the foremost opponent of the scheme - without offering an alternative solution.
This report therefore marks a new attempt to put this financial instrument on the agenda as an accompanying measure.
In Germany there is a new Government, which will not necessarily feel that it would lose face by reversing the rejectionist stance of its predecessor, so perhaps we can now hope for a more conciliatory response.
Last but not least, we must not forget the television companies, which act as the driving force of the programme industry by investing large sums of money in audiovisual productions and by providing opportunities for the transmission of audiovisual works.
A key role attaches to the public corporations in particular.
They possess a wealth of human and material resources, which are often the prerequisite for successful productions.
Mr President, the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party thinks that MEDIA Plus is an extremely commendable and important programme which can help strengthen cultural and linguistic diversity within the EU.
European film production is an important part of the EU' s cultural and media policy, and the Liberal Group considers that it is important to support the European film industry which is exposed to a very great deal of competition, especially from the American film industry.
A special effort must be made on behalf of the European film industry, and that is something the Liberal Group supports.
On one important point, however, we shall be voting against the rapporteur' s recommendation, and that is the budget for the programme.
We are opposed to increasing the amounts proposed by the Commission, as recommended by the rapporteur.
It is the European Parliament' s and the EU' s task to establish the correct framework and conditions for a cultural policy of this kind, but it is not a proper part of our remit to spend an exorbitant amount of taxpayers' money on cultural policy.
We therefore think that the Commission' s proposal for a total overall budget of EUR 400 million over the five years is both realistic and appropriate.
It is similarly with certain reservations that we shall be voting tomorrow in favour of the proposals to set up a European Guarantee Fund and to broaden the financing options through cooperation with the European Investment Bank.
If we are still voting in favour of the proposals, it is because they do not automatically mean more expense for European taxpayers.
Unlike previous media programmes, the MEDIA Plus programme also involves the radio industry and, because we really cannot find any good, sensible reason for this, we have a reservation regarding this area, too.
The media programmes were previously administered by the Commission in cooperation with the Media Committee as the advisory committee.
The rapporteur wishes to change the status of the Media Committee from that of an advisory to that of a competent body, but this is something for which we have never obtained a really good explanation.
I fear that this change will make it still a little more difficult to administer the MEDIA Plus programme, so it is also with a reservation that we shall be voting in favour of the proposals tomorrow.
In spite of all these reservations, I think we have an extremely good program before us to enable us to strengthen the European film industry.
We should very much like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Hieronymi, for the impressive work she has done.
Commissioner, Mr President, I have good news and bad news about the MEDIA Plus programme.
The good news is that Mrs Hieronymi has, of course, carried out sterling work and the cooperation which culminated in unanimity within the committee which handled this report was more than excellent.
The plan is indeed sound.
In fact, projects which preceded this plan have already proved that this type of plan meets a real need.
We of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance have called for attention to be given to the smaller countries, to the difficulties which smaller producers encounter in smaller countries or in countries which belong to a smaller linguistic group, and we particularly appreciated this being taken into account in the adopted amendments.
Needless to say, we fully back what the rapporteur has stated with regard to the need for a legal basis.
Unfortunately I have to give you the bad news too.
This is not so much related to the Media Plan as it is to the media policy as a whole, as proposed by the European Union.
Indeed, we may well ask ourselves what Europe' s ambition is.
I do wonder.
I was interested to hear Mr Andreasen' s criticism on the budgetary aspect here, but I read in the press that Europe spends EUR 1 billion per annum on helping and encouraging tobacco growers.
I cannot help but ask myself questions then or, as Mr Perry rightly pointed out: why is it seemingly easier to obtain EU funding in Europe if you manufacture olive oil?
This is hardly ever discussed.
The huge EU budgets which are channelled into agriculture are not really discussed much, rightly so, in fact.
But I do wonder why it is so difficult to adopt European policy or industrial policy which can match Hollywood.
In my opinion, all Hollywood wants is a worthy opponent.
Unfortunately, we are forced to note that this programme cannot even start to offer anything that remotely resembles an opponent.
This programme does not even take production into account.
It mentions very important areas, such as distribution or the preliminary stages of production, but when it comes to production, mum is the word.
Naturally, the intention is not to squander subsidies.
Indeed not.
As the rapporteur rightly stated, it is vital for the European Union to set up a Guarantee Fund at long last, in tandem with the European Investment Bank, and to offer European producers who dare compete with Hollywood the necessary guarantees, so that we can offer those people who really want to invest in European cinema the opportunity to do this.
And I would like to ask the Commissioner to roll up her sleeves and get stuck in.
This is not just to safeguard our culture, but it is also an enormous challenge for this new century, because everyone knows that this will be the age of the content industry, and it would be extremely regrettable if we at European level were to hand this over completely to the American content industry.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate Mrs Hyeronymi on the excellent work of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education and the Media, and I would also like to stress the extremely high level of agreement and synergy between the Committees, to the extent - and this is proof - that the main body of the report and those expressing the opinions of the different committees were all approved unanimously.
From a structural point of view, greater investment was necessary in the audiovisual sector to create fresh job opportunities for young unemployed Europeans and to stem the European Union brain drain to third countries, particularly the United States of America, where greater investment leads not only to better working conditions but also greater job opportunities.
The issues worked on: we considered it necessary to alter the eligibility arrangements applying to the programme by reducing the number of partners from three to two; we considered it necessary to ensure that the training programmes set out in the proposal include support measures geared to the need to develop innovative content for the production of audiovisual formats other than drama and documentaries; we considered that it was important to change the legal basis to ensure that the component relating to support for the development, distribution, and promotion of European audiovisual works can likewise be brought within the scope of codecision, thus enabling Parliament to wield greater influence on implementation of the programme and its aim of fostering European culture.
Finally, considering development of investment in the European cinema industry to be extremely important, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy calls upon the Member States to pursue a policy of making sums reinvested for the creation of new jobs tax-deductible, and stresses the importance of establishing a guarantee fund as one of the measures necessary for the development of the independent audiovisual industry which encourages new talent and develops a cultural content of European tradition.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in a Europe of economic and monetary union, it could have been an advantage for the MEDIA/MEDIA Plus programme to have Article 157 (industry) of the Treaty as its legal basis.
Audiovisual media would, of course, be at the heart of European policy, and also of our work.
Now, reading the preview of this part-session produced by Parliament' s press department, I note that the MEDIA Plus programme is not one of this week' s highlights.
And I have been really surprised at the low level of interest aroused by one of this year' s most important reports from the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport - or rather, to tell you the truth, I have not been surprised at all.
Culture is not paid much attention in this Parliament, as in all the European Institutions.
That must change.
It is not just the audiovisual industry or, I should rather say, the audiovisual sector.
Like others Members who have spoken on this subject, I hope Article 151, on culture, can also be a legal basis for this audiovisual programme.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mrs Hieronymi wholeheartedly for her determination to broaden the basis and the aim, and to develop the resources for this programme, not to mention all the energy she has put into our joint work.
Audiovisual creation does not account for the whole industry, but creation is indeed involved and the purpose of this programme is to make cultural diversity effective and concrete.
Cultural diversity is not a slogan.
It is a cultural and economic necessity.
We urgently need to have audiovisual works distributed in every country in Europe.
Grants to cinemas showing non-national European films should be increased.
Emphasising the cultural importance of the programme does not mean neglecting its economic importance, of course.
By 2005, the audiovisual sector should have been responsible for creating over 300 000 highly qualified jobs.
How can people have so little interest in a market likely to grow so rapidly?
It seems that neither cultural necessity nor economic objectives carry any weight in favour of implementing this ambitious programme.
As always when culture is involved, the budget is minimal, not to mention the fact that it is always gone ten in the evening by the time we get round to culture here.
People may say the budget has been increased compared with the two previous programmes, MEDIA 1 and MEDIA 2.
I think not.
EUR 250 million for twelve countries and EUR 310 million for sixteen countries is no less than the EUR 400 million now proposed for some thirty countries.
Why is such a derisory budget, with no real increase, allocated to a programme which can combine the two objectives Europe so badly needs - the objective of Europe' s identity and Europe' s own diversified culture, and dynamic economic development?
We are told the digital age promises a revolution in the development of content and the distribution of images, and the MEDIA Plus programme devotes space to pilot projects, such as the digital transposition of our audiovisual heritage.
Under the circumstances, would it really be responsible not to take the MEDIA Plus programme seriously?
Mr President, the MEDIA programmes are designed to strengthen European industry and the audiovisual content through measures providing financial support to specific sectors such as development, the preparation stage of projects, the distribution and marketing of audiovisual works, the promotion of European works and programmes with the aim of facilitating access to European and international markets, and training aimed at improving occupational preparation.
The adoption of the Media Plus and Training programmes is important; the autonomous role of the promotion sector is important; the significant role of distribution is important for an increasingly wide distribution of works; the complementarity between Media Plus and Media Training should be increased as much as possible.
The Commission should take Parliament's contribution to heart and accept all the amendments - both those to the training part, which is subject to codecision, and those to the development, distribution and promotion part, which is merely subject to the consultation procedure and which, moreover, receives the greatest share of the budget.
The amendments are the result of some very clever work, Mrs Hyeronymi, and, as Chairman, I would like to compliment you and reiterate that you have won the unanimous support of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media, Education and Sport and the committees which expressed opinions.
The latter Committees - the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy - have done something significant in approving the proposal to change the legal basis of Media Plus, inserting Article 157 (industry) and Article 151 (culture) in order to give equal value to industry and the audiovisual sector.
The Commission has already indicated through press agencies that it opposes this amendment.
I am sorry but we are not satisfied with the response and we would have preferred to have heard the Commission's position in this debate and not through press statements.
In any case, we call for an increase in the budget and we hope that Parliament and the Commission will be able to achieve unanimity and an agreement on this issue as well.
Mr President, I thank Mrs Hieronymi for the work she has put into this report.
It is important to stress at the outset that this is not just any old report.
It is something that is very dear not only to the members of this committee and the House but also to members of the industry right across the Union.
But in putting this before the House we have to ask ourselves two very important questions.
Firstly, why do we need this programme?
Secondly, what is the added value that it is going to bring us?
Only by answering those questions as a House can we go forward to the Council and the Commission with a very strong case.
Why do we need it?
We are at the very beginning of an explosion of this industry on this continent.
We have to put ourselves in the position of being able to compete in the international arena.
I believe we are able to do that.
I also believe that this industry will be the spearhead of this century, in the same way as coal, steel and the infrastructure of railways were the impetus for the development of the revolution in the 19th century.
It is absolutely vital that we do not miss the train on this one.
It is absolutely vital that we get in there as a series of institutions committed to building this industry.
The second reason is that we have to, in this increasingly homogenised era of global audio-visual content, get into the area of freedom of speech, freedom of expression and freedom of diversity.
That is where we in this House have an exemplary responsibility in performing our role in the development of this particular sector.
My own Group is very committed to the budget that has been laid out in the report.
We are also very committed to diversifying and looking at different sources of funding as befits our new entrepreneurial era.
Finally, it is very important to reiterate what Mrs Pack said about having a long term strategy for the audio-visual sector in the European Union, a long term coordinated and integrated strategy that allows us to benefit from each other's strengths in every Member State.
Madam Commissioner, on a certain occasion in September, you said that we should declare war on Hollywood in order to strengthen the European film industry.
The only problem there is that our best warriors emigrate to Hollywood.
Commissioner, malicious gossip has it that you could be open to challenge, in purely legal terms, for awarding the European Film Prize in Cannes on behalf of MEDIA Plus, since the prize may have been funded from the MEDIA II budget.
Be that as it may, we shall not criticise you.
On the contrary, we are grateful for the tremendous vigour with which you have been tackling the entire cultural agenda.
I have read in the press that we in the European Parliament could possibly upset the timetable because we are pressing for parliamentary codecision.
I do not think this is the case.
We have the political will to see that this programme begins on time.
As directly elected representatives of the people, we also have a legal and moral right to be part of the decision-making process in the field of cultural policy.
Madam Commissioner, we make an earnest appeal for a constructive dialogue with you and with the Council on this specific issue.
Mr President, I would like to say that I am pleased with the MEDIA Plus document.
I believe that it has been very much improved by Parliament.
Mrs Hieronymi, furthermore, has been very open to all suggestions and it seems to me that, in relation to other programmes, it contains an innovation which the Commission has also contributed to, that is, support for marketing and distribution.
Nevertheless, I would like a further step to be taken because, in my view, the MEDIA Plus document follows a principle which is rather like that of arts cinema: it supports in particular the script and the production when these days we know that post-production accounts for 60%, 70% or 80% of good films.
Furthermore, postproduction is the field in which the new technologies are working.
It is much cheaper to produce special effects by computer than in reality.
If we do not support post-production, editing, training in editing and the establishment of studios for dubbing, editing and creating sound tracks, in which post-production can be properly carried out, our cinema will lag behind.
We have European directors who have worked with American companies, who have made fantastic films.
We have the knowledge, but we do not have the support for the industry to allow us to compete in post-production, because to speak now of script-led cinema is to speak of times past, it is to speak of the theatre-cinema in which the camera follows the actor around.
That system is completely obsolete.
We should support this new industry in which, furthermore, there are new vocations, new forms of creativity, a creativity of images, pure cinema, the new cinema for the era we are living in.
I would therefore ask that, when offering grants, these aspects should be taken into account and the industry should be opened up to the world.
In the conciliation we should now finally be talking of a cultural industry.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, technological progress over the last decade has indeed revolutionised the audiovisual sector.
In any society that respects man and functions to satisfy his diverse material, spiritual and cultural needs, such progress encourages artistic creation to flourish and new forms of expression to develop, making art accessible to all and helping to create a deeper understanding between people from all walks of life.
In capitalist societies, however, in both the audiovisual and in other sectors, the beneficial consequences of technological progress are being stifled by the forces controlling it; to wit, by monopolies making profits not by improving the quality of artistic creation, but by controlling the markets, subjecting people to misleading advertising, dictating ideological beliefs and creating specific consumer standards, even for culture.
The problem, honourable members, is not just whether films produced in the US or films produced in Europe dominate the European market; the main problem lies with the content and quality of the films that we and our children watch.
The European Union treats culture in general and audiovisual media in particular as a commodity, as yet another commercial activity for big business and as a competitive market where the only winners are those who are best equipped to turn the market mechanisms to their advantage, rather than those who have something new or something of a higher quality to offer.
This approach is quite evident in the proposal for the MEDIA Plus/MEDIA training programme, from the very first paragraph of the introduction and from Article 1 of the proposal for a decision, which aims to allow professionals in the industry to take full advantage of the European and international dimension of the market.
The whole structure has absolutely nothing to do with the needs of the people of the European Union or with culture; on the contrary it serves those interests which benefit from the commercialisation of culture.
Mr President, I congratulate the rapporteur on the work that she has done.
There are two simple points I want to make.
There are some things that the public sector cannot do and some things the market cannot do.
Certainly the public sector cannot make good films.
I do not believe it can do much of a job of judging what is a good film.
Whenever we try it in the United Kingdom, any support from the government tends to mean that the film is going to be a flop.
We need to very careful about that.
Similarly, the market does not have adequate resources or adequate ability to ensure that we have sufficiently skilled and trained people.
That certainly is an area that is proposed in this report and is a responsibility at a European level.
I must pay tribute to organisations like, in Britain, the National Film School in Beaconsfield, which needs help to do its work.
I was pleased to see there are some references to digital radio in this report, but not enough.
We should not forget the radio sector in audio-visual.
I hope that will not be forgotten as this report goes through.
Finally, it is very easy to write a long speech.
It is much harder to give a short speech.
It is easy to spend a large budget, but difficult to spend a small budget.
We look to the Commission to spend the money that they have efficiently and effectively.
Mr President, I shall not have the last word; that is the Commissioner's prerogative.
I wish to subscribe to the thanks that have been expressed to the rapporteur and to emphasise that I have heard from insiders that the programme has so far been an unqualified success.
I believe that one reason for this has been the way in which the support has been accompanied by intensive consultancy and local networking.
This needs to be re-emphasised.
The MEDIA desk and the local MEDIA branches have proved to be very useful instruments.
It is vital for these accompanying institutional measures to be retained.
The MEDIA branch offices help to minimise the obstacles to European cooperation, for example.
On the one hand, MEDIA is about culture and common European cultural traditions in the audiovisual domain.
This is still a rather tender sapling which needs our undivided attention.
Moreover, as other speakers have already pointed out, it is also an economic asset that is judged by its success.
One key criterion of the success of the new MEDIA programme will be its support for the development, marketing and promotion of films that the public wants to see.
I make no attempt to conceal my own personal view on this matter.
Hollywood cannot be beaten, in my opinion, by money and quotas but only by quality.
Recent years have shown that people are interested in many different types of film.
Europe must not shy away from this window of opportunity.
We must continue to foster this encouraging development, and to that end the budgetary increase requested in Mrs Hieronymi's report is a logical move.
Finally, I should like to mention that many of the roots of our European culture lie in Central and Eastern Europe.
A higher budget will also make it possible to involve the Central and Eastern European countries to a greater extent in these programmes.
The last word on an increased budget may not yet have been spoken, and we shall perhaps be discussing further increases over the next few years.
Mr President, first of all, I want to thank you for agreeing to put MEDIA Plus on your already very full agenda, despite the fact that we so often get there late at night.
But late in the evening is often the time for cultural activities, so we are not really doing anything unusual.
I also want to thank the Members of Parliament who have worked so intensively on the draft: the members of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, of course, but also the various committees the report was referred to for an opinion, and I want to mention the draftsmen, Mrs Echerer, Mr Fiori, Mr Rocard and Mr Wynn.
Above all, I would like to add my voice to all those who have highlighted the contribution of the rapporteur, Ruth Hieronymi.
We usually do congratulate the rapporteur.
It is traditional.
But this time I think we can say Mrs Hieronymi' s work has been more than exceptional.
She has been a great rapporteur and it is thanks to her that the draft Parliament is submitting to us today is a draft which improves the Commission' s text.
We appreciate the rapporteur' s negotiating talent and her personal commitment.
Thank you very much, Mrs Hieronymi.
Mr President, as you know, the Commission sets great store by the European Parliament' s opinion, especially with the Culture Council coming up on 20-21 July, because it is my job to let the ministers know the views of the European Parliament.
In this way, discussions between the Commission and the Council can progress usefully, not just on the basis of the Commission' s proposal, but also on the basis of the position expressed by Parliament.
Do not expect me to launch into a speech on the importance of European cinema.
I have done that many times, in many places.
You know my views on the subject;
I share yours, but we are here this evening to produce the best possible draft.