# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Subject: High infant mortality levels in Kosovo According to the most recent UN information forwarded to the World Health Organisation, Kosovo has the highest rate of infant mortality in Europe.
About 50% of premature babies do not survive and the war has resulted in a massive increase in the number of miscarriages.
Even babies born when due tend to be underdeveloped.
In view of the humanitarian aid being given by the European Union and the efforts being made by the head of the interim administration, Mr Bernard Kouchner, what measures will the Council take to defend the rights of the women of Kosovo to motherhood and to protect the health of pregnant women, women in confinement and new-born children?
Mr President, Mrs Karamanou' s question is an extremely serious one, and I would not wish to conceal that fact.
We are perfectly aware of the difficult and dramatic humanitarian situation in Kosovo and of the problem of displaced people in that region - and I mean people who originate from Kosovo - and of the particular effect of this on child health and on mortality rates.
I think it is well known that the European Union has made a clear contribution to the humanitarian aid effort being made by the international community.
As you know, the European Community has contributed a total of EUR 378 million for the province of Kosovo alone, and this has to be seen in conjunction with the contributions made by Member States at national level.
This contribution covers various projects in the fields of health and health systems and of water purification.
Furthermore, as you know, the European Union makes a contribution to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, which came to EUR 66.3 million in 1999.
I think that Mrs Karamanou is aware that, because of the need for division of labour between the international donors, the task of restoring health care in Kosovo has been entrusted to the World Health Organisation.
The reports produced by the WHO indicate that it is fully aware of the alarming infant mortality situation, and it has focused its efforts on improving basic conditions in maternity and general hospitals.
Nevertheless, we are aware that this situation is far from a satisfactory solution and that there are widespread repercussions in other areas of health care, apart from child health.
This is not just a technical situation, it is a political situation, and it goes hand in hand with the need to solve the political situation, because there are aspects to this, and we may as well be open about this, which are associated with the international community' s inability up to now to make a multi-ethnic society function in Kosovo, with tragic effects on attempts to improve health care in that region.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I thank you for your answer which supplements what Commissioner Patten said yesterday on the subject.
Yet, the sum of EUR 378 million you mentioned had been given in 1999, was proved by the facts to be quite insufficient to create even rudimentary civilised conditions in Kosovo, especially where the provision of health services is concerned.
Mr President-in-Office, do you not think that the very fact of increased child mortality is an abomination for the continent of Europe, a shameful thing, which should motivate us all, so that the aid we provide becomes more effective and more generous?
Of course, the situation was not idyllic, even before the bombardments, anything but, I should say.
However, since NATO' s intervention, there has been a very clear deterioration in the natural and human environment.
So, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, is it not a moral obligation that we should try to create civilised conditions for the long-suffering inhabitants of Kosovo, and above all, keep our promises to them?
Mrs Karamanou, I recognise the fact that all the efforts that have been made in Kosovo in this field have not been enough.
I do not think that any of us has the least doubt about that.
I do not want to link this question with your comments about the period "before" and "after" NATO' s intervention, as we will probably touch on that issue at another point during this Question Time.
Nevertheless, I would like to say that the European Union is aware that the resources it has devoted to Kosovo reflect the financial limitations it has to work within.
We have to remember that we share responsibility in that region with the international community.
The European Union has a certain responsibility in view of that particular role, but we cannot undertake to rapidly rebuild structures that were, as you have said yourself, Mrs Karamanou, not the best before the military action in Kosovo.
What is more, I do not believe, Mrs Karamanou, that the military action in Kosovo resulted in such a significant destruction of public health facilities as to have had a direct impact on the current situation.
The present position is more dramatic in terms of displaced populations, and in terms of a whole raft of economic factors and of the level of satisfaction with basic health facilities resulting from the overall breakdown in organisational structures in Kosovo' s administration.
This is the basic issue underlying the present situation as a whole.
And if we cannot solve the political problem, which must be done in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolution, then we will not solve the problem of child health, nor the various other problems faced by this region.
I would like to widen the debate and include the situation in Mitrovica.
In cooperation with Europe, the international community rebuilt the hospital there too, but it is located in the northern part of the city, thus prohibiting access to Albanian Kosovars.
This means that medical aid is still denied to the Albanian Kosovars.
This is also happening elsewhere in the country, causing tension between the Albanian Kosovars and Serbs, making for a situation where nobody trusts anybody anymore and where Albanians do not want to be looked after by Serbs and vice versa.
I understand very well what you are saying and you are right: the European Union should work in a wider context of international cooperation.
But where will you place the emphasis?
What will you do to ensure that Albanian Kosovars too can be cared for in a hospital, including that in Mitrovica?
Mr Staes, the situation in Mitrovica is well known.
This is a very special situation with a degree of inter-ethnic tension which fortunately is not matched with such severity in others parts of Kosovo.
I perfectly understand Mr Staes' s concerns.
Nevertheless, I would like to say that Bernard Kouchner' s work in this area has aimed to comply with the objectives of the relevant United Nations resolution, in an attempt to create multi-ethnic facilities which can serve the various communities, including the various aspects of the administration.
I believe that we should not jump to conclusions here about who is responsible, because there are various protagonists involved.
The situation in Mitrovica is appalling, and involves very special tensions, and I believe that the measures taken over the last few hours to create safe conditions in that area are to be welcomed.
Nevertheless, I have to say that, regrettably, we do not have the police resources - and this is connected with the Member States' contributions - to guarantee the follow-up action we proposed to the military action, that is to say the establishment of inter-ethnic coordination mechanisms guaranteeing adequate safety for the various communities, and, in particular, access to hospitals.
Question No 3 by (H-0027/00):
Subject: Indictment of NATO before War Crimes Tribunal Human rights organisations, such as the US Human Rights Watch, have already collected significant evidence of NATO crimes in connection with the bombing of Kosovo and Serbia with a view to bringing a case before the War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague.
On the basis of this evidence, some of which has already been lodged with the Tribunal, NATO is accused of 'serious violations of international humanitarian law' and 'wilful murder'.
Does the Council consider that such accusations should be put before the War Crimes Tribunal for a thorough judicial investigation?
In the event of a judicial inquiry into the accusations against NATO, what will be done in respect of the High Representative for the CFSP, who was NATO Secretary-General during the crisis?
Is there any procedure for suspending him from office until the judicial investigation into the accusations has been completed?
Mr President, Mr Alavanos' question naturally gives us food for thought on a wide range of issues.
The Council has already, on various occasions, stated its conviction that the severe measures taken by NATO were both necessary and justified to deal with extremist and irresponsible actions involving clear violations of the United Nations Security Council resolutions.
I am aware that there may be different views about NATO' s action and the legitimacy of that action.
Everyone is free to hold such views.
In my own country, the various parliamentary groups had differing views on this matter.
That was how it was.
In any case, the Council' s position is clear in that it considers that the objective of the air campaign carried out by the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was to put an end to the humanitarian disaster in Kosovo caused by the Belgrade regime.
This objective was fully and formally expressed in the statement adopted by the General Affairs Council in Luxembourg on 8 April.
I must say that these NATO measures were not taken lightly and were only carried out as a last resort when it became evident that all avenues for reaching a negotiated solution had been exhausted and that the Belgrade authorities were concentrating their forces in order to expel the Kosovo Albanians from their land.
I am sure you are aware, Mr Alavanos, that, during her recent visit to NATO headquarters, Prosecutor Del Ponte stressed that the International Tribunal was obliged to examine all accusations presented to it, including those made against NATO, in particular by pacifist groups from Canada.
This compulsory examination was to be carried out in line with accusations submitted.
In any case, I have with me a statement made by Prosecutor Del Ponte according to which NATO is not at present under any investigation by the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and there is no formal inquiry process concerning NATO' s actions in the Kosovo conflict.
All information received during the past six months, either from individuals or from groups requesting an investigation of NATO' s actions during the Kosovo conflict, have been recorded by the Prosecutor.
Any other information will of course be analysed by the Prosecutor, who will in due course decide whether or not there is cause for action.
Until that time Prosecutor Del Ponte has decided not to examine any of the accusations of criminality made against NATO.
I thank the President-in-Office but I do not agree with him that the purpose of NATO' s intervention was to stop a humanitarian disaster, because we have a humanitarian disaster in Kosovo today, we have the hell of Milosevic, followed by the hell of the KLA and the NATO forces.
If the President-in-Office has noticed, almost half the questions he has had to answer today relate to Kosovo.
Despite this, he too accepted that the inquisition procedure of the War Crimes Tribunal against NATO after applications by Canadian and other pacifist organisations is an open question.
My question, which the President-in-Office did not answer, is this: if this inquisition procedure begins, in which the main or, if you will, one of the main people interrogated and probably found guilty will be Mr Solana, who is today the High Representative of the European Union' s Common Foreign and Security Policy, should it not be, if that happens, if the General Prosecutor of the Tribunal is determined to begin the process, that Mr Solana' s status is suspended at least until it is shown that his hands are clean?
Mr Alavanos, if an action of this kind should be brought against NATO and if this action were to be brought against Mr Javier Solana personally, we would have to bear in mind that Mr Javier Solana held one post at that time and is holding a different one today.
The duties that he exercises today have nothing whatsoever to do with the duties that he exercised during his time as Secretary-General of NATO.
In the absence of any corresponding indication from any international judicial body which could justify any personal accusation against Mr Javier Solana - and there is no sign of this whatsoever - the European Union will not of course make any statement at all on this matter.
Mr President, I believe Mr Alavanos is getting NATO and Mr Milosevic mixed up.
Mr Milosevic should be appearing before the war crimes tribunal and we should be awarding NATO the Sakharov prize.
But I have a quite different question for the Council.
How do matters stand in Kosovo with regard to the rebuilding of the administration, the judiciary and, most importantly of all, the police force?
You mentioned before that we are on the brink of catastrophe there and nothing is being done.
Rapid action is called for!
First of all, I would like to say that I agree with the priorities you have identified concerning personal responsibility, Mr Posselt.
With regard to the judicial structure in Kosovo, we have already heard Mr Kouchner, on various occasions, describe the enormous difficulties he is experiencing in setting up administrative machinery and a judicial structure.
As you know, the first steps were taken some months ago.
We are all aware of the difficulties, and particularly the financial difficulties, that Mr Kouchner is facing in setting up this administrative machinery, and, in particular, we are aware of the special difficulty involved in recruiting police so as to ensure day-to-day public safety.
This is a responsibility that the European Union takes very seriously, Mr Posselt, and I would like to mention that, at the General Affairs Council held on Monday, this issue was repeatedly stressed when we were discussing Kosovo.
Statements were made and pressure was brought to bear on the various Member States who have undertaken to make police resources available to honour their commitments.
Some Member States are taking refuge in the fact that they have provided military forces and that they cannot send the police forces, to which they committed themselves, as quickly as they would like.
We are certainly very much aware that this factor is seriously compromising Mr Kouchner' s work and the normalisation of administrative structures in Kosovo, especially as regards judicial structures and police cover.
This is having unfortunate and obvious effects on the scope for controlling inter-ethnic coordination, and we are all conscious that, if measures are not taken in the short term, we may end up with situations involving the kind of tensions that we witnessed just a few hours ago, and that these tensions may be mirrored in other areas of Kosovo.
This is obviously a question which really has to be seen in a NATO context, but, as the European Union shares NATO' s view of these issues, it is not difficult for us to associate ourselves with this.
I would like to make this clear on behalf of the Council, so that there can be no doubt.
Mr Marset Campos, you will be aware, first of all, of how difficult it is to select targets during a military operation, particularly an air-based one, and you will also be aware that there is a category of targets that, whilst they are not military targets as such, are infrastructure targets selected with a view to hindering the smooth running of the military machine.
We are of course entering a grey area here, and you may say, Mr Marset Campos, that these are civilian targets, such as bridges and road and rail infrastructure, whilst others will tell me that they are military targets, because they are targets which support military structures in aggressive campaigns such as those carried out by Mr Milosevic' s forces in Kosovo.
So we do not see eye to eye on how we view certain targets.
Unfortunately, and as everyone recognised during the military action in Kosovo, there were civilian sectors, and in particular infrastructural sectors directly affecting the general public, and even inhabited areas, which were directly affected by NATO air attacks.
This is generally recognised and this happens in all wars, and the Kosovo war was not a clean war, nor a model war, but a war based on the art of the possible.
And, above all, it was a necessary war, and it was not only about what was possible, it was necessary to put an end to an absolutely unacceptable form of aggression which was utterly rejected by the entire international community.
Mr Marset Campos, regardless of how we may see things with hindsight - and it is easy to see things with the benefit of hindsight, if you take no action yourself - I believe that, if we look at what happened in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and at the impunity that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina led to, and the continuation of that impunity, then we might perhaps see the NATO military action in Kosovo in a somewhat less catastrophic light.
Question No 4 by (H-0028/00):
Subject: Turkish blockade of Armenia Given that the European Union is actively promoting social, economic and political relations with Armenia through the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, signed on 12 October 1999, what steps is the Council taking to persuade the Turkish Government to lift the economic blockade of Armenia?
Has the time come for the Turkish Government to lift the economic blockade of Armenia?
.
(PT) Mr President, Mrs Schleicher' s question is about a regional conflict, and at first sight, the question appears to assume that our relations with Turkey and Armenia are merely bilateral.
It is obvious that underlying this question is the key issue of Nagorno-Karabakh and also Armenia' s conflict with Azerbaijan, which have repercussions here of course, given the special relationship that Azerbaijan has with Turkey.
Nevertheless, as regards the relationship that interests us - the relationship between the European Union and Armenia - the entry into force of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement in July 1999 and the first meeting that we held in October last year show how seriously the European Union takes its relations with Armenia.
One of our aims is to extend commercial relations in the area of trade and investment in particular.
Another aim is to maintain a bilateral political dialogue with Armenia, in view of its major role in that subregion.
As I said, Nagorno-Karabakh is an issue which it is still vital to resolve and one which of course threatens the stability of the southern Caucasus.
In our view, all efforts to achieve a solution to this conflict must be intensified.
This must be our top priority.
The European Union has been endeavouring to facilitate this process and we are of course also aware that Turkey must adopt a constructive attitude towards this matter and play a major role in it.
In December 1999, as we all know, Turkey was accepted as a candidate for membership of the European Union.
Political dialogue with Turkey will be stepped up in view of this new situation.
The presidency of the European Union, which I myself represented, visited Ankara immediately after that decision and we stressed to the Turkish authorities the importance of strengthening political dialogue between us.
In particular, we stressed the need for us to take advantage of Turkey' s own importance in the region, particularly in relation to central Asia and the Caucasus.
We will try to reach common positions on international issues in the context of this relationship with Turkey, one which we would like to see become ever closer politically speaking.
As I have said, this applies in particular in view of the region of which Turkey forms a part, and given the importance of its strategic geographical position.
We hope that Turkey will adopt a constructive and positive attitude.
Above all, we hope that, in the political dialogue preceding the whole run-up to negotiations, Turkey will be able to accept the European Union' s statements on common foreign and security policy.
In this case, I feel that Turkey will not be able to avoid our interpretation of the need to find reasonable solutions to the Nagorno-Karabakh situation, respecting the legitimate aspects of both Armenia and Azerbaijan' s positions.
Mr President, I would like to thank the Representative of the Council Presidency for his answer.
Nevertheless, I am a little disappointed that this is viewed from a bilateral angle first and foremost when, ultimately, there is in fact a major tripartite relationship.
We provide partnership funding and there are cooperation agreements in place, in order to help Armenia, and still the aid cannot come into play because Turkey has imposed an economic blockade, and so many things cannot get through to the Armenians at all.
We are negotiating with Turkey as to the possibility of its acceding to the Union and so it is in the interests of all of us that every state that wishes to become a Member should cultivate friendly relations with its neighbours.
Can you not exert greater influence over Turkey, so as to enable there to be peaceful developments in this region, and so as to enable Armenians themselves to develop in the way they need to for there to be progress on the cooperation front?
- (PT) Mrs Schleicher, you are quite right to say that we should use our relationship with Turkey to ensure that that country can play a constructive role in this situation and, particularly, that it becomes part of the solution rather than part of the problem.
We feel that precisely because Turkey has embarked on a new type of relationship with the European Union, and also because Turkey now has to respond to the European Union' s positions on common foreign and security policy issues, we will, to be frank, be testing Turkey' s will as regards the European Union' s priorities in its foreign relations.
Our relationship with Armenia, as evinced by the agreement we signed with that country last year, is of course one element in these foreign relations.
We also feel that, if Turkey wishes to move towards sharing the fundamental values of the European Union and the general framework of the European Union' s relations, regardless of whatever special bilateral conditions may apply to its own relations with any other country, it must in general act in accordance with the basic standards demonstrated by the European Union in its foreign relations.
We are, moreover, convinced that this issue will be one of the priorities of the bilateral relations between the European Union and Turkey in the near future.
As they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 5 and 6 will be taken together.
Question No 5 by (H-0031/00):
Subject: Worsening situation in Kosovo In Kosovo, the genocide of Serbs and other non-Albanian ethnic groups is continuing and worsening to the extent that Mr Bernard Kouchner himself recently announced that the political situation and the level of security in the area were far from satisfactory.
Accusations are also being made of failure to implement UN Directive 1244 since, on the one hand, its provisions concerning guarantees for all the inhabitants of Kosovo are being disregarded and on the other, encouragement is being given to extremist breakaway groups, culminating in the appointment of the former KLA leader H. Thaci as 'interim prime minister' of Kosovo and the designation of the KLA as the 'Kosovo protection force'.
What steps will the Council take in view of the above in order to ensure compliance with UN decisions and, in particular, resolution 1244 and prevent the secession of the province of Kosovo from Serbia?
Question No 6 by (H-0122/00):
Subject: Ethnic cleansing of Serbs in Kosovo Since the end of the bombing of Yugoslavia by NATO and the EU aimed at preventing the ethnic cleansing of Kosovar Albanians by Serbia, and since the arrival of KFOR on 12 June 1999, 200 000 Serbs living in Kosovo have been expelled and 768 murdered, constituting ethnic cleansing on a larger scale than that carried out by the Serbs themselves.
During the last few days we have seen Serbs murdered by Kosovar Albanian Mafia-type groups, also with impunity.
What decision will the Council adopt to put an end, once and for all, to this ethnic cleansing and to guarantee respect for the human rights of the whole population of Kosovo, irrespective of race or creed?
.
(PT) Mr President, as I stated in response to a previous question, the situation in Kosovo is an issue to which last Monday' s General Affairs Council certainly paid a great deal of attention.
That Council emphasised its support for the efforts of UNMIK and of Bernard Kouchner, the special representative of the Secretary-General, and in particular their efforts to create an interim administrative structure, in Kosovo, under which the guarantee that it will include all sides, particularly those which have until now refused to take part in this interim structure, will not be an empty one.
Javier Solana, the High Representative for the common foreign and security policy of the European Union, gave this General Affairs Council an assessment of the situation.
He is expected to put forward proposals on this matter, particularly internal adjustment measures, which will allow, not only a certain degree of flexibility in inter-ethnic relations, but will also - as I have already stated in response to another question - permit the establishment of new police structures and the creation of systems which will enable the Kosovo situation to be prevented from becoming considerably worse, in terms of corruption, drug-trafficking and crime.
The forces on the ground have so far been unable to solve these problems.
It is therefore obvious, Mr Korakas, that the Council of Ministers is still seriously concerned about the current situation in Kosovo, particularly about the exodus of the Serbian population and of other ethnic and religious minorities from Kosovo.
These minorities are often not mentioned enough when discrimination taking place in Kosovo is discussed.
The Council wishes to express its consternation and concern at the degree of inter-ethnic violence still being seen.
As I have already said in response to another question, the latest outbreak of hostilities in Mitrovica is just another example of the difficulty of overcoming the distrust which has built up over decades.
Obviously we are at just one stage of a process which has already passed through various earlier stages, and I think that we should always see this stage in the light of history.
The Council of Ministers of the European Union has on several occasions stated its commitment to establishing a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo in accordance with the terms of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244.
It has in particular declared its commitment to all refugees being able to return safely and without obstacles.
I would like to make it clear, Mr Korakas, regardless of the many doubts that we may have concerning Resolution 1244, that it is still the main determinant of our actions in that region.
As regards criticisms levelled at the Council, I wish to state that the Council condemns all acts of violence, persecution and intolerance, whoever commits them.
Therefore, in response to the current situation, the Council has resolutely supported the establishment of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo, UNMIK, has contributed to its budget and has taken responsibility for the so-called "fourth UNMIK pillar" , which is concerned with economic reconstruction and rehabilitation.
In assessing the progress that UNMIK has made so far, we must bear in mind the extremely difficult circumstances in which this organisation is operating.
By this I mean the large number of refugees and displaced persons who have had to be rehoused, the fact that most of the infrastructure has been destroyed, the strength of feeling that still exists in every section of Kosovo' s population, the fact that the economy has collapsed and the total lack of internal tax income.
There is also the fact that administrative structures at local and district level have imploded, as have the judicial and police systems.
This is all due to the war and to a decade of neglect after Belgrade removed Kosovo' s autonomy.
This factor is important and it should remain clear in everyone' s mind that it was the change in Kosovo' s status within the Republic of Yugoslavia that caused the increasing ethnic tensions that gave rise to the current situation.
This factor must not be forgotten, lest the past actions of those who are historically responsible should also be forgotten.
In these circumstances, I think that UNMIK, together with the other international bodies and organisations involved, must have made some progress in relation to some of the objectives stated in Resolution 1244, although we are still a long way from a situation which is at all satisfactory.
The Council also supports the decision of the special representative, Bernard Kouchner, to establish a provisional joint administrative council which should include all of Kosovo' s ethnic groups, as I have already mentioned.
The European Union has appealed to the Serbs in Kosovo to reconsider their boycott of this structure so that they can contribute to a multi-ethnic region and assure themselves a place in the new administrative structures.
On the other hand, the European Union is also supporting UNMIK' s efforts to construct the Kosovar civil police force, with the aim of helping to combat multi-ethnic violence and of creating the secure atmosphere necessary to prevent Kosovars of non-Albanian ethnic origin from leaving the province.
Although we have already made a substantial contribution, we must recognise that, until now, as I have already said, the EU Member States have not been able to detach officers to this police force, which has proven to be a very damaging factor for the operation of a public security structure.
As I have said, in accordance with the conclusions of the General Affairs Council of 24 January, the Member States are doing their utmost to find additional police personnel, and the most recent General Affairs Council reiterated this position.
Strengthening police forces is also an important task in the context of the growing threat represented by organised crime, and the Commission is seeking to include the fight against organised crime in its programme of assistance for Kosovo for 2000 and is asking the Member States to identify what assistance they can provide in this area.
We feel that a large part of the solution to the Kosovo problem - and there cannot be very much doubt about this - also relates to the problem of stabilising the countries involved.
Unless this is done, there is no point in thinking that we can solve Kosovo' s problems.
We therefore need to stabilise the situation in Albania, and there are currently proposals for the Commission to evaluate Albania' s chances of moving towards a stabilisation and association agreement.
We need to stabilise the situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and we need to come up with integrated models in the other areas of the former Yugoslavia.
Unless we can do all this, we will not be able to find separate solutions for Kosovo.
It is the overall context in the region and the overall context for implementing the Stability Pact that provide a solution for this situation.
Mr President, I am sorry, but, listening to the Council' s representative, one really has to wonder how far hypocrisy, tolerance and complicity can go.
It is a fact that, as they say in my country, in the home of a hanged man one does not mention ropes.
Yugoslavia used to be a peaceful country, a paragon of stability and peace.
It was NATO' s interventions and initially those of Germany which led to all that has happened.
So it is not the Belgrade Government that is responsible, but NATO itself, the imperialists and their interventions.
What do we have today?
We have a flagrant violation of Security Council Resolution 1244 and this proves that it was a trap.
We have 350 000 Serbians, Gypsies and other nationalities, besides Albanian Kosovars, who have been expelled.
Nine-hundred were murdered, 800 abducted, and 8 months later we have a continuing and flagrant violation of the Security Council' s resolution.
For example, not only has the KLA failed to disarm, as provided for in the resolution, but on the contrary, by virtue of Mr Kouchner' s assertions in the European Parliament, it has acquired modern equipment and has now been designated the "Kosovo Protection Force" .
In conclusion, since the Minister mentioned Mr Kouchner, I would like to say that, with his 25 decrees, Kouchner is violating both the sovereignty of Yugoslavia and the Security Council' s resolution.
He has created a separate currency, a judicial body...
(The President interrupted the speaker)
Let us see things as they are, Mr President!
- (PT) I do not think that was a question, Mr Korakas, those were statements.
The first of these which I wish to draw to the House' s attention is the idea that Belgrade is not responsible for the situation in Kosovo.
I wish to make this clear because it is an important statement and it implies that imperialist action by NATO is responsible for the situation in Kosovo.
This is an odd interpretation - although it is perhaps not quite so odd, as it is shared by the Serbian authorities - but I think that you must understand, Mr Korakas, that there are other interpretations too.
You must also understand that the international community and the EU Council of Ministers have a view of events which is very different to your own.
With regard to Resolution 1244, if it is a trap, then I do not understand either why it is that you think that every violation of this trap is considered to be damaging.
Resolution 1244 may not be perfect, but it was the only resolution that could be agreed upon to bring an end to a particular situation.
This resolution has probably been difficult to apply for the simple reason that it presupposes a climate of stability, to which neither Mr Milosevic nor his regime have contributed.
I recognise, as we all do, that the behaviour of certain Kosovar Albanian forces in Kosovo has been neither desirable nor successful.
Mr Kouchner has been highly critical of this situation and this behaviour.
We should not imagine, Mr Korakas, that all the blame can be placed on one side.
Nor should we imagine that we can forget the past when we are analysing the present.
The present, particularly in the case of the Balkans, and you know this better than I do, has its roots in history and in successive historical developments.
There are not only "good guys" in this story.
As I see it, these situations are quite clear and we should all learn lessons from and accept responsibility for our previous inaction in the face of Mr Milosevic' s behaviour, at a time when he could do whatever he wanted in Kosovo with impunity, particularly once he had taken away its autonomy.
I thank the Minister for his response, but I would also like to point out that, statistically, there is now more violence in Kosovo than there was before the NATO bombing.
It is worrying that the bombing has aggravated the situation, and we should recognise that it was a mistake on the part of NATO and the European Union to take such action.
I agree with what the Minister very rightly said about the culpability of Belgrade, but we should also remember that the secret services of the USA, Germany, France, Italy and the United Kingdom have been supplying arms and money to the KLA, a mafia, which has contributed to the problems in the area.
We are therefore all to blame.
I would like to ask him a supplementary question in a wider context.
Do you not think that it would be beneficial to lift the embargo on Serbia in order to normalise the area economically and also to benefit Kosovo as a province of Serbia?
- (PT) I would like to say, Mr Marset Campos, that I find it very difficult to make judgments based on suppositions about what might have happened if something else had not happened!
Neither you nor I will ever know what might be happening now in Kosovo or what might have happened in Kosovo if NATO had not dropped its bombs.
We will never know if the aggressive and ever worsening actions Mr Milosevic and his government were perpetrating more and more frequently would in fact have had far more dire consequences than those that we are witnessing in Kosovo today.
With regard to lifting sanctions, we think that the European Union' s attitude towards Yugoslavia has amounted to a careful assessment of the various situations.
We have implemented an Energy for Democracy programme to support democratically governed municipalities in Yugoslavia.
We reacted positively, at last Monday' s General Affairs Council, to the request made to us by democratic forces in Serbia that we should lift the air embargo, both for international aircraft and for aircraft belonging to Yugoslavia' s national airline.
These are signs of the European Union' s goodwill towards the situation in Serbia.
We must realise that we will not achieve results by making gestures that are not reciprocated.
Nor will we achieve results by providing certain kinds of facilities for the Serbian authorities, whose actions, particularly in the sphere of human rights within Serbia, and particularly as regards Serbia' s internal political system, are still deeply regrettable.
I hope that you will agree with me, Mr Marset Campos, about the current state of democracy in that country.
We shall make appropriate gestures towards Serbia, in terms of providing services, of lifting sanctions, when Serbia' s behaviour, both on the international stage and in its relations with its neighbouring countries, and its behaviour within its own borders, is in tune with what we consider to be the fundamental principles governing the international community and the behaviour of "decent" countries on the world stage.
Mr President, I am no friend of Milosevic or his government.
Nevertheless I have the gravest doubts about the legitimacy of Nato's action against Yugoslavia over Kosovo, both in terms of the lack of authority from the UN Security Council and because it could have been avoided by not imposing unacceptable terms on Serbia's sovereignty at Rambouillet.
The current situation in Kosovo, which is now ethnically cleansed of Serbs and Roma, speaks for itself.
Should Nato not at the very least acknowledge fault for its deliberate targeting of the Belgrade TV tower and killing over 20 civilian journalists, which remains a severe moral blemish on the conduct of the war and now opens the embarrassment of a possible indictment for war crimes against our Western leaders?
Mr Tannock, with regard to the position adopted by the European Union, we do not have selective interpretations and analyses of what were military objectives, and in particular of the initiatives taken against certain types of infrastructure that were propping up Mr Milosevic' s political system and acting as propaganda for him.
I cannot therefore tell you whether we agreed or not on a specific action carried out by NATO, but it was part of an overall plan with which we do agree.
Some of these actions might have been questionable, and some were regarded as unfortunate by NATO itself, but others were justified for tactical reasons, with the aim of preventing Mr Milosevic from continuing his propaganda campaign within the former Yugoslavia.
In any event, I, on behalf of the Council, do not wish to make a value judgement about any specific military action carried out by NATO.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, since I know the history of the Balkans, I should like to remind you that, for many decades, the peoples of Yugoslavia lived in peace.
Destabilisation began around ten years ago with the break-up of Yugoslavia, in which the European Union played a decisive part.
Yugoslavia' s crime was that it was the only Balkan country that did not ask to become a member either of NATO or of the European Union.
So whatever remained standing after the air attacks is now being destroyed by the supposedly disarmed KLA, under the very nose of KFOR, whose role as an occupying force is becoming increasingly apparent.
Every day, new crimes come to light against non-Albanian speakers and against the cultural heritage of Kosovo, and there are hundreds of violations of the UN' s Resolution 1244.
In my opinion, the best thing the Council could do would be to cease occupying that part of Yugoslavia and search for a solution acceptable to all sides, with respect for the various national characteristics in the area and especially respect for the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of another, independent country.
I respect your understanding and knowledge of the Balkan region, Mr Alyssandrakis, but I find it difficult, quite frankly, to understand how respecting the characteristics of the region can, in terms of political stability, be a solution to the problem.
If we look at the democratic stability of the region, it could perhaps be said that it was the break-up of Yugoslavia that caused the current situation, but let us not get involved in interpreting an international development.
Nevertheless, I would like to say that Yugoslavia was what it was, in the sense that the state managed to harmonise some of its people' s ethnic differences to a degree.
It must be pointed out that it did this at a time when its political framework was far from ideal in terms of being democratically representative.
The division of Yugoslavia is probably a historical fact that we shall have to accept, regardless of the mistakes that may have been made along the way.
We do not feel that withdrawing international forces now would be any kind of solution.
Quite the contrary, it would be a solution leading to calamity.
Mr President, I was a little disappointed with the answer given by the President-in-Office to my colleague.
It is very important, if we stress that Europe is to be a Europe of values, that we do not go down the road of saying that means justify ends.
If civilian targets were targeted and destroyed, killing civilians is illegal by anyone's standards.
It should not be defended even by those of us who deeply deplore the Milosevic regime.
That, however, is not my question.
My question is about political prisoners held in Serbia now.
There are, I believe, around 5 000 Kosovar political prisoners held in Serbia at the moment.
My question to the President-in-Office is twofold.
Firstly, is the Council fully aware of and concerned about the fate of these prisoners?
Secondly, what does it propose to do about them?
Mr MacCormick, first of all, I would like to answer your comments.
I did not defend attacks on civilians.
What I said and what I explained in a previous answer is that there are civilian targets linked with structures which are objects for military action, and you know as well as I do that some military actions not only go for military targets, but also for civilian targets and structures which are connected with military action.
What is a legitimate target is obviously a grey area.
As I said, we are not making value judgements about specific actions.
We are making an overall value judgement about NATO' s action, and this overall value judgement is positive.
We agree with the general view of NATO' s action.
With regard to political prisoners in Serbia, Mr MacCormick, it is obvious that, when I say that in Serbia today Mr Milosevic is not acting in accordance with the rules of a decent society at international level, I am referring specifically, not just to the way he acts towards his fellow citizens.
I am also referring to the way Mr Milosevic treats political prisoners, and the way he attacks democratic rights and the opposition' s rights of access to the media, and to his attacks on the facilities that should be granted to non-governmental organisations, particularly those protecting human rights.
In spite of everything, all this represents only one of many kinds of highly pernicious action perpetrated by Mr Milosevic on Yugoslavian society, and the European Union is of course inevitably concerned about this situation.
This is precisely why the European Union is maintaining all its sanctions until Yugoslavia' s behaviour on the international stage reflects the values that we have to defend.
Question No 7 by (H-0035/00):
Subject: Drafting of the Charter of Fundamental Rights The general public welcomes the fact that a Charter of Fundamental Rights is to be drawn up.
It is also to be hoped that it will meet the challenges of Europe in the 21st century.
What are the Council's views on the substance of the Charter?
What type of rights will the Charter set out (economic, social and cultural)?
Which citizens will it cover (those of the European Union or the citizens of all European countries with a view to enlargement?
Will it cover immigrants etc.?)?
Will it set out established social rights in the European Union or will it set a broader agenda?
What means will the Charter use to ensure that it clearly guarantees equality between the sexes?
What are the Council's views on incorporating the Charter into the Treaty on European Union?
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is one of the most promising aspects of any that we in the European Union are working on at institutional level.
As you know, the charter stems from a decision of the Cologne European Council.
It is a factor that we feel is crucial to the construction of what could be called an ethical pillar for the European Union and of what could be called the European Union' s need, in aiming to achieve a Union of values, to be able to increase its scope, not just internally, but also in order to give legitimacy to its own image externally, based on a common set of values.
This is of course extremely important for the Community of Fifteen.
Four or five months ago, we probably did not think this was so important for the Community of Fifteen.
Today, we are perhaps already thinking along different lines, or at least some of us are.
The enlarged Union is also very important, specifically with regard to future cultural policies.
The content of the charter is, as you know, currently under discussion.
There have only been two meetings of the preparatory group for the Charter of Fundamental Rights; this group is now called the Convention for the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.
There are various problems that must be addressed in this area.
First of all, we must decide if it is a declaratory text or a binding text.
Secondly, there is the content of the charter.
This applies whether the document is binding or not.
In other words, we must decide whether it is a collection of all the principles which the Member States advocate and have enshrined in their national constitutions, or whether it is a new corpus which could to a certain extent act as a common pattern for the European Union.
Then there is a fundamental problem which your question in fact touched upon and which I think is of the utmost importance, yet it has still not been resolved.
That issue is whether this charter only applies to citizens of the Union or whether it also applies to third-country nationals who are resident in the Union.
This issue is also under discussion.
There is also an extremely important issue, that of the subordination of legal systems, and compatibility between the legal system of the Strasbourg Court and the legal system of the Luxembourg Court.
This problem must be resolved when the Charter of Fundamental Rights is drawn up.
You also touched upon the issue of social rights, Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou.
We will have to find some common ground on this matter.
I would like to say, as a member of the Portuguese delegation, that we regard economic and social rights as a vital part of the European Union' s heritage, and understand that they must be part of any European Union charter and of any corpus of European Union values.
I do not know whether everyone shares this view.
Concerning your last question, there is the issue of equality between men and women in the European Union.
I am sure that this aspect will certainly be treated with the utmost care in this charter, all the more so because, during discussions on the Treaty of Amsterdam, we ourselves had strong views on this and the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam represented a qualitative leap as compared with Maastricht.
Lastly, on the subject of incorporating the charter into the Treaty on European Union, I am currently chairing the steering group of the preparatory group for the Intergovernmental Conference.
The Portuguese Presidency is keen to ensure that, as soon as there is consensus on the charter among the people drafting it, it should be incorporated into the Treaty on European Union and that this issue should immediately be referred to the Intergovernmental Conference.
As you know, the charter does not fall within the competence of the Council, but comes under a convention with an elected chairman and representatives of the European Parliament, of national parliaments and of the governments of the Member States, and of the European Commission.
It should be referred to the Intergovernmental Conference as soon as it is ready, but we are not in control of this procedure.
We are merely monitoring the progress of the charter by means of a vice-chairman of the convention, who is at the same time the representative of the European Union presidency in this group.
I thank the President-in-Office for the concerns and certainties he has expressed about the progress of the work.
You will understand, Mr President-in-Office, that there was a point to my question, because the Council is a political body of the European Union and the citizens of Europe, men and women, want to know how it views the democratic and social model of Europe in the twenty-first century.
As a supplementary question, I should like to ask you whether, as the Portuguese Presidency, you have made provision for the rights of children, as such, to be included in future deliberations and the rights to be incorporated in the Charter.
As I said, Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, we are not in control of the procedure for drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
This procedure falls within the competence of the members of the group, and the matter will only be submitted to the Council if and when consensus is reached on the terms of this charter.
I would nevertheless like to say, with regard to the rights of the child, that we consider this to be an extremely topical issue, particularly for the Council of Europe and in view of the existence of a set of relevant international texts to which we have signed up.
This matter should form part of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
This will certainly be the guideline that my government for one will advocate for the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Furthermore, we will see if we can do this for a range of other proposals that we have on this issue.
I do not know whether these proposals will meet with a favourable reception or not.
I presume, however, that this is not a particularly controversial matter and we think that it would simply involve bringing together the currently agreed corpus of rights, which even the most elementary justice would suggest should be included in the charter and be shared by the Union as a whole.
I would remind Members that, according to the guidelines for these sittings, questions must be concise and be worded in a way which will allow a brief answer.
You know that there is a Parliamentary delegation chaired by Mr Mndez de Vigo and a Committee on Constitutional Affairs where these issues can be debated at great length.
I therefore ask that both questions and answers be very brief.
Otherwise, we would be in a way undermining the whole process of drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
I am sure that the President-in-Office of the Council is prepared to answer everything, but I must ensure that this sitting consists of questions and answers.
Mr Rbig has the floor.
Mr President, fourteen Member States have imposed bilateral sanctions on another Member State, because a democratically elected government was formed there.
Both parties were once part of the government.
So far there have been no infringements of the law.
Are preventive sanctions reconcilable with the Charter of Human Rights?
Would a right of veto on the part of the President-in-Office of the Council, in respect of the formation of national governments, be reconcilable with the Charter of Fundamental Rights?
Is the call for violent demonstrations reconcilable with the Charter of Fundamental Rights?
Mr Rbig, as President-in-Office, I cannot give you an answer for the simple reason that the statement by the Portuguese Prime Minister on behalf of the fourteen Heads of State and Government of the Member States of the European Union was adopted bilaterally and not by him in his capacity as President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union.
Nevertheless, I would like to say that the various preventive actions taken on a strictly bilateral basis by these Member States was actually a set of actions of what I would call preventive political action at diplomatic level.
We feel that they were perfectly justified and seemed to be reasonable in the face of the actions and personalities of a party which, although it has become part of a European Union government, does not strike us as being able to guarantee that it can meet the Union' s aims.
I do not wish to dwell on this subject on behalf of the Council presidency, because my government intervened at the request of, and in conjunction with, fourteen Member States and not in its presidency capacity.
Mr President, I have the honour of being a member of the Convention drafting the Charter so I am not going to ask the presidency to speculate on the contents or whether it thinks the Convention should be declaratory or whether it should have judicial force.
What I would like to know is what will happen to the draft Charter that the Convention draws up?
Will the Council treat it as a document that it has to accept as it stands, or will the Council feel free to amend that document?
Will the Council say just simply yes or no to it or will it be in a position to actually then redraft that draft Charter?
- (PT) The answer is neither yes nor no.
I do not know, Mr Martin.
It will depend on the decision taken by the Council.
Question No 8 by (H-0042/00):
Subject: Granting of export credit guarantees and its implications for the construction of the Ilisu Dam in Turkey The G8 meeting in Cologne called on the OECD to set up a process for the establishment of common standards for the granting of export credits.
These can be used to distort competition and support questionable projects.
Will the EU take the lead in advancing this process?
The need was demonstrated recently by the statement from the British Government that it is 'minded to grant' an export credit licence to a company involved in the construction of the Ilisu Dam in Turkey.
The World Bank has decided not to fund the project, which will displace 20 000 Kurds, potentially limit the fresh water supply to Syria and Iraq and cause ecological damage.
What is the Council's view of the involvement of European governments and companies in this project?
.
(PT) To answer your question, Mrs Lucas, we must consider this issue from two angles.
Firstly, concerning the system of export credits in general, and, secondly, concerning the project you have mentioned in particular.
With regard to the general point, it should be pointed out that the G8 did not call on the OECD to establish common standards for the granting of export credits, as your question suggests.
These standards already exist today.
The agreement on guidelines for export credit which enjoy official support have been in force within the OECD since 1978.
The objective of these guidelines is precisely to see that officially backed export credits are used properly, that is in a transparent and disciplined way.
As you know, most OECD countries are already party to this agreement and the European Community as such, and not the Member States individually, is also party to this agreement, in accordance with Article 133, formerly Article 113 of the Treaty on European Union.
This agreement has been gradually corrected and improved and the European Union wishes to maintain its pivotal role in this process because it considers this to be of central importance in its international economic relations.
With regard to the G8, and in accordance with paragraph 32 of the Cologne Summit statement of June 1999, it is stated that we will work with the OECD towards common environmental guidelines for institutions that promote export.
We aim to conclude this work by the time the G8 Summit is held in 2001.
The G8 therefore recognise the importance of credits both for exports and for the environment, and the importance of the work currently being done within the OECD on this subject.
In 1999, the OECD Ministerial Council meeting, in which I took part, welcomed the progress made in drawing up an OECD agreement on the exchange of environmental information on large projects involving officially backed export credits.
The Council urged that work should continue, with the aim of strengthening common platforms, pending a report on progress to be made to the next session of the Ministerial Council to be held this year.
As you know, the Member States of the European Union are playing a central role in this process and in this discussion.
With regard to the specific point of the Ilisu dam itself, discussions are taking place between the Turkish authorities and authorities whose export credit agencies are potential suppliers of export credit insurance for those undertaking the project, who took a deliberate decision to make adequate safeguards for the environmental, social and cultural implications of this project.
Furthermore, it was in this context that a representative of the United Kingdom stated in 1999 that he envisaged guaranteeing that export credit insurance would take second place to safeguarding the type of issue that you mentioned in your question, Mrs Lucas.
The question of an export credit licence does not apply to this project.
It is worth pointing out that, as funding for the project has not been requested from the World Bank, there is no question of the Bank refusing to finance it.
It could only refuse of course if such a request had been made.
It goes without saying that the involvement of the Member States' governments and official export credit agencies in the Ilisu dam project has been in compliance with European Union, OECD and G8 political and legal requirements and commitments, in the case of the G8 by those countries belonging to that group.
The process of agreeing these common standards may have started as long ago as 1978 but clearly the fact that the British Government appears to be going ahead with a massively environmentally damaging project suggests that it has not been very successful so far.
I wonder if you would answer a question concerning investment by EU companies in the EU applicant countries.
I ask this because of the issue of coherence, the subject of this morning' s discussion.
On the one hand we ask applicant countries to take on board the environmental acquis and yet, at the very same time, the EU Member States are supporting and encouraging investment in those countries which is itself hugely environmentally damaging.
Can you say whether or not the specific issue of investment in applicant countries has featured in any of the discussions to date to which you have been referring?
- (PT) Mrs Lucas, I was not present at the debate you are referring to.
I would like to say that the Council will only be able to respond to that part of your question in writing, at a later date.
Question No 9 by (H-0044/00):
Subject: Environmental problems caused by the Drogheda Port Company development project, and the role of the Court of Auditors A major conflict between environmental conservation and structural development interests has arisen in the area of the Boyne Estuary, Ireland, following a development project of the Drogheda Port Company.
The affected area is designated a Special Protection Area (SPA) under the Wild Birds Directive and is under consideration for a Special Area of Conservation under the Habitats Directive, as it is an area of international importance.
Many local and European associations have strongly criticised the project.
Similar cases occur in other regions of the Union, where EU development funding conflicts with environmental unsustainability of the beneficiary measures.
Is not the Council of the opinion that the Court of Auditors should be given more resources in order to investigate or review similar development measures where environmental conflicts arise?
What kind of measures does the Council plan to take in order to strengthen the review and evaluation powers of the European institutions in similar cases?
.
(PT) In response to your question, Mrs McKenna, I would first of all like to highlight the fact that the role of the Court of Auditors was laid down in the Treaty establishing the European Community.
In accordance with Article 246 of the Treaty, the auditing of accounts is carried out by the Court of Auditors which, to this end, studies the accounts of all revenue and expenditure of the Community as well as the regularity and the legality of the underlying transactions.
The Court also guarantees proper financial management.
This is indeed also stipulated in Article 248.
The Court of Auditors, therefore, already has all the instruments necessary to carry out its role.
With regard to your suggestion for increasing the Court' s resources, the Council considers that all of the Union' s institutions have, under the Community budget, the necessary financial means for them to be able to properly carry out their respective remits.
In some cases, it would probably be desirable for their financial resources to be increased, but there are budgetary restraints of which I am sure you are aware.
I would like to take this opportunity to remind you that the Budget of the European Union is approved by common agreement between the Council and this Parliament.
The Council therefore, has no means of changing the role conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty.
If extra resources were given to the Court of Auditors it would be money well spent, because it would ensure that EU funding was not going to something that conflicted with environmental concerns.
For years the Council has been blocking the strategic development impact assessment of plans and programmes.
I would ask you, now that you are President of the Council, will you push forward with this extremely important proposal.
Secondly, as there is no mention of Structural Funds in the current draft could you ensure that this would be put back in?
I would like to know what you could do about this as President-in-Office of the Council at the moment because it is the Council that has been blocking this for a long time.
It is extremely important.
If the Court of Auditors were able to assess regularly the potential conflicts between environmental concerns and structural development, it would be very important because the Court of Auditors could do an extremely good job.
Their reports are extremely detailed and very important.
This is the way to ensure that such conflicts are avoided in the future.
- (PT) Mrs McKenna, a large part of the problem you have raised relates to issues which are the responsibility of the Commission.
It is therefore the Commission that must ensure that certain development projects comply with relevant environmental provisions.
The Commission will have to provide specific answers to these questions.
I do not think that I can give a more complete answer on the specific case that you quoted.
Question No 10 by (H-0053/00):
Subject: Statute for Members of the European Parliament The Council and Parliament are going to try to reach agreement on a Statute for the Members of the European Parliament.
One of the matters to be settled is whether Members are to receive equal pay, and where they are to pay tax.
According to media reports the Portuguese Presidency considers that all Members should pay the same tax, to the EU.
This is in conflict with the view taken by some Member States who wish to have the right to tax their Members in their home countries.
Will the Portuguese Presidency clarify its position on this matter?
.
(PT) The Portuguese Presidency is particularly interested in this issue, as I suppose that this is the first time a presidency has made resolving the problem of a Statute for Members of the European Parliament a priority in its programme.
The Portuguese Presidency made reaching an agreement on this statute one of its priorities, as furthermore, did the President of the European Parliament, when she stated this at the Helsinki European Council.
We are therefore in perfect and total agreement in our concern to achieve a positive outcome on this matter.
We are therefore taking advantage of this political will in an attempt to define the outlines of a compromise, and we have already begun work on this matter.
It is worth pointing out once more that this compromise will require the unanimous support of the Council, in accordance with Article 190, and the assent of this Parliament, to which it falls to approve this statute.
The Presidency has engaged in intensive discussions with a range of Members of this Parliament and with the group to which Parliament entrusted the task of negotiating with the Council.
I myself had an opportunity to meet this group, for the first time, in parallel with the January part-session, and I am trying to arrange to do so again soon in order to continue these discussions.
These discussions have also recommenced more intensively in the relevant bodies of the Council, and I think that I can say, in a spirit of openness and greater flexibility, and because we all recognise the importance that this has, particularly for the general public, that drawing up this statute is a vital factor in ensuring both the dignity of the functions of Members of the European Parliament and the necessary transparency and good management of public funds.
With regard more specifically to your question, I would like to highlight the fact that it only makes sense to have a new statute if it represents progress in comparison with the current situation and if it ensures that holders of identical posts are as far as possible treated in the same way.
This has, from the outset, been the position of the Portuguese Presidency.
Nevertheless, our role as mediator means that we must take account of all current attitudes in the Council and I am sure you are aware, Mr Sjstedt, that the tax issue poses problems for certain delegations.
As this is the case, whatever solution is found, I think that it will have to respect both democratic law and be acceptable to all Member States, regardless of their national positions on the matter.
What I can promise with regard to this issue is that the presidency has the utmost commitment to working, for as long as it is involved with this matter, in an atmosphere of total transparency and openness towards Members of the European Parliament.
We will also make the utmost effort with members of the Council, particularly with those who had most difficulty in accepting the proposal suggested last year, so as to reach a reasonable compromise solution, and one which would at the same time guarantee the dignity appropriate for a statute for the members of this House.
Mr President, I would thank the Council of Ministers for its answer.
I want to ask two follow-up questions connected with the taxation of ourselves as parliamentarians.
My basic view is that one ought to pay tax in the country in which one lives, in which one' s family lives and in which one benefits from public services.
I intended to ask the presidency if there really is an argument for saying that we should not pay tax in our own countries just as other people do.
Is there any argument for our being given a special privilege just because we are parliamentarians?
That is my first question.
My second question is about whether the Portuguese Presidency can accept a solution which involves the tax issue' s being solved in different ways for Members of different nationalities, or whether you want a solution which is identical for members of all nationalities.
- (PT) Without wishing to show any lack of respect towards this House and particularly because of the respect that your questions deserve, I would rather not answer the questions you have raised immediately.
We are in the midst of rather sensitive negotiations.
This sensitivity is reflected in the way in which the Presidency of the Council of the European Union expresses itself in a specific context in relation to particular situations.
This has an impact of course, because it is read by other members of the Council.
At this stage in the discussion, please forgive me if I cannot give a direct answer to the specific questions that have been put to me.
I would ask that we be judged on our results, when we endeavour to reach a more concrete solution in the near future.
I will be happy to come back to Parliament to respond to and clarify the problems which may conceivably occur if a result is not reached, or to congratulate all of you if this result is achieved.
I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council, after his few hours working in this Chamber with these Members of the European Parliament, whether he has come to any assessment of what they are worth in terms of pay?
Mr Purvis, as this discussion of salaries in the European Parliament does not relate exclusively to your country and even affects my country, I have a precise idea of what the salaries of the Members of the European Parliament are worth.
I am therefore perfectly aware of this problem.
Mr President, I want to thank you for your answer.
I want to ask a follow-up question which bears some resemblance to the one Mr Sjstedt asked.
We both come from Sweden.
In our country, we pay our tax in the form of local taxes because the services concerned are local.
We have extensive services, too.
We have problems stemming from the lack of confidence in politicians and, not least, in European politicians here in Parliament.
How do you think that public confidence in ourselves as politicians would be affected if a situation were to arise in which we obtained the right to use services where we live - education, health care etc - but, at the same time, did not pay any tax and did not contribute?
How do you think a system like that would affect people' s confidence in ourselves as politicians?
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I do not know whether you are obliged to answer this question since it is really a philosophical question.
However, if you wish to enter into the realms of philosophy, go ahead!
.
Mr President, I have no desire to enter into the realms of philosophy.
These are fundamental issues which concern the very shape of the Statute for Members and of its role in the context of political society.
I do not want to enter into this type of discussion because I think that it might, to use a French expression, prjuger the Portuguese Presidency' s views in the course of the negotiations in which it is involved on the Statute for Members.
I would ask you to allow me to refrain from commenting on this matter.
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed, Questions Nos 11 to 35 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes Questions to the Council.
(The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)
Address by Mr Vaclav Havel, President of the Czech Republic
Mr President in office, ladies and gentlemen, I have great honour in extending a warm welcome, on behalf of the House, to the President of the Czech Republic, Mr Vaclav Havel.
I should also like to welcome Mrs Havel, who is sitting in the gallery.
You are most welcome.
(Applause)
This is not your first visit to our Parliament, Mr President.
You addressed plenary in Strasbourg nearly six years ago, in March 1994, and many of us, who were already European Members of Parliament at that time, still have a vivid recollection of your speech.
In fact, shortly after the Maastricht Treaty was ratified, you spoke in favour of strengthening European values, creating a European ethical dimension and opening the Union to the countries of central and eastern Europe.
In other words, for many citizens, and not just in your country, you personify the European values to which we constantly voice our attachment.
There have been extremely dynamic developments in relations between the Union and the Czech Republic following two European elections and a major new reform of the European Treaties.
An association agreement has been signed and a joint parliamentary committee has been set up by the European Parliament and the Czech Parliament.
Your country filed an official application to join the Union in 1996 and accession negotiations were finally officially opened in 1998.
The process of European integration and enlargement has speeded up impressively since the fall of the iron curtain.
The end of this artificial separation of Europe marked the start of a new era.
We now face an historical challenge with multiple prospects for all the citizens of Europe.
Mr President, you are a symbol of these changes.
You founded and signed Charter 77, the human rights movement which represented and called for fundamental values during a dark period in the history of your people.
A Communist regime sentenced you to five years in prison for defending human freedom and dignity.
But you never lost hope and history proved you right.
Ten years ago, the "velvet revolution" proclaimed Havel na HRAD.
For ten years you represented democratic Czechoslovakia and, later, the Czech Republic, as its president.
Reconciliation with your neighbours was, and still is, a basic objective which you have defended with vigour and perseverance.
You are a first class European.
Today, the Czech Republic is preparing to join our Union.
I am sure that you will agree, Mr President, and experience has shown us, that the process of enlargement of the Union is not without its pitfalls for both parties and the Czech Republic will need to make a great deal of effort in order to meet the accession criteria.
The European Union, for its part, will need to adapt its institutions and policies in order to prepare for enlargement.
It has already taken a big step forward with Agenda 2000.
The next step, i.e. institutional reform, will be taken following the inauguration of the new Intergovernmental Conference, in which the European Parliament will be fully involved.
Our responsibility as members of the European Parliament is to ensure that the process of enlargement takes place in an climate of optimum openness and transparency so that, when the time comes, the citizens of the European Union and the citizens of the Czech Republic will approve the accession of the Czech Republic to the European Union through their elected representatives.
Mr President, it gives me great pleasure to give you the floor.
(Applause)
Madam President, members of the European Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, the question of whether, deep down, a European has a sense of European identity, alongside a sense or awareness of national identity, crops up time and time again nowadays.
In other words, do Europeans really feel they are Europeans or is it more of an abstract idea, a theoretical concept designed to repackage a geographical factor as a state of mind?
This question also crops up during the debate on the degree of sovereignty which the nation states can and should transfer to the institutions of the European Union.
Some insist that if a clearly-felt national identity is eclipsed too quickly by a European identity which few feel, or which is even perceived as fanciful, then things are sure to take a turn for the worse.
So what exactly do we mean by Europeanism?
If I look deep into my heart and try to identify the point at which I start to feel European, and what unites me to Europe, the first thing I feel is mild surprise at the fact that it is only now, under the pressure of topical political issues and duties, that I even ask myself the question.
Why did I not put this question to myself a long time ago, when I started to make my way in the world and reflect on the world and my place in it?
Did I consider my attachment to Europe as a purely extrinsic factor of little significance, a factor which did not need to concern, let alone torment, me?
Or, on the contrary, did I consider my Europeanism as so self-evident that it did not warrant interrogation, examination or further thought?
The second proposition is the more likely: everything with which I have always identified myself was so naturally European that it never occurred to me to consider it as such.
I simply did not see any point in qualifying it or, generally, in associating my way of thinking with a specific continent.
Furthermore, I have the feeling that, as a young man, I might well have felt slightly silly saying or writing that I am a European, that my perceptions and way of thinking are European or even explicitly claiming that I was from Europe.
It would have seemed profoundly pathetic and presumptuous, a more arrogant version of the national patriotism which has always embarrassed me.
In other words, I was so obviously and naturally European that I did not even think about it.
And I am sure that applies to the majority of Europeans.
They are profoundly European but they are not even aware of it, they do not hang that label round their necks, which is why opinion polls show that they are somewhat surprised at having to shout their Europeanism from the rooftops.
There does not appear to be a great tradition of considered Europeanism in Europe.
That is not necessarily a good thing and I welcome with satisfaction the fact that our Europeanism is starting to emerge clearly today from the vast melting pot of concepts which "speak for themselves" .
Questioning, considering and trying to define it, helps us enormously in understanding ourselves.
It is becoming a determining factor in the multicultural and multifaceted world in which we live, in which the capacity to perceive one' s own identity is a prerequisite to peaceful coexistence with other identities.
Moreover, if Europe has thought so little about its own identity in the past, that is no doubt because it considered itself, wrongly, to be the entire world; or at least it considered itself to be better than the rest of the world, because it did not feel the need to define itself in relation to others.
Which, of course, had unfortunate consequences as far as its actual conduct was concerned.
Thinking about Europeanism means asking what set of values, ideals or principles puts you in mind of the notion of Europe, even what is typical of Europe.
More than that, it also means starting from the very essence of the thing, examining the whole concept critically.
And, hence, quickly realising that numerous European traditions, values or principles are typically highly ambiguous and may lead to ruin if exaggerated, exploited or abused.
If Europe has entered an era of self-examination, that means that it wishes to define itself in relation to others and, also, that it wants to identify what is good about itself, what has proven its worth and what should be retained for the future.
When I first had the honour of addressing this House six years ago, I mentioned the need to emphasise the spiritual dimension, and the importance of the values of European integration, and I confided my fear that the spiritual, historic, political and civilising aspects of Europe might be hijacked by questions of a technical, economic, financial or administrative nature which risked upsetting the public.
At the time, my words sounded somewhat provocative and I expected to be booed out of the House.
But no such thing happened and it is satisfying to note that these same words now no longer sound provocative at all.
The dramatic changes in Europe since the iron curtain fell ten years ago, the increasingly obvious need to enlarge the European Union, faster and faster economic integration and the array of new threats being generated by present circumstances are also factors which have forced the European Union to open its mind to renewed, more intense introspection and to identify and redefine the values which unite it and give it purpose.
The idea is occasionally mooted that this quest has come too late, that cultural and political integration and introspection should have preceded economic integration; in other words, that we have started from the wrong end.
I do not think that is a fair judgement.
After the Second World War, democratic western Europe had to deal with the memory of the horror of two world wars and the threat of the spread of totalitarian Communism.
At the time, it was almost superfluous to discuss which values needed to be protected.
They stuck out a mile.
On the contrary, the west needed to unite technically, as it were, post haste, in order to prevent the possible emergence or even the proliferation of dictatorship and a relapse into old national conflicts.
Doubtless the same applies to my feeling of Europeanism: it came to me so naturally over the years, or even the decades, that it did not even occur to me to claim it explicitly.
For western Europe, everything which it needed to protect was so obvious that it did not feel any pressing need to define it, analyse it, pull it apart or translate it into various political or institutional acts.
Thus, just as I have only now come to ask myself if I feel European and to consider what that means, so the democratic Europe under construction has doubtless been forced by the historic events of the last decade to reflect on the very basis for its unification and its objectives in greater depth.
In my view, the main European values, as shaped by the turbulent spiritual and political history of Europe, and as adopted by other parts of the world, or at least some parts of the world, are obvious.
Respect for the individual and for his freedoms, his rights and his dignity, the principle of solidarity, equality before the law and the rule of law, protection of all ethnic minorities, democratic institutions, separation of the legislative, executive and judicial estates, political pluralism, respect for private property and free enterprise, a market economy and the development of the civil society.
The form which these values currently assume naturally reflects countless modern European experiences, including the fact that our continent is becoming a main multicultural crossroads.
I should like to dwell, for reasons which I shall explain, on one of these fundamental values.
I refer to the civil society.
In the western world, i.e. in today' s Euro-American world, a richly constructed, open, decentralised civil society based on trust in the sovereign independence of its citizens and their various associations, forms the basis of the democratic state and guarantees its political stability.
If the European Union is shortly to open its doors to new democracies and, in my view, it is in its vital interest to do so, it is extremely important, if not of capital importance, that it help to reconstruct and develop the civil society in these countries.
It was not by chance that, shortly after it came to power, the Communist dictatorship shredded and then eradicated the fabric of civil society as quickly as possible.
It knew full well that it would never gain real control of the people while the various grass-roots structures of the civil society continued to function.
What remained of a genuine civil society lived and developed in direct or indirect resistance.
And European values survived in this milieu not thanks to the political regime, but in spite of it.
The way in which society structures itself cannot, of course, be imposed from on high.
But the climate and the conditions which are conducive to its development can be put in place.
In this sense, aid for new democracies should be given in the wider context of the sustainable development and reinforcement of the civil society at pan-European level.
The more varied, differentiated and interlinked the various civil European structures, the more willing the new democracies will be to join them and the faster the principle of trust in the citizens and subsidiarity will apply in them, thereby reinforcing their stability.
But that is not all: the foundations of the European Union as a supranational community will grow all the stronger.
Specifically, that means that one of the first jobs is to transfer certain social solidarity tasks to local authorities and non-profit-making or public-sector organisations.
The lower the level at which resources are redistributed, the more transparent and economic this redistribution will be, providing better coverage of the multifarious needs of society, which are difficult to define from the centre, and creating social solidarity which is all the more genuine for being distinctly linked to specific persons or associations of persons.
This genuine solidarity between citizens, social groups, communities and regions is the best basis for solidarity which cannot be dispensed by a single entity, i.e. the state.
And in a supranational entity as big as the European Union, which needs to function as an instrument of solidarity, the real civil foundations must be even more stronger and even richer.
The viability of the European Union therefore depends mainly, perhaps above all, on the spirit in which its citizens accept a civil European identity.
An increasing awareness of all the symptoms or manifestations of national egotism, xenophobia or racial intolerance should clearly form part of this new sense of European identity.
The policy of appeasement which culminated in the capitulation to evil in Munich is one of the bitterest chapters of modern European history.
This experience should encourage us to be vigilant.
Evil needs to be nipped in the bud and it is not enough that there are governments to do so.
The attitude of governments should be informed by the attitude of its citizens.
The concern for security is another expression of social solidarity.
This is the job of the state or of a supranational grouping.
The European Union has started working intensively on a new concept for its security policy.
The overriding feature of this policy should be its capacity to take decisions quickly and transform them equally quickly into action.
I think that is extremely important.
It is also high time.
Surely, recent experiences in Yugoslavia have a great deal to teach us on this subject.
In my view, the intervention by NATO demonstrated several things quite clearly.
First, respect for life and human dignity and the concern for European security may, under certain circumstances, call for intervention beyond the borders of the European Union.
Of course, the stronger the mandate for such intervention, the better.
However, one can also imagine the unfortunate situation in which there is no UN mandate and yet intervention is in the interest of the whole of Europe and human civilisation as we know it.
I am not convinced that Europe was prepared, even recently, to deal with such a disastrous eventuality.
It is certainly more prepared now, at least psychologically, and I think that it should capitalise on this and finalise its material and technical arrangements.
Secondly, more effort needs to be made in the area of preventive security.
In Kosovo and Serbia, as in Bosnia-Herzegovina and other parts of former Yugoslavia, tens of thousands of human lives and countless property could have been saved if the international community had been capable of appropriate reaction earlier, when the conflict broke out.
(Applause) Unfortunately, despite all the appeals, despite all the warnings of possible or imminent atrocity, nothing happened.
One of the possible, conceivable reasons was a preoccupation with a variety of individual and material interests and the inability of government teams to rake risks in the name of a good cause and the greater good.
Thirdly, the United States played the leading role in this particular instance and it is highly probable that, without their intervention, the international community, not knowing what to do, would today still be witnessing the atrocities which led to intervention in Kosovo.
But Europe cannot rely indefinitely on the United States, especially when it comes to European problems.
It should be capable of finding a solution and resolving the situation itself.
It is unthinkable in today' s world, where small entities legitimately unite in international or supranational communities, that the European Union can continue to be a respected member of the world order if it is unable to agree on how to defend human rights, not only on its own territory but within its sphere of action, i.e. in the area which may, one day, belong to it.
I think, as I said a moment ago, that enlargement is in the vital interest of the European Union.
Allow me to reiterate and highlight this conviction.
It stems perhaps from the experience of a man who lived for forty years under Communist rule, preceded by Nazi domination, or from the individual experience of an inhabitant of a country at the very centre of Europe which, over the centuries, has become the crossroads of various spiritual currents and European geopolitical interests, even the birthplace of more than one European conflict.
All this leads me to the firm conviction that Europe is the only political entity whose security must be undivided.
The idea of two Europes living cheek by jowl, the idea of a democratic, stable, prosperous Europe on the road to integration and a less democratic, less stable and less prosperous Europe is, in my view, completely illusory.
It sounds like the idea of sustainable coexistence in a room which is half flooded and half dry.
Despite its differences, Europe is indivisible, and anything serious which happens to it will have repercussions on, and consequences for, the rest of the continent.
As a single political entity, Europe has an opportunity today which it has never had throughout its turbulent history; the opportunity to construct a profoundly fair and peaceful order based on the principle of equality and cooperation by all sides.
No more acts of violence perpetrated by the powerful on the less powerful; instead, understanding and general consensus, however difficult they are and however long they take to achieve, should be the guiding principle behind the structure and stability of Europe in the next millennium.
In this context, I understand Europe to mean the continent as a whole.
We all know that the process of enlargement of the European Union needs to be accompanied by continual and ambitious reform of its institutions.
I am sure that the Intergovernmental Conference will make realistic proposals which will send the European Union in the right direction.
However, institutional change within the European Union must not stop there.
On the contrary, it must be the start of a very long process, possibly taking several decades, in which the overriding concern is to speed up and simplify decision-making within the European Union and make it more transparent.
Allow me to mention two more specific points which I have alluded to on several occasions and which could, in my view, help to achieve these objectives in the more distant future.
First, I believe that the European Union should, sooner or later, have a clear, accurate, universally understandable constitution...
(Applause)... a constitution which every child in Europe can simply learn at school.
This constitution would comprise two parts, as is standard practice.
The first part would set out the fundamental rights and duties of the European citizens and states, the fundamental values on which a united Europe is based and the sense and purpose of the European structure.
The second would describe the main institutions of the European Union, their main powers and the relations between them.
The fact of having a constitution would not automatically radically transform the union of states as we know it into the federal superstate which the eurosceptics dread; it would simply give the people of the Europe under construction a clearer idea of the nature of the European Union, thereby allowing them to understand it better and identify with it.
(Applause)One of the important questions often rightly raised in connection with institutional reform is how the Union will ensure that the smaller Member States can rest assured that they will not be relegated to a minority by the larger Member States, even taking due account of the size of the various states.
It seems to me that one possibility might be to create a second chamber in the European Parliament.
It would not, of course, be directly elected; instead the various parliaments would send delegations of perhaps three deputies per state.
The first chamber, i.e. the current parliament, would reflect the size of the various Member States, while the second would reinforce their equality because all Member States would have the same number of deputies.
This would mean that the Commission, for example, would not need to have one member per state and the national parliaments could be involved in a much more "hands on" manner.
Whatever the process or outcome of institutional reform or the reform which I mentioned, one thing would appear to be certain: disagreement or the absence of consensus on institutional issues should not hamper the enlargement of the European Union.
Were it to do so, too great a delay might have far more dangerous consequences than the failure to complete institutional reform.
Ladies and Gentlemen, the technical civilisation which covers the entire planet was born in Europe and has been highly influenced by certain aspects of the Euro-American civilisation.
Europe therefore bears a great deal of responsibility for the state of this civilisation.
However, this responsibility should never take the form of forcibly enforcing its own values, ideas or heritage on the rest of the world.
On the contrary, Europe should, at long last, get its own act together and serve as an example which others may, but are not obliged to, follow.
The whole modern perception of life as continual material progress and growth, based on the assurances of man, who sees himself as the master of the universe, is the hidden and regrettable face of the European spiritual tradition.
This perception of life also predetermines the threatening side of our current civilisation.
Who, if not this part of the world, should vigorously oppose these threats, given that it was this part of the world which started this trend, sending our civilisation into free fall?
It seems to me that, at this turning point in time, it is up to Europe to take a good look at its equivocal contribution to the world and to realise that we have not only taught the world human rights, we have also shown it the Holocaust.
We were the spiritual mentors not only for the industrial and then the information revolution, but also when it came to disfiguring nature in the name of rampant materialism, pillaging its resources and polluting its atmosphere.
We need to understand that, yes, we did open the way to huge developments in science and technology; but we did so at an exorbitant price by doing away with a whole set of very important and complex human experiences formed over several millennia.
Europe needs to get its own act together first.
It can make savings, impose hardships, respect - in the best spiritual tradition - the higher cosmic order as something which is above and beyond us and respect the moral order as the consequence of that higher order.
Humility, affability, kindness, respect for what we do not understand, a deep feeling of solidarity with others, respect for what is different, the willingness to make sacrifices or do good deeds which eternity alone can reward, the eternity which watches us, silently, through the eyes of our conscience.
These are the values which could and should be on the agenda as we construct Europe.
Europe bears all or some of the responsibility for the most horrific events of the 20th century: two world wars, fascism and the totalitarian Communist regime.
Over the last century, Europe witnessed three positive events, not all of which were of its doing: the end of colonial domination, the fall of the iron curtain and the emergence of the European structure.
In my view, the fourth major mission which awaits Europe is to try and show, by its very existence, that it is possible to counter the huge danger which our contradictory civilisation allows to hover over the planet.
I would be happy if my country could take part in all this as a fully paid-up partner.
Thank you for your attention.
(Long and enthusiastic standing ovation)
Mr President, allow me, on behalf of the European Parliament, to extend our warmest thanks for the clear message which you have brought and of which the members have already shown their appreciation.
Thank you.
You are right to remind us that a national identity is perfectly compatible with a European identity.
And you have used your personal experience to show us that your European identity was not decreed; it was a spontaneous and natural move.
I have taken note of your words; this is something which we all feel very deeply.
We find you faithful to the principles which have always guided you, which have always guided your actions; your attachment to fundamental values.
You reminded us of your speech in 1994, which you yourself qualify as slightly provocative, but there is such a thing as creative utopia and we have been able to gauge together how far we have come.
And you very opportunely highlighted the role of the civil society, the importance of the civil society, not just in the candidate countries, but in all the countries in the European Union, in restoring our citizens' confidence, in restoring confidence in the social solidarity which we need.
To summarise, perhaps what struck me most in your speech; above all, you wished to remind us that, beyond its economic aspects, the task of constructing Europe is a spiritual one.
We of course look forward most keenly to continuing this task with you.
Thank you, Mr President.
(The formal sitting was closed at 12.40 p.m.)
ACP-EU Joint Assembly
The next item is the annual report (A5-0032/2000) by Mr Corrie, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the results of the activities of the ACS-EU Joint Assembly in 1999.
, rapporteur.- Mr President, I had hoped to be rising at 9 a.m., not 9 p.m., to present this report.
I hope the number of Members in this Chamber is not an indication of the interest in overseas development work.
However, it is normal practice that the report on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly is put before Members of this Parliament and I have the pleasant task of doing that tonight.
Once again, I can report two highly successful Assemblies having taken place, one in Strasbourg and one in Nassau.
In many ways this was the end of an old era and the start of a new one.
The ACP-EU Joint Assembly is a unique organisation in world politics.
Where else do 86 nations come together to discuss matters of mutual concern?
The Strasbourg Assembly was the last chaired by Lord Plumb.
In honour of the tremendous work he carried out over a difficult period the Joint Bureau in Nassau made him an honorary president, and we wish him well in his retirement.
The two Assemblies have been dominated by the negotiations on renewal of the Lom Convention and I look forward to the signature of a new Convention and its rapid ratification by all the countries concerned.
I remember that at the last mid-term review, when I was rapporteur, the then Commissioner Marin said that review would be the last.
Well, he was wrong, and I pay tribute to Philip Lowe and his team who have worked so successfully behind the scenes to conclude a new Convention in very difficult circumstances.
I was also delighted to hear the report this morning from Commissioner Nielson who has worked untiringly to get the right outcome to the negotiations.
I pay special tribute to him for his success.
I also pay tribute to Mrs Kinnock and her working group for the huge amount of work they put in on the future of Lom.
I am quite sure that Mrs Kinnock' s report and the one on regional cooperation and integration had a major bearing on the outcome of these negotiations.
I also thank the Working Groups on the small island states and climate change and the Follow-up Group on Fisheries for their excellent reports.
We have had question times to the Council and the Commission and to the ACP Council, and I would like to thank those institutions for their interest in our work.
The main thrust of our work in both Assemblies was poverty eradication.
The resolution passed went so far as to say that poverty amounted to a violation of human rights.
It also emphasised the importance of abolishing gender inequalities and as I travel through Africa and see the work done by women I only wish there were more women in senior government positions and in presidential posts.
We might then see an end to some of the fraud, corruption and mismanagement that seem endemic in some countries and that have to be stopped.
We had, as usual, many debates on countries where there are war situations.
I visited Ethiopia and Eritrea to gain first-hand knowledge.
The OAU is doing its best to broker a peace deal there.
But Ethiopia is still calling for clarification on certain issues and the humanitarian situation in both countries is serious.
We were delighted to hear in Nassau that a trade agreement was being reached with South Africa after four years of negotiations.
This highlights the problems of coherence between the EU and the developing nations, which came to a head at the WTO talks in Seattle.
Much work has to be done to convince the developing nations of the advantages of globalisation and world free-trade agreements.
In Nassau, we had two interesting debates on East Timor and Cuba.
Cuba has observer status but I understand has now shown a wish to join the ACP.
All nations from within the confines of the ACP territory who can live up to the requirements of democracy, human rights, governance and an independent judiciary are, I am sure, welcome.
I await with interest developments in Cuba.
When Mr Dalmau, the Cuban Junior Minister for Foreign Affairs addressed the Assembly, he did not hesitate to let his feelings be known.
On East Timor, Mr Da Costa, from the Timorese National Resistance Council, gave a very moving address indicating that East Timor would also like to join the ACP when it becomes a state with a government.
We must give them all our support to reach that goal.
Human rights is such an important issue within the ACP-EU Assembly that Joint Vice-Presidents have been appointed with special responsibilities for monitoring human rights closely and reporting to the Assembly.
A number of cases have been highlighted, including the child soldier issue in Sudan, where many children have been abducted from neighbouring states.
I had the honour of being elected the European Co-President at the beginning of this fifth term and Mr Clair from Mauritius is the new ACP Co-President.
I would like to see a number of changes to our Assembly, particularly after the signing of the new Convention in May.
We must have more equality between our ACP partners and our European members and I want to get rid of the "them and us" syndrome.
Firstly, I would like to see a Joint Parliamentary Assembly of elected members from ACP countries and not ambassadors or government ministers sitting there as delegates.
This I think is the new Convention.
Secondly, the new Convention allows for regional assemblies in the six regions, which would allow us to be much more specific in our work.
These assemblies would report back to the Joint Assembly.
We had a regional debate in Nassau in the Caribbean and this was extremely productive.
We are going to have one in Abuja in West Africa too.
I want the Assembly to stop being just a talk-shop and become a work-shop for the betterment of all the people in developing countries.
I want to see civil society given a louder voice.
But to do that we have to see an end to corruption and we have to face this head-on.
We must reward those nations which are making the effort to live by the rules of good governance.
Equally, we should come down hard on those who are corrupt or whose constitutions do not allow the pluralist governments that we demand.
I am delighted to see the result in Zimbabwe.
European taxpayers will no longer accept their taxes being fraudulently used.
A new wind of change must blow through Africa and new standards must be set and lived up to.
The Joint Assembly should play a leading role in monitoring the enactment of good governance, human rights and democracy in cooperation with the Commission.
I believe that as equal partners the EU- and ACP-elected delegates are up to that task.
I beg to move acceptance of this report.
Mr President, let me begin by congratulating Mr Corrie on his excellent and comprehensive report.
Our approach to development policy must always be based on respect for human rights and the fight against poverty.
But there is a crass contradiction between fighting poverty and the cuts in development aid appropriations in many Member States and in the EU.
With regard to financing, we must look to the future and provide the Joint Assembly with additional funds so that, for instance, we can send delegations to the ACP states to oversee electoral processes, at their invitation.
In future, the EU must take a far more multilateral approach when it agrees development projects and, furthermore, must coordinate more closely with the individual states in order to improve efficiency and use the funding more effectively.
An example here could be the field of education, which will deserve and need special support in the ACP states in future.
For instance, the very rapidly growing educational and technological potential of the Internet offers entirely new means of helping the developing countries, which at present still have modest resources, to move towards a global approach, as opposed to globalisation.
I see it as a future task of the EU to contribute in this way to the establishment of small and medium-sized enterprises in the ACP states, which can promote self-help.
An example here is the problem in Nigeria, which imports industrial finished products from all over the world and then has to spend substantial resources on product maintenance by foreign workers.
One way forward to promote the setting up of SMEs could be to train the Nigerian population adequately.
It will be easier to take account of the developing countries' very diverse problems, and EU aid could be prepared and implemented in a more targeted manner if, as the report makes quite clear, we take the urgently needed step of optimising our working methods, by introducing the proposed regional assemblies.
Thank you, Mr Zimmerling: If I am informed correctly, this is the first time you are addressing this House.
Congratulations on your maiden speech: It went really well.
Mr President, it cannot be repeated often enough: since 1975, the Lom Convention has constituted an important pillar of European development cooperation and has a pilot role to play in many respects.
Based as it is on the principle of partnership and equality, and on parliamentary control by the Joint Assembly, it is an example to the world.
Most appropriately, given that this year we are celebrating 25 years of cooperation under Lom, we will shortly be signing a new and more advanced partnership agreement, which also upgrades the Joint Assembly into a genuine parliamentary assembly on both sides.
So I do not want to look back only to the year 1999.
The rapporteur, Mr Corrie, has already done so most expertly.
Much of what concerns us today is the outcome of fundamental processes of transformation in all parts of the world since the late 1980s.
They also had strong repercussions in the developing countries.
The after-shocks can still be felt.
ACP cooperation is a dynamic process.
The content of the agreements has progressed steadily between Lom I and Lom VI.
At the same time the number of partner states has increased considerably, now standing at 71.
All those involved were particularly moved by the enlargement to Namibia and South Africa.
Cuba has just knocked at the door, and, if Cuba is also accepted into the ACP-EU community, that will be a momentous step and will bring in its wake processes of change in Cuba itself.
So ACP cooperation remains very exciting, and not only because of the new emphases introduced in the new Convention.
Fighting poverty and promoting sustained economic, cultural and social development are important objectives in the endeavour to build up democratic societies, based on respect for human rights, in the ACP states.
That also means strengthening the democratic institutions.
The history of the Joint Assembly provides impressive evidence of a positive trend in that direction.
In the past, the representatives of the ACP countries tended to be government members, government officials or ambassadors; but today at least three quarters of the ACP delegates are elected members of parliament.
We ought to throw a big party when the figure reaches 100% in the near future, which is indeed what the new Convention is aiming at.
Unfortunately there is far too little appreciation of the steady advance of processes of democratisation which, unlike the various crises that arise, largely pass unnoticed.
One special aspect of multilateral cooperation with the ACP states is regional cooperation and integration.
There is one wish on the European Parliament' s long wish list that will be fulfilled: as we have already heard, the Joint Assembly will soon also be able to hold regional assemblies.
Enhanced regional cooperation can help prevent the outbreak of conflicts based on ethnic, economic, social or religious factors, i.e. have a preventive effect.
For the same reason the European Parliament has always called for civil society to be involved in the decision-making processes and in cooperation management, and emphasised the importance of decentralised cooperation.
The enhanced contacts between the Joint Assembly and the social partners provided for in the new Convention are another step in the right direction.
But I am a little sad that the European Development Fund has still not been incorporated in the Community budget.
I hope it does not take another 25 years before we finally achieve that too.
Mr President, I congratulate Mr Corrie on his report.
The Lom Convention has been an expression of a real partnership between the EU and the ACP countries for over 25 years.
That it has continued at all in the face of overwhelming pressure against it from many quarters, including the WTO, is a triumph of sorts.
But of course the new Convention must be measured not by the fact that it exists but by the extent to which it can contribute to the EU commitment to poverty eradication and the achievement of the international development targets.
Measured by this yardstick there are a number of serious shortcomings in the new arrangements.
For example, the agreement is particularly disappointing for those ACP countries suffering from short-term fluctuations in export earnings.
During a marathon negotiating session in December a compromise was reached which provided that, in respect of least-developed, landlocked and island states, assistance would be provided in the event of a minimum 2% loss of export earnings rather than the level of 10% for the other ACP states.
But at the final negotiating session the EU claimed that it had never actually agreed to the inclusion of islands and landlocked states among those which would qualify for the support on the basis of the 2% threshold.
This change has been devastating for the Windward Islands in particular which may be the only ACP state which will actually lose massively from the new arrangements.
This seems a particularly perverse outcome since the Windward Islands are one of the smallest and most vulnerable of the ACP states and they are now going to have to pay the highest price for this new Lom arrangement.
Meanwhile, on the trade side, pressure from the WTO to ensure that any Lom Convention is WTO-compatible has meant that there is a huge momentum behind the idea of the so-called regional economic partnership arrangements or free-trade agreements.
Non-least-developed countries are likely to face considerable pressure to accept these arrangements.
Yet it is quite clear that even after a transitional period a number of countries will simply be unable to open their markets yet to the chill winds of free trade without wrecking their own domestic economy.
We therefore need to be particularly vigilant to ensure that genuine options are open to those countries which are not yet ready for free-trade arrangements.
We need to ensure that strategies for promoting regional integration within the ACP are pursued in their own right.
Finally, during any new trade round the EU and the ACP states should press jointly for a reform of GATT Article 24 in order to explicitly provide regional non-reciprocal trade agreements between structurally and economically dissimilar groups of countries.
The Lom Convention is a unique partnership; but if it is to be truly effective it needs to extend beyond the discussions within the context of Lom and involve a participation of the WTO and a partnership in all other international negotiating fora.
Mr President, what I want to do in this debate is condemn the fate reserved for the poor countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific.
People have the gall to say they benefit from the Lom Convention, but even looking at trading relations alone, the Lom Convention has done nothing to protect those countries; their already feeble share in trade with Europe has been halved.
That reflects the growth of inequality between EU and ACP countries.
The Lom Convention essentially benefits a few large industrial or financial conglomerates, which continue to pillage those countries and perpetuate their economic dependence, notably on the former colonial powers.
When it comes to so-called development aid, given that underdevelopment in the majority of these countries is getting worse rather than better, development is clearly not what the aid is for, even when it is not just a disguised export subsidy for European manufacturers.
The aid is primarily a windfall for incumbent regimes, and the poor majority does not benefit at all.
Even if it were properly redirected this aid would not be enough to finance the most basic infrastructure for health care, education or drinking water supply.
For some years now the great powers have been reducing the amount of this already derisory aid, and it is the height of cynicism when this is done on the pretext of human rights violations or corruption.
After all, who protects these deeply corrupt regimes, if not the governments of the rich countries?
They turn a blind eye to the masters of corruption, the big groups controlling oil, water supply, or public works.
They could clamp down on them since their head offices are here in Europe.
The debate about either extending the Lom Convention with its quotas and protectionism, or, instead, gradually winding down the special relationship between the European Union and the ACP countries in the name of free trade, is a warped debate between two ways of perpetuating the pillage and impoverishment of those countries.
I protest against an ignoble and inhuman organisation which literally condemns hundreds of millions of human beings to a wretched death to enrich a minority.
A mere fraction of the fantastic wealth accumulated by the big groups could lift these poor countries out of extreme poverty, but, until we have the courage to take on those big capitalist groups, we are just covering up the real problems.
Mr President, I want to thank the Co-President of the Joint ACP-EU Assembly, Mr Corrie.
It was no easy task to draw up a report on a complicated forum like the ACP-EU Assembly.
In this speech, I will confine myself to addressing certain points I consider fundamental.
I believe the European Parliament should call for the Assembly to become truly parliamentary, urging all ACP countries to send members of their national parliaments as their representatives, so as to strengthen their own democratic fabric.
My next contribution to the debate is to turn my attention to globalisation and the WTO, which is seen by the ACP countries as an enormous danger to their development.
I do believe the ACP countries need a transition period, but they also need support in the context of the new logic of regionalisation of aid, not only in agriculture and fisheries, but also in the exploitation of mineral and underground resources, some of which are being exploited, with slim economic returns to the ACP countries themselves.
Thirdly, the European Parliament - through a joint working group within the Joint Assembly - must make a major effort to achieve stability in ACP countries' budgets through the selection of budgetary items to permit economic and, above all, social development, and by monitoring income and fiscal policies in force in the ACP countries.
We must put the people of the ACP countries first in our relationship with their rulers, who need to be fully aware that development aid from the European Union is intended for the people and not for the oligarchies that handle all the internal and external resources in some countries.
Fourthly, and finally, the prevention of inter-ethnic conflicts between States must be our constant concern and to some extent this can be achieved either through a strong and authoritative diplomatic offensive or with the proposals I have set out.
Mr President, I agree with the positive evaluation Mrs Junker has just made and I want to add that Mr Corrie has started his term as Co-President of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly with effective and impartial work deserving of our full appreciation.
I shall restrict my speech to one particular act which took place a few days ago, partly as a consequence of events alluded to in the report we are debating here.
I refer to Cuba' s expression of intent, of 2 February, to become a full member of the ACP group of countries.
A Cuban delegation attended the last meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in Nassau, and Vice-Chancellor Dalmau spoke in the plenary session, engaging in a lively debate, and afterwards held conversations with many of us.
Following Nassau, a delegation from Parliament led by Mr Corrie and the Chairman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, Joaqun Miranda, visited Havana and a series of very illuminating exchanges of opinion took place.
It is my impression that this mission from the European Parliament was the final push which convinced our Cuban friends that the time had come to move forward on mechanisms of cooperation with the European Union.
We are witnessing events of great political significance and I hope that we in the European Parliament can promote the appropriate favourable view and a generous attitude on the part of the Union, so that Cuba' s aspirations can meet with a positive response as soon as possible.
That is important, for at least three reasons.
First, it is important for Cuba, to bring its people development and prosperity and finally break the United States blockade, which has been repeatedly condemned by the European Parliament and the United Nations.
Secondly, we must bear in mind that Cuba' s application has the support of all the ACP countries.
If the European Union responds positively to the recommendation of our associates, we will be proving our respect and consideration for those associates and this will have positive effects on the whole framework of our cooperation with them.
Nor can we ignore the value of such a decision in demonstrating the consistency and autonomy of the European Union and the fact that it does not bow to pressure from any quarter.
By accepting Cuba into the ACP community we will be demonstrating that our Europe is not involved in the shameful process of 'playing but not paying' , and that, when we get indignant about absurdities like the Helms-Burton Act, we are not being hypocritical but are ready to act and take all the consequences.
The ACP-EU Joint Assembly meets again in a few weeks time and I am sure this subject will be dealt with there.
Ideally the European Parliament' s representatives should be able to support Cuba' s intent at those proceedings, as our parliamentary colleagues from the ACP countries will no doubt be doing.
Of course, Cuba must meet all the standard conditions, just like any other member.
The Cubans know that and I am sure they accept it.
It must also be made clear that Cuba is not going to be asked for more than has been asked of our other partners.
Cuba' s wish to join is welcome and Cuba will be welcome in our circle.
I say that wholeheartedly, but also with the deep conviction that, just as the blockade has produced nothing but poverty and, as a consequence of that, extreme tension and a hardening of the Cuban position, the integration we are supporting here, and the prosperity it will produce, will translate into the dtente and openness we all seek and from which all of us, especially the Cuban people, will benefit.
Mr President, I also want to begin by thanking and congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Corrie, for an excellent report which I think very well describes and summarises the work which has been done in the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in the course of 1999.
I do not have very long in which to speak, and I really only want to take up two questions.
The first is about the fight against poverty, which I think is becoming an embarrassment both for the EU and the Member States.
In spite of the fact that, both in the Treaty and at the UN' s meetings in Rio and Copenhagen, there was an undertaking to work to eradicate poverty in the world, the budget for development aid is, in actual fact, being cut back, when the express desire was that exactly the opposite should happen.
We must put a stop to this trend.
We must begin by writing off debts.
We must follow up words with action.
I should like us to take a leading role in this work.
My second question concerns the fact that, in many contexts, we talk about the ACP countries having to learn the principles of democracy.
Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the resolution demand, within the context of the new agreement, that working methods should be developed and optimised.
The ACP countries are to be urged to allow a whole range of political opinions to come up for discussion.
I think that is a very good idea indeed, and I fully subscribe to it.
However, we must also ask ourselves about our own democratic arrangements.
How do these operate within the European Parliament' s delegation to the ACP-EU' s Joint Assembly?
In contrast to how things are done here in the European Parliament and in Parliament' s committees, where rapporteurs are nominated and appointed to produce reports, there are no regulations whatsoever applied within this delegation to the Joint Assembly.
The two large groups share all the reports and consultative documents etc between themselves.
In order to change this undemocratic arrangement, we, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, have tabled Amendment No 6 in which we request that the rapporteurs appointed to produce reports and consultative documents, together with the members of working parties, should be appointed in accordance with clear, democratic rules.
In this context, account ought to be taken of the smaller groups, and consideration given to introducing more representative arrangements.
Mr President, Commissioner, firstly, I too would like to congratulate Mr Corrie on the quality of his report, which appropriately reflects the tenor of the debates in the Joint Assembly he so effectively co-chaired.
The eradication of poverty was central to our work and many speakers highlighted the need to preserve an essential tool for achieving that ambitious aim, to whit, preferential agreements between the European Union and the ACP countries within the framework of the Lom Conventions.
The challenge was immense.
Globalisation, free trade, and the hegemony of the WTO with its internationalist philosophy, were imperilling the very essence of the North-South dialogue.
So we can only applaud the conclusion of a new partnership agreement for development, and personally I am convinced that the work of the last Joint Assembly did have a decisive influence on breaking the deadlock in the negotiations, as did the new climate created by the events at Seattle.
However, while I welcome the renewal of the agreements, what I find most interesting is the new wind blowing through our relationships and finding expression in the balanced nature of the negotiations now drawing to a close.
The European Union seems to me to have finally emerged from the old paternalist, or frankly neo-colonialist, logic where those giving aid are all too eager to start giving lessons, following a formula our friend Michel Rocard is so keen on.
The Union has finally accepted the idea that dialogue cannot be genuine or effective unless it is the expression of a contract which respects the dignity of the partners.
By refusing to allow the idea of good governance to become a tool, in the hands of technocrats, for imposing new sets of conditions, the European Union is demonstrating wisdom and modesty.
We have spent two centuries laying the foundations of a democracy whose fragility is constantly brought home to us by events.
What right have we to try to impose our model on people whose history, values and identity are sometimes so profoundly different from our own?
Personally, I prefer the willingness that is clearly flagged up in these agreements to extend the partnership to new agents - local authorities, non-governmental organisations - which seems to me to represent the only possible way the people of these countries can progressively achieve ownership cooperation.
In short, this is the only way they can emerge from humiliating and childlike dependence on aid and take responsibility for themselves, the proof of success.
Mr President, Commissioner, firstly, I too would like to congratulate Mr Corrie on the accuracy and rigour of the summary in his report.
The European Parliament' s opinion on the activities of the ACP-European Union Joint Assembly has always had a major impact, undeniably contributing to a consistent policy and role for the European Union in development and cooperation.
The important role of the increasingly parliamentary Joint Assembly in strengthening relations between the European Union and the ACP countries needs to be stressed.
In view of this positive action, there is every advantage to be gained from according the Joint Assembly a budget compatible with improving the quality of its work.
We back the rapporteur' s proposal to introduce regional parliamentary assemblies, under the aegis of the Joint Assembly, in the six regions of the Convention: the Caribbean, the Pacific and four African regions.
These regional assemblies would monitor action in their respective areas.
Poverty has been the common denominator of all the debates in the Joint Assembly and its eradication is the priority for the European Union' s development policy.
In line with the resolution at the Nassau meeting, we must concentrate on meeting the poverty reduction targets agreed by the international community.
Consistency and action are needed.
The next Lom Convention must specify the investment in education and stimulate regional cooperation and the participation of local bodies.
The participation of local bodies is absolutely essential.
In a wider context, the priorities, as I see it, are to convert poor countries' debt into programmes for poverty eradication and sustainable development, as well as control of fraud and corruption.
We need to make progress with concrete and consistent action.
People in the poor countries are beginning to despair.
I call on the Commission to act on the rapid accession of East Timor to the Lom Convention as one means, amongst others, of promoting the eradication of poverty and accelerating its economic, cultural and social development, in order to strengthen its internal democratisation.
Finally, I must congratulate the Council Presidency on the coming Europe-Africa Summit and call on all the participants to contribute to solid practical action to promote the development of peace, democracy and the eradication of poverty in the underdeveloped countries of Africa.
.
(DA) Mr President, I should like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur for his excellent report and also to thank the Joint Assembly for its work in 1999.
I am also delighted to be able to confirm that I shall be participating in the Joint Assembly' s next meeting, which takes place in March in Nigeria.
The Commission is pleased to see the Joint Assembly playing a larger role, especially in connection with promoting a more extensive political dialogue with our partners in development.
The Commission agrees with the rapporteur that combating poverty continues to be the central objective for development policy and will always play a key role.
In order to be able to develop, the countries concerned must, however, become actively involved in the global economic system.
With regard to trade with our partners in development, the Commission is quite prepared to guarantee that any new arrangement will take account of the ACP countries' special economic and social limitations.
Mrs Lucas mentioned that the Stabex and Sysmin system ought to be continued with.
I do not agree.
That system has proved itself to be inappropriate because it is, in actual fact, of use only to relatively few of the 71 countries concerned.
It operates too slowly, and it therefore stands to reason that the developing countries should have said yes to the new system of the future, because this will operate more flexibly.
Regarding the future accession of countries such as East Timor to the Lom Convention, I can only repeat what I recently said to the European Parliament' s Committee on Development and Cooperation, namely, that the door is open.
It is the applicants themselves who are to decide whether they want to knock on the door.
Once they have done so, we shall adopt a position on the matter.
With regard to Cuba' s application for accession to the Lom Convention, the Commission notes that, according to their recent declaration, the ACP States support Cuba' s application.
The EU has always called for a constructive attitude to be adopted towards Cuba, as outlined in the EU' s common position, but it has to be recognised that the discussions will be complex.
With regard to the Cte d' Ivoire, I can inform you that the whole of the EUR 28 million has been paid back in accordance with what was agreed following examination of the financial irregularities.
With regard to financing the European Development Fund by an amount in excess of the budget, I can say that this is being considered.
For its part, the Commission supports this, but we cannot at this point produce new reports on the whys and wherefores.
Concerning Article 366A, I can say that, during the negotiations for a new partnership agreement, a new procedure was established for dealing with instances where human rights and the principles of democracy and the rule of law are infringed.
It is now the case, following adoption of the Amsterdam Treaty, that Parliament wishes, on the basis of Article 300, to be kept fully informed of all decisions, and the Commission will continue to take account of Parliament' s decisions on this subject.
There are no plans to follow the procedure involving concurrent statements in Parliament in connection with such decisions.
This would in fact demand a change to the recently adopted Amsterdam Treaty.
Finally, I would refer to the South Africa agreement, which the rapporteur also touched upon.
In this regard, I am simply pleased - delighted, in fact - here this evening, as a conclusion to this debate, to be able, very appropriately, to inform you that South Africa' s President has today said yes to the solution which the EU' s Council of Foreign Ministers last Monday agreed unanimously to propose with regard to the outstanding problems regarding South Africa.
So the "Grappa War" is over.
Peace has broken out, and we can now look forward to cooperation with South Africa in accordance with the common dreams and values which ought to have underpinned the whole business from the start.
I think this rather nicely puts the finishing touches to a debate which has, on the whole, been quite positive, and I would repeat my thanks to the rapporteur and to Parliament for the cooperation which has gone into our relations with the Third World on precisely the work in question.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
Stabilisation and association agreement with FYROM
The next item is the report (A5-0031/2000) by Mr Swoboda, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the recommendation for a Council Decision authorising the Commission to negotiate a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with FYROM (SEC(1999)1279 - C5-0166/1999 -1999/2121(COS)).
Mr President, Commissioner Patten, today we are discussing a country that really has suffered hard times, a country that is, however, moving in a very promising direction, thanks to its own efforts and resolve and certainly also thanks to the support of the international community.
So if the European Union, the Council and the Commission are proposing - and I assume that Parliament will support that proposal tomorrow - the first stabilisation and association agreement in south-eastern Europe, in the Balkan region - I am quite happy to use that term - it is primarily in gratitude for or acknowledgement of the fact that FYROM itself has worked its way into a good position, in economic and, of course, mainly in political terms, in face of the war in the neighbouring region and also in relation to its own minority.
For it is no small thing to have a minority of 33% or even 35% in one' s own country.
That country and its politicians - no doubt with some differences here and there - have always done very good work, and we should recognise that.
The Commission is proposing that we should conclude an agreement jointly with the Council.
Let me make a few comments on aspects on which views may differ somewhat, although, even in this regard, I want to strongly emphasise and acknowledge Commissioner Patten' s activities and interest in relation to FYROM and the region as a whole.
Firstly, there is the regional approach.
I believe that if it is understood properly, the regional approach is both important and necessary.
There has to be a willingness to cooperate.
Provided it is not seen as some kind of constraint but as a willingness to cooperate, as an opportunity that each country should grasp, then this is the right approach.
The problem is that, when we look at FYROM, we can see how very difficult it is to cooperate economically with some neighbouring countries, such as Kosovo and Albania, or to cooperate politically with, for instance, Yugoslavia.
On the other hand, cooperation with Bulgaria, and in particular with Greece, has made good progress and I think we should acknowledge that too.
In this context, the European Union must consider, as it began to do early this week, how to include the neighbouring Yugoslavia in regional cooperation in spite of everything, i.e. without taking back any of our criticism of this terrible regime.
Tomorrow morning I will therefore table an amendment urging that we concentrate the sanctions on the regime itself while easing them somewhat for the people and for the economy in a spirit of economic cooperation.
In that regard allow me to say, since I come from a country through which the Danube flows, that I am grateful that the Commission, i.e. Commissioner Patten and also Vice-President Palacio, with whom I was recently in Budapest, is considering opening the Danube to shipping again.
That would provide for a modicum of economic recovery in this region too, which, of course, would be of particular importance to Romania.
In my view, this regional approach, provided it is understood correctly, i.e. as a method of contributing to economic recovery in the region itself, is in fact the right one to adopt.
As I said, it must not be perceived as a constraint nor must it be set as a precondition.
Secondly, let me say quite clearly and plainly that we want to open the way to and offer FYROM accession to the European Union.
In our view, it would be an illusion to think there was any point in FYROM applying for accession right now, but it would also be wrong to delay discussing it until some later date.
FYROM wants to be told here and now that, in principle, accession will be possible when the time is right.
This country is afraid it will be in a sense sidelined.
It sees, in the whole readjustment of aid instruments, a risk that it will no longer be the last carriage of a train heading towards Europe but that this train will continue through Europe while leaving FYROM on a siding.
I think Commissioner Patten understands that too.
So I very strongly urge him to make it clear in the appropriate talks.
Thirdly, I believe that, so far at least, FYROM has shown that it is capable of using the various instruments properly.
Even though there will of course be readjustments here, FYROM will continue to show that many of the tasks that are still being dealt with in Brussels today can in future be handled in Skopje, in the country itself.
I hope that the honourable Members will agree to support these proposals as a sign of goodwill towards FYROM.
Mr President, since the start of the Yugoslav wars, the Republic of Macedonia - I prefer to use this abbreviation - has behaved as a constructive peace-keeper.
We would remind you of the proposals made by the governments of Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina at the time, which had non-violent liberalisation and a non-violent separation from the Yugoslav federal structure in view.
As you can see, our Macedonian friends have always played a very positive role and it is for this reason that it should be pointed out at this stage that Macedonia is not just a pawn in our so-called strive towards stability, but actually took the initiative.
The former President, Mr Gligorov, can take special credit for this, and the current President too has already adopted the profile of President of all Macedonian citizens, so much so that the European Union should only be grateful to have him as interlocutor in the Balkans.
Despite the obvious reasons for any internal tension, both population groups have struck a reasonable modus vivendi and the outlook for reaching a sound solution to the remaining problems is good.
It was, in fact, in Macedonia that I heard at the time about the Roma population actually not having too bad a time there.
I was unaccustomed to hearing this type of comment about the Roma in Europe.
With regard to the problems afflicting Macedonia, higher education for the Albanian-speaking citizens deserves our special attention.
Accessible higher education, with which you have a certain affinity, is an important instrument in the emancipation of population groups.
I am speaking from personal experience as someone who attended the Protestant university in Amsterdam.
I might never have studied otherwise.
Such an affinity and this type of higher education is also important in the development of the constitutional state and for the aptly termed mainstream society which needs to be strengthened in countries like this.
The agreement with Macedonia should partly compensate for the damage which this country incurred following the boycott we instituted against Serbia, which is at no cost to us but costs Serbia' s neighbouring states all the more.
It would be beneficial if we could reorganise this, especially vis--vis the neighbouring states.
It is only fair that we should regulate aid to Macedonia properly now.
We are therefore quite prepared to support the liberals' amendment to keep aid independent from the donor states' interests, for we need to give industry in Macedonia and the region the best possible opportunities with the aid money available for reconstruction.
I am more than happy to include Bulgaria and Romania in this, as it seems to me a tactical and psychological error only to talk about the five countries of former Yugoslavia, plus Albania.
It is important to us that the economies in the region can stand on their own two feet again, which can quite easily be done with the aid money.
The agreement with Macedonia should be seen as a door opening to the European Union, allowing this country to join, even though this will not be the case in the foreseeable future.
In the meantime, we constantly need to start from the premise in our policy that it is desirable for Macedonian legislation to resemble that of the Member States, and our policy should reflect this, even in the naming of aid programmes for Macedonia.
I would quote the PHARE programme as an example.
Mr President, the name of the republic is still a problem on account of the Greek sensitivities surrounding it.
I assume that the Member States will feel increasingly freer to use the name in their own language which fits the republic.
If certain countries wish to use the words "former Yugoslavia" , then that is their business; others need not feel obliged to copy them.
It will not do to keep us under constant pressure.
Hence my support for the sound report by Mr Swoboda; we have come to expect nothing less of him, and hence also my words of appreciation for the respected Republic of Macedonia.
Mr President, let me begin by expressing my personal appreciation of the quality of Mr Swoboda' s work as rapporteur.
Today we are expressing a positive opinion on the opening of negotiations for a stabilisation and association agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Macedonia.
We do so in the awareness that this decision, the very first relating to that area, is actually set in the context of an entirely new phase of our relations with the Balkans.
This new phase, or rather policy, identifies the prospect of integrating the region into Europe as the only option for settling its conflicts peacefully.
Our agreement to the negotiations, as set out in the rapporteur' s explanatory statement, is born of the conviction that it is right for Union policy to combine both a regional dimension and a more precise assessment of efforts made and results achieved by individual countries in moving towards the acquis communautaire.
This is the dual objective which I believe should be pursued.
On the one hand, we must maintain programmes on, for example, infrastructure, preparations - still premature - for free trade, and encouragement of economic and commercial cooperation between the countries in the area, and on the other, it is now appropriate to create a model of closer integration with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia as an example of the policy.
And there are several reasons why our opinion can only be positive.
As we were able to ascertain during our missions to Skopje, there has been considerable progress in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, as regards the economy, movement towards democracy and - an area which is difficult and contentious enough in the Balkans - multi-ethnic coexistence.
On the other hand, the price Macedonia has been paying for the war in neighbouring Kosovo is very high, both in terms of logistic availability of NATO forces and in terms of reduced exports to Northern Europe.
I conclude, Mr President, by affirming that this progress is indeed difficult, fragile, and uncertain and it calls for constant vigilance on our part during the various stages of close and precise inspection that have long been advocated.
Mr President, Commissioner, I rise to express the warmth and optimism with which the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party welcomes the start of negotiations with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
We are extremely hopeful that, along the lines set out by the rapporteur, Mr Swoboda, this agreement can represent an example to be rapidly extended to the other countries, especially Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and Kosovo and, as soon as possible, Serbia.
We are convinced a rapid start to these negotiations and their speedy conclusion is the only way to achieve peace in the region - peace which did not automatically come with the end of the Kosovo war - thus avoiding the recurrence of further disintegration and a return to chaos and violence, with all the consequences of that in terms of continental, if not world, instability.
If the maintenance of peace and security is the basic motivation of the current courageous process of enlargement of the Union to the countries of Eastern Europe, that motivation must be present even more strongly in relations with Albania and the countries of former Yugoslavia.
And that means decisively pursuing the kind of parallel enlargement to south-east Europe that the agreements we are discussing represent.
It is in that quasi-provocative spirit that we have presented an amendment suggesting the transfer of responsibility for south-east Europe from Foreign Affairs to Enlargement.
Very rapid and direct involvement of south-east Europe in the life of the European institutions has also led us to suggest that a limited number of observers invited from the national parliaments should be accepted into the European Parliament, and that staff from those countries could work in the Court of Justice and the Commission.
But if the development in the region of a more democratic society and largely market-based economy is to be encouraged, we are convinced that immediate and concrete steps must be taken to intensify the struggle against corruption and to make international aid more effective for reconstruction and development.
With this in mind, we have presented some amendments which I hope Parliament will accept.
First, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia should be offered a customs tariff equal to zero for their exports to the European Union and compensation for the progressive reduction of customs duties applied by Macedonia to European products, on condition that the principle of joint customs control at the frontiers of Macedonia is accepted.
Secondly, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia should be encouraged, with adequate financial support, to gradually link its currency to the euro as the first step towards the Europeanisation of the whole Macedonian economy, with the additional aim of eliminating any possible corruption in the banking system.
Thirdly, world aid and assistance coming into the region, and hence into Macedonia as well, should be clearly multilateral, and should not subject the beneficiary country to direct obligations towards the donor country.
Mr President, Commissioner, we hope the agreement can achieve all its objectives but we cannot delude ourselves that peace, stability and prosperity in south-east Europe can be achieved without dealing with the very wide-ranging problems we are trying to eliminate.
I am referring to the future constitutional state of Kosovo, the need to involve Serbia in the region' s reconciliation process and - why not? - new discussions on relations between the European Union, NATO and the UN, in the light of the new balance that needs to be found between humanitarian intervention and state sovereignty, which I think calls for a change in the existing UN Charter.
Mr President, Commissioner, the war in Kosovo has knocked everything off balance.
This is certainly true for the relations between the European Union and the western Balkans.
Since then, expectations have been high.
This applies to them and us.
This is true on their part because - whether we like it or not - they are asking us for direct aid and they are wondering what Europe wants from them at the end of the day?
Is there any prospect of membership?
This is very much on their minds.
But here too, within the European Union, expectations are high.
If we do things properly, this may well be a first taster of a genuine common foreign and security policy.
Will the Union manage to display a united front and develop a common policy, for the first time, concerning such a difficult regulation?
It also remains to be seen whether the European Union has learnt any lessons from the bad experiences in Bosnia when it comes to providing aid and the slightly better experiences in Kosovo.
Can we, based on the experiences in Macedonia and in four other countries, improve on this?
Against this background of extremely high expectations, I do not think that I am exaggerating if I say that this first step, namely the stability and association agreement with Macedonia, is vitally important.
This is not the Union' s only contribution.
The debate on the Stability Pact, the debate on the CARA programme and the financing arrangements in the short term are all pending.
We are now dealing with the stabilisation and association agreements, that is to say a medium-term issue.
This is why I think that this first agreement with Macedonia is so crucial, because it serves as a model.
I am convinced that the four other countries are wondering what is going to happen.
What does the European Union intend to do with Macedonia?
Will it do the same to us?
This first step is so important because of this model function.
Macedonia also serves as a model for another reason.
The rapporteur has already hinted at this in no uncertain terms, namely, the issue of interethnic relations.
There is no need to paint too much of an idealistic picture.
During the presidential elections, it appeared that things were not running too smoothly, but compared to the rest of the region, Macedonia could serve as a model.
We would gain a great deal if we managed to export this model to the rest of the western Balkans with the help of the Macedonians.
This model function also applies to regional cooperation.
I could not agree more with the rapporteur: a balance must be struck between promoting regional cooperation on the one hand and maintaining the openness towards Bulgaria and Greece, and not cutting them off on the other.
Mr President, Commissioner, if we manage this first step successfully, we will have gained a great deal.
If we mess it up, then we will have lost a great deal more.
Mr President, let me begin by saying that I have no problem with approving this very sound report in principle.
I just want to point to one issue which in my view is not considered in the report and which raises a major problem in relation to Macedonia and the effectiveness of EU financial and other support.
I am referring to the sanctions against Yugoslavia.
Do not misunderstand me: I too believe that we need to take effective action against the Milosevic regime.
But firstly, these sanctions have a far-reaching and adverse impact on many of the neighbouring states too, including Macedonia, which find themselves in an extremely difficult economic situation as it is.
Secondly, the entire population of Yugoslavia is being held accountable for the actions of Milosevic and his circle, which is wrong on humanitarian grounds and politically counterproductive.
So I believe that we should take today' s debate as an opportunity to call for a rapid end to the policy of sanctions, as stated in Amendment No 10.
Mr President, we did not need to witness the end the Kosovo conflict to reach the conclusion that, after various wars in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, with their untold negative effects on the stability of the Balkans, a global and durable strategy for the whole region is needed, aimed at guaranteeing peace and stability in south-east Europe.
This strategy, which took shape in the Stability Pact adopted on 10 June 1999 in Cologne, considers south-east Europe as a whole, but simultaneously recognises the diversity and unequal development of the various countries that compose the region.
The European Union' s contribution under the Stability Pact, now converted into what is called the "stabilisation and association process" , represents a development in the regional concept the European Community drew up in 1996 for the five countries of the region: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania.
Its most significant aspect was the establishment of political and economic conditions intended to support the implementation of the Dayton peace agreement, and it should therefore contribute to regional stability.
So establishing relations between the European Union and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on a completely new basis, and offering that country the prospect of full integration into the structures of the European Union through the mechanism of the stabilisation and association process, constitutes an important contribution to stability in the Balkans.
The assumption is that the countries are prepared to accept a certain set of conditions.
The expectation is that we send them a politically relevant signal that it is possible for them to join us one day, maintaining respect for their sovereignty of course.
We are not deluding ourselves by believing that, once agreement is obtained, the mandate we are giving the Commission today could constitute a first major step towards peace and stability in that long-suffering region, where the people have already shown they have the right to seek membership of our area of freedom and development.
They have suffered enough, first under the Soviet yoke and then from the high price they paid for being forced to become part of the communist bloc.
The evidence is that the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is politically and economically capable of establishing new contractual relations with the European Union, going beyond the cooperation agreement in force since 1 June 1998, which in practice targets respect for the acquis communautaire, especially in key areas of the internal market.
It is true that the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia still has a long way to go, but, given the political and economic reforms already made in the context of the cooperation agreement, and with transitional periods accepted for certain domains, the country will be able to fulfil the conditions for a stabilisation and association agreement.
We share the view that its development is a factor for stability in the region, we approve the terms of the negotiating mandate as proposed, emphasising that what is involved is a bilateral agreement with the European Union, and we agree with the rapporteur when he stresses that this is the first concrete application of an integrated long term strategy for south-east Europe, and that the issue is how the Balkans can be structured in the long term in order to guarantee peace and stability.
The various references made to regional cooperation with the neighbouring countries in fact become politically relevant in this context.
This agreement can and must become an example to the other countries in the region.
That is why it is so important.
The point is that underlying this whole process is an effective political will on the part of the European Union to draw closer to these countries.
We are aware that some of them are already undergoing processes of democratic stabilisation, that others still need to affirm the democratic authority of their governments, and that equilibrium in others depends on the military presence in the zone, but they are all countries which now know that, once they have overcome their difficulties, a bridge is available to provide an effective link with the European Union.
Mr President, Commissioner, I am not going to join in the unanimous chorus from my fellow Members.
I think this report is a small masterpiece of hypocrisy.
Paragraph 5 holds up this agreement as an example.
We know there are 13 applicant countries, from Lithuania to Turkey, and just one black hole in Europe, the Balkans, but because these countries are denied the opportunity to become applicants, we want to make them believe that this agreement is a miracle.
Paragraph 11 indicates that symbolic measures can replace the shared political outlook represented by applicant status.
But this is not just a masterpiece of hypocrisy, it is also an aberration, because, if negotiations begin tomorrow, this agreement will be signed in a year and will come into force in three years.
And I defy you to imagine that there will not be membership applications in due form from Croatia, Macedonia and Bosnia, amongst the Balkan countries, three years hence.
A few days ago Mr Racan announced that Croatia' s formal membership application would be presented at the end of 2000.
There are bound to be other applications and this great work, this fine intellectual architecture, will crumble, left behind by events just as we have been left behind by everything that has been happening in the former Yugoslavia for the past 20 years.
This would not be so serious if this region of Europe were not so beset by the problems we are all aware of, problems which are being addressed, but which have not yet been resolved, by the new government of Macedonia.
There are the problems of coexistence between the Macedonian majority and the Albanian minority, the connected problems of Kosovo, the notorious economic problems, the problems of being neighbour to a particularly developed mafia in Serbia, and then there is the problem of the Greek veto which must be condemned for what it is.
After nearly 10 years, Greece continues to prevent this country being called by its own name, and I hope the interpreters have not used the term FYROM when I have been saying Macedonia.
It is absolutely absurd.
Apart from anything else it is offensive, in my opinion, to the Greek MEPs and the citizens of Greece.
This question needs to be resolved urgently.
Finally, by happy chance, a letter from Mr Georgievski, President of Macedonia to Mr Fischler, dated 8 March, has come into my hands.
In it, referring to Article O, now Article 49 of the Treaty, he asks if Macedonia can join the European Union.
Why has the Council not informed us of this?
Why has the Commission not informed us of this formal request from Macedonia?
Mr President, Commissioner, the Balkans are not purely a dark cave, politically speaking.
The decidedly positive developments in the Republic of Macedonia over the past critical years speak for themselves.
The gruesome escalation of ethnic violence in neighbouring Kosovo did not reach its territory.
Paradoxically, but truly, the war in Kosovo Polje generated exactly the opposite effect: the perilous gap of confidence between the Macedonian majority and the Albanian minority became decidedly smaller.
From the point of view of the Macedonian majority, the Albanian minority behaved loyally towards the common state during the international explosion of the Kosovo conflict.
In the eyes of the Albanian minority, the Macedonians and the Macedonian state have more than met their neighbourly obligations in respect of Kosovo' s Albanian majority who were persecuted to the extreme.
This remarkable upshot of the Kosovar war negotiations can therefore justifiably be seen as the internal, political establishment of the Republic of Macedonia the second time round.
Mr Swoboda' s well-balanced and laudable report fits in with this unexpected and delightful upshot on a very practical level.
In brief, the European Union knows what to do in Macedonia: to help this local port of refuge - recently used by scores of war refugees - to fulfil its role properly as a catalyst for the planned Stability Pact in the Balkans.
Mr President, as one who has been concerned with Macedonia for eight years, I have to contradict Mr Dupuis.
What we are doing here is not hypocritical.
We have reached a propitious moment and I think the Macedonians are glad about it.
Please stop being so unpleasant and pouring cold water on everything.
I think we should take a more positive approach here.
Macedonia did not go through a war.
But it suffered from the war in its vicinity and from the sanctions, as it is still suffering from the sanctions that were rightly imposed on the neighbouring countries.
It suffered enormously from the influx of refugees during the Kosovo war.
So we must admit that developments in Macedonia have followed surprisingly continuous democratic lines.
This is a country that has difficult inter-ethnic problems to deal with at home, and is resolving them with increasing success.
Let me emphasise that we can congratulate Macedonia on its exemplary legislation on ethnic minorities and the way it applies it and that the consistent policy of integrating the 30% of ethnic Albanians in government activity, in government policy and in society, is a precondition for peaceful coexistence in Macedonia.
I am glad to see that the hope Mr Swoboda expressed in his report will be fulfilled early in March, i.e. that we will finally have an EU delegation there and that we, as the European Union, will finally have a greater role to play there.
I believe that the opening of these negotiations on the stability and association process is the logical conclusion of a salutary and positive trend in that country.
As a sign of our political commitment, we must finally show Macedonia in practice that we are indeed rewarding its own welcome regional cooperation by genuinely embarking on regional projects.
Let me name just two small ones: the rapid resolution of the problem of the frontier crossing with Kosovo in Blace and the creation of Corridor 8, from Albania via Macedonia to Bulgaria.
I think Mr Swoboda has drafted an excellent report, and it has my wholehearted support.
Mr President, I too would like to compliment Mr Swoboda on his report.
I think it is a good thing that so many of us are expressing support for the approach he has adopted in it.
The report tackles stability in the region in a structural manner.
This is also the purpose of the pending agreement with the Republic of Macedonia which we are debating today.
Although the actual implementation of the Stability Pact has not yet started, the Commission has already developed the new instrument, entitled the Stabilisation and Association Agreement.
This marks the beginning of the treaty-based stabilising process for the countries of the former Yugoslavia.
These countries do not yet qualify for a pre-accession agreement.
The present agreement is a kind of pre-pre-agreement, but with a view to joining in future.
The instrument of joining countries together by means of active treaties is excellent, provided that the agreements stipulated in them are implemented dynamically, so that the required stabilisation can actually be attained.
Macedonia remains a potential minefield and has a history to match.
It does, however, have the ambition to break free from this image.
This requires internal stability.
The new government would like to tackle this matter and the agreement could be an agenda for reforms, including a direct role and equality for the Albanian minority.
More than anything, the country needs peace and quiet now, in order to put its internal house in order and to find the road to greater prosperity.
We, the social democrats, would urge the opposition to back these ideas.
They need to help support the much-praised Macedonian model.
But the country also - and especially - needs external stability.
What is the point of having internal stability if the surrounding environment is unstable?
This stability is required in the relations with Yugoslavia, Kosovo, Albania and Bulgaria.
The region should recognise that Macedonia exists and that it will continue to exist.
External stability also means open borders and regional cooperation.
Minorities and majorities need to be given room for human and cultural exchange.
Macedonia' s stability is very much linked with the developments in the neighbouring countries.
The Kosovo problem is well-known and the international community is present there on a massive scale.
It seems that the Albania factor is being underestimated.
The Union considers it untimely to reach a stability and association agreement with this country.
But what then instead?
It is the very argument to conclude an agreement with Macedonia and not yet with Albania that cause us so much concern, so much so that a passive stance from the Union vis--vis Albania is really not acceptable.
What does the Commission intend to do regarding this issue?
Yugoslavia is just as much a weak link in the stability process and, as such, a threat to Macedonia' s stability.
We need to wait and see what happens there.
The mood in Belgrade is becoming less predictable by the day.
We, however, second the Council' s decision to give the sanctions a different focus.
In this way, at least a serious attempt is being made to give the opposition, which is preparing for a new round of demonstrations, a shot in the arm.
What else will the Union undertake in this respect if the demand from the opposition - bringing forward elections - is met?
What else can we do to support this opposition?
Mr President, Commissioner, Kosovo was hopefully the last occasion on which international law could be interpreted as saying that dictators could persecute minorities in the most repellent way on the grounds that "it is happening within their own nation" .
When the USA and NATO and, finally, also the EU, reacted, it was already late, in fact very late.
A great deal of suffering could have been avoided if the EU, among others, has acted earlier and more decisively.
We, the European Union, therefore have a special responsibility to help, support and rebuild the Balkans now.
Our absolute objective must be to create the prior conditions for all countries in south-east Europe to be integrated with other countries in the EU - economically, politically and in terms of trade.
Fertile soil for the growth of democracy in this war-ravaged part of Europe is best provided through trade and economic integration.
We Liberals are prepared to go a long way and to do so quickly, just as Paolo Costa reported.
It is therefore with great satisfaction that we welcome the proposal that is now being made for a stabilisation and association agreement with Macedonia, and we thank Mr Swoboda for a very good report.
Macedonia deserves our support, especially in view of the self-sacrificial, disinterested work which the people and leaders of Macedonia undertook during the Kosovo war.
Now that Macedonia is prising itself loose from the crushing embrace of Communism and nationalism, it is our duty to act and provide support in no uncertain terms.
We should do exactly the same for the other countries in the Balkans.
This is an urgent duty for the EU.
Mr President, allow me in this context to remind MEPs - especially in view of a discussion earlier this evening - of the fact that the man who is mainly responsible for war, human degradation, murder and driving innocent people from their homes is still governing what remains of Yugoslavia, namely Serbia.
The man who is accused of genocide and who ought to be brought before the war crimes tribunal in the Hague still goes free.
I am talking about Milosevic.
As long as Milosevic is still there and Serbia is not pursuing a democratic path, Serbia constitutes a constant threat to peace throughout the Balkans, including in Macedonia.
Mr President, the agreement being promoted will be the first application of the Stability Pact in south-eastern Europe,
Its terms, which the Swoboda report accepts, are certainly not directed towards peace, but towards greater political and economic dominance of the country, and towards controlling its natural wealth, overexploiting its workforce and continuing to use that country as a springboard against the countries and peoples in the area who are resisting the new order.
All this, in exchange for the promise of future accession to the European Union.
The report accepts these attitudes along with the more general policy of the European Union on south-eastern Europe.
It is characteristic that the report congratulates FYROM on the constructive stance it maintained during the NATO attack, eulogises its pacifist role because it allowed its territory to be used as a base for NATO forces, but, of course, remains silent about the indignation of its people, which was manifested by mass demonstrations during the NATO bombardments.
Finally, because we consider that both the stability pact and the stabilisation and association process the European Union is implementing in countries in that area, will create new problems there, new tribulations for their peoples, and will reinforce the dominant role of the American and European imperialists, we will be voting against the report in an expression of our solidarity with the people of FYROM.
Mr President, Commissioner, one of the most basic aims of the European Union' s stability and association agreement with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is to establish stability and peace in the area, and this, of course, presupposes developing and maintaining good neighbourly relations between the countries involved.
I shall not bother you with details of the problem concerning the name FYROM, which as you must know, is the subject of a difference of opinion with Greece and of negotiations between the two countries lasting over four years, under the aegis of the Secretary General of the UN in the context of related Security Council resolutions, but also the conventional obligation of the respective parties pursuant to Article 5 of the so-termed Intermediate Agreement of 1995.
I do, however, think it appropriate to say that, at the forthcoming negotiations and with the conclusion of the association agreement, the European side must point out to the Skopje government the need for it to show appropriate constructive political will, so that it may contribute positively to a successful outcome of the talks in New York.
I should like to hope that such an appeal from Europe, with parallel emphasis on the difficulties that any further indecision would create for completing and implementing the association agreement, would be duly heeded and appraised accordingly by the Skopje government, so that it can respond appropriately, on the one hand, to Greece' s demonstrably conciliatory attitude concerning the specific issue, and, on the other hand, to the more general practical, declared intention and disposition of all the partners in the European Union, including Greece, to facilitate and support FYROM' s progress towards a United Europe.
Mr President, this is because I do not think that the harmonious day to day relations, contacts and communication between FYROM and Greece that have actually been achieved at both bipartite and multipartite level, and this mainly thanks to the practical arrangements of the intermediate agreement, I repeat, I do not think these sufficiently cover the conditions and criteria of good neighbourliness necessary, inter alia, for negotiating and concluding an association agreement.
On the contrary, I think that this demand can only be considered satisfied by a de jure full normalisation of FYROM' s relations with all its neighbours.
That, combined with the essential improvement of certain aspects of the internal situation in that country, in the area of minorities and democratic institutions, would round off the image of political maturity which FYROM has, in fact, presented in other respects and which has made our European family welcome closer relations with it.
Mr President, the agreement we are debating today, as analysed by Mr Swoboda, which I hope we will adopt tomorrow, constitutes the second politically positive step, after the stability pact for the area.
There is another small step, which is related to the recent partial lifting of the embargo decided by our 15 governments for Yugoslavia.
For about 10 years, the situation in the area has been fluid.
Both as an historical period and, in particular, as a political period, 10 years is a very long time.
Under those conditions, then, there has been a real failure.
In that sense, the agreement we will be voting on tomorrow, which contributes towards stability in the area, is de facto a move in the right direction.
In essence, FYROM is a miniature version of the former Yugoslavia, regardless of where one or another minority holds supremacy.
From that standpoint, the fact that so far it has resisted any influences from its wider environment is a very positive element and under no circumstances should any of us, any State, any policy or any view, impel that small republic towards external, disruptive movements in an effort to solve other problems, granted - let it be noted - that it has institutions which it can build upon still further and so become a real democracy.
In that area, there have been various policies from time to time, and what the European Union should guard against is the risk that, for ultimately superficial reasons, it may help to create banana republics elsewhere.
We must be sure that, in seeking allies in the area, we must not always choose anyone who offers.
We must choose those which are moderate, which have breadth of vision and which have a perception of peace and stability in the area.
I hope and wish, and am indeed certain, that the European Union, with maturity and with the measures it has begun to adopt, will little by little construct, in the wider area, the necessary environment which it needs itself.
Let us not deceive ourselves: a Europe, one part of which is being held back because of frictions, misinterpretations and conflicts, and because of nationalistic clashes, will never be a Europe that has brought its own house to the level it wants.
In any event, speaking now as a Greek, I want to tell some of the speakers I listened to earlier that much of what was said is fixated on other times and places.
They have quite failed to grasp the new conditions created in the area; the new and positive conditions which have been created, in very many cases on Greece' s initiative.
You should know that the country which cooperates most with FYROM and has the best relations with it, in the entire area, is Greece, and this has contributed greatly to the stability of the area.
I say this just so that we know where we stand.
Mr President, I found what Mr Souladakis said much more sensible than the statements by other colleagues from his Member State.
So I must say quite plainly that anyone who tries to tie the agreement with Macedonia to resolving the issue of the country' s name, as he does, will not only find Macedonia itself against him but all the other EU Member States too.
Let me also say quite openly that he is thereby doing huge damage to his own country' s interests.
It is in our interest to see stability and peace in the Balkans, and there is a chance of that, although the Stability Pact is in danger of becoming a stillborn entity.
I hope that is not the case, but the risk is there.
That is precisely why it is so urgent for the EU to take a bilateral approach to the individual states and for us to open up definite prospects of EU membership for Macedonia.
So I welcome Mr Swoboda' s excellent report, especially paragraph 12, which quite clearly maps out a European, an EU, prospect for Macedonia.
Without indulging in any illusions, I believe that is important, it has to happen.
We know it cannot happen overnight, but a definite statement to the effect that Macedonia is quite clearly a European country and therefore has the right to be a member of the European Union is a most important, confidence-building measure.
In my view, this is a unique opportunity to strengthen a democracy that has not only established a unique multi-ethnic government in this region but is also strengthening the autonomy of the local authorities, reforming the judicial and economic systems, and doing so under the most difficult conditions, in the aftermath of nationalism, Communism and war.
A few years ago, I had the privilege of inviting the current President and Prime Minister here as private individuals.
At the time they were still finding it very difficult to build on their various contacts here.
I am very happy to see they have kept the promise they made at the time: to build up a profoundly European democracy.
We must thank them for playing this important role in moving towards peace, stability and democracy, at a very critical time last year, as I said, and at a strategically crucial point.
So we are not just the donors here, we were also the recipients, and we owe it to the Macedonians to thank them for fulfilling a crucial European mission at that time.
That is why it is important to negotiate and ratify the agreement promptly, rapidly to upgrade the EU representation to official delegation status, for our Commissioner to visit Macedonia very soon, as I hear he will, and for us to open up a definite prospect of EU membership for this country, as the Swoboda report does.
.
This has been a very interesting general debate about the Balkans as a whole.
It was none the worse for that, but perhaps I will be forgiven for concentrating very largely on the report because there are some extremely important issues that I want to touch on.
I am delighted to be able to be able to set out the Commission's position on the report.
It is very helpful.
It is an excellent contribution by Mr Swoboda and his colleagues.
We are very grateful for his leadership on this issue and for that of some of his colleagues, a number of whom are in the House this evening - Mrs Pack, Mr Lagendijk and others.
I am very pleased that at our overall relations with FYROM are in such a good state.
Perhaps Mr Dupuis will forgive me for using that expression - both he and his interpreter - in the spirit of entente cordiale.
That has been helped by our excellent European Union representative in the country.
He has been a great friend to Parliament and a great servant of the Commission.
The imminent commencement of negotiations on a stabilisation and association agreement is the most powerful example of our good relations.
So to is the cooperation of FYROM in the rebuilding of Kosovo.
I am grateful to the authorities in Macedonia for their assistance in recent weeks in helping to cope with the considerable difficulties with the power supply in Kosovo.
Like honourable Members I recognise the stabilising role that this country has played during the Balkan tragedy, in particular when it comes to integrating the Albanian minority into the political and social life of the country.
I saw the newly-elected President Georgievski a few weeks ago and I was extremely impressed, as others have been, by his commitment to multi-ethnicity and pluralism.
Let me set out where matters now stand on these negotiations to which - as Mr Lagendijk said - other countries in the region are looking with very considerable interest.
The Council adopted on 24 January this year its negotiating directives for a stabilisation and association agreement with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
This represents the most important step forward in the stabilisation and association process of the western Balkans region initiated by the Commission in May 1999.
Let me make clear the main elements of those draft directives.
They cover the inclusion in the agreement of arrangements establishing a political dialogue with FYROM.
They cover provisions for enhanced regional cooperation including the prospect of establishing free trade areas between the countries of the region, though I must make it clear that there is no question of any attempt to recreate the state of Yugoslavia.
They cover the prospect of the establishment of a free trade area between the European Union and them within ten years of the entry into force of the agreement.
They cover provisions on the movement of workers, freedom of establishment, supply of services, current payments and movement of capital.
They cover a commitment by FYROM to approximate its legislation to that of the European Community, notably in key areas of the internal market; and they cover provisions on cooperation with FYROM in a wide range of fields, including justice and home affairs.
We are now making in the Commission the necessary preparations so that negotiations can start in March.
I am due to visit FYROM in the second week in March.
I hope to be able to set the process in motion then, although the formal negotiations will start very shortly thereafter.
At the time of that visit I will also, as recommended by honourable Members and others, be upgrading our representation in FYROM.
The target date for concluding the negotiations is December this year but this will depend to a very large extent on the goodwill and determination of the negotiators.
The agreement could enter into force in three to four years from now, given the time needed for ratification in Member States' parliaments.
I should like to comment very briefly on a number of other points in the draft resolution.
We accept that the agreement should to a certain extent serve as an example for other such agreements, although obviously we will also want to take account of the fact that we are dealing with different countries, each of which has its own identity and its own concerns.
I share the wide-spread concern that we should treat each country on its merits and not shackle everyone to the pace of the slowest in the development of relations with the Union.
That has never been the intention.
The very fact that negotiations are beginning first with FYROM, before all the others, is evidence that we can and do differentiate.
On the provision of regional aid referred to in the report we agree that our technical and financial assistance should go in part to projects having a cross-border or regional dimension.
We agree that there should be an evolutionary clause on the prospect of EU membership contained in the stabilisation and association agreement.
It will reflect the European Union's position on its relations with the countries of the western Balkans as set out in the Cologne European Council conclusions.
We strongly agree on the need to decentralise our assistance programmes to the maximum possible extent.
As for the arrangements covering European Union assistance to the western Balkans, Members will be aware that we are drawing up a new regulation to simplify and streamline their management and to put everything under one regulation.
I am aware that there is concern in FYROM and elsewhere at the end of the PHARE programme in these countries and, especially, at the loss of association with the PHARE name.
I note with considerable concern what Members say on this score.
I will take another look at the issue, although I should point out that having two PHARE programmes up and running risks real confusion.
I want to stress, however, that whatever the programme is called, our commitment to the integration of FYROM and its neighbours into the European family is stronger than ever.
In general I trust that Members of this House will share my pleasure that Macedonia has reached this stage relatively rapidly.
I hope that the other countries of the region will redouble their efforts to make similar progress.
I look forward to many similar debates to this over the next few years marking, I hope, the success of what we are trying to do in the Balkans which, for me, remains the single most important litmus-test of what Europe is able to do on its own doorstep.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.
Agreement on comitology
The next item is the report (A5-0021/2000) by Mrs Frassoni, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission on the implementation of the new Council decision of 28 June 1999 on comitology (1999/468/EC).
.
(IT) Mr President, the approval of this agreement with the Commission on procedures for implementing the Council decision on comitology marks the end of a saga which has kept Parliament busy for two years, along with a few enthusiasts scattered among the various institutions of the Union, whom many people do not hesitate to call masochists.
Until 1993, the way the Commission exercised its executive powers, and in particular the mysterious and even suspect committee arrangements, was creating conflict and mistrust between the institutions, and threatening to have serious consequences on the legislative procedure.
That is why, in accordance with Declaration No 31, annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam, the Union institutions have undertaken a complex task of negotiation and consultation, resulting in the new Council decision, which revises the old system quite substantially, although we are not entirely satisfied with it.
In particular, the decision outlines a form of parliamentary control whereby Parliament can sound the alarm if an implementing measure, deriving from an act adopted under the codecision procedure, oversteps the implementing powers delegated to the Commission.
During the protracted interinstitutional negotiations - which saw Parliament actively involved, thanks to the work of the rapporteur, Adelaide Aglietta - it was understood that the European Parliament and Commission would conclude an interinstitutional agreement on the procedures for implementing certain aspects of the new decision.
On the one hand, certain points which the Council did not intend to incorporate into the decision were to be made explicit and, on the other, the system for providing information about implementing measures and monitoring them was to be organised more precisely.
During the trialogue held on 6 October 1999 in Strasbourg, the Presidents of the European Parliament and the Commission approved the idea of concluding this agreement soon.
We believe we have respected that commitment, and indeed this was made relatively easy by the climate of trust and mutual respect evident throughout the negotiations with the Commission.
Essentially, the agreement deals with two points: one is the right of the European Parliament to be informed, which is the sine qua non for the genuine exercise of its right to intervene pursuant to Article 8 of the decision.
Hitherto, such information had been supplied on paper and unsystematically, and was of no use to our services; and indeed this was often the fault of Parliament itself.
From now on, the information will be provided by means of an electronic system called CIRCA, to which the European Parliament will have access.
This represents a real innovation, not only for us, but also - I am sure - for the Commission.
The other point is that Article 8 of the Council decision does not specify either the method by which the European Parliament is to sound the alarm, or the time limit within which it must exercise its restricted power of control.
Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the agreement confirm that, as a general rule, the European Parliament will adopt its resolution, stating its reasons, at a plenary sitting and has one month to exercise its right of intervention before the Commission adopts the draft implementing measure.
But we all realise that it is not always possible to wait a month before implementing a measure.
Therefore, the agreement contains explicit provisions on urgent procedure, including possible action by the committee responsible.
I want to end by stressing that we cannot assess whether this is a good agreement or not, we must wait and see how it works in practice.
The European Parliament needs to acquire the resources, which it currently lacks, to ensure efficient monitoring of implementing measures, and the Commission must accept that some of its practices need reorganising to provide proper information to Parliament and ensure that control can be effective.
Finally, it needs to be borne in mind that - whatever happens - the real solution to the problems of comitology for the European Parliament is still to change the procedure for implementing legislation laid down in the Treaties, and gradually to dismantle the committees whose existence represents an anomaly that severely restricts the Commission' s executive power and may prejudice the European Parliament' s legislative powers.
Mr President, comitology is a concept most people do not know how to handle and hardly anyone knows what it means.
It makes them think of secret societies and conspiracies, which is the way things used to be.
In fact, it implies nothing other than fixing the procedures for the exercise of the implementing powers conferred on the Commission.
The procedures for exercising these implementing powers take the form of a limited number of committee procedures.
Up until the Amsterdam Treaty, there were about 20 variations of these committee procedures, which created neither clarity in the implementation of legislation nor transparency for the citizens.
On the contrary, for a long time even the European Parliament was not informed.
For the European Parliament, the first step in the struggle for more transparency in this jungle of committees was to be informed, at least, of all that the European Commission intended to regulate in the context of these various committees.
Agreement was reached in 1988 in the form of an exchange of letters between Lord Plumb and Mr Delors.
A further step towards transparency and the involvement of the European Parliament came with what is known as the modus vivendi of 20 September 1994, which granted Parliament the right not only to be informed but also to intervene in certain cases.
It also gave it the possibility of scrutiny.
With the Amsterdam Treaty, the situation improved decidedly when the number of committee procedures was drastically reduced - as the European Parliament had long wanted - to three procedures, the administrative procedure, the regulatory procedure and the advisory procedure.
Now, following the Amsterdam Treaty, the rights of information and control granted to the European Parliament in the past need to be enshrined anew in an interinstitutional agreement.
Mrs Frassoni, our rapporteur, has done very careful work and identified the questions that have to be clarified in the context of that interinstitutional agreement and the administrative procedures that may have to be changed within Parliament.
A key problem is the time factor.
When the European Parliament is informed, it generally has to adopt a position within the very short timeframe of four weeks, should it so wish.
In matters relating to the health and safety of the people of the European Union, the European Commission, as guardian of the Treaties and the only institution with the right of initiative, must be in a position to react very rapidly, if necessary within a few hours or days.
Nevertheless, the European Parliament must retain the right to be informed and where appropriate also to react.
Our rapporteur identifies very useful solutions to these difficulties, which I and my group can only support in full.
I just have one more request.
In the German version, paragraph 2 of the resolution has been translated rather misleadingly and I urgently ask for clarification, which I would also like to see in the printed version later.
In my view, instead of "weitergefhrt werden mssen" the wording should be "erhalten bleiben mssen" .
The German version is not very clear here.
I would ask for that to be checked again.
For the rest, I warmly thank our rapporteur.
It is a difficult subject and I hope we have managed to make it somewhat easier to deal with now.
Mr President, I congratulate the rapporteur on her report.
I must add that it is a welcome change to see Mrs Frassoni in such a conciliatory mood and willing to reach compromises with the other institutions.
When it comes to the IGC, she is one of what the French call "les pures et dures" : no compromise, no deals with the other institutions; we would rather see the whole thing blocked than compromise our positions.
Yet here she is willing to accept the steps forward that have been achieved, which are far from matching Parliament' s original position on the issue of comitology.
Let us remember what is at stake here.
Parliament had four main criticisms of the comitology system as it existed prior to the new Council decision supplemented by this interinstitutional agreement.
Firstly, the whole system is obscure.
It is not transparent with hundreds of committees meeting with secret agendas and nobody knowing who is on the committees.
Here is a real step forward, in the new system that has been agreed.
We are to know who is on each committee.
We are to know when they meet.
We are to get the agendas.
We are to get the documents that are sent to them.
The whole system will be more open and transparent - if still rather complex.
So that is at least a step forward.
Our second criticism is that the system was very restrictive of the Commission.
We adopt legislation in the European Union.
We expect the Commission to implement it.
And then we have a system designed to hinder the Commission and make it more difficult - especially what was called the "contre-filet" system, under which the Council could block the Commission by a simple majority even when the Council was not capable of finding an alternative to the implementing measure concerned.
Here too there is at least some progress.
The Council will no longer be able to block implementing measures indefinitely beyond the three-month period unless it has a qualified majority to block it, in other words, unless there is substantial opposition among the Member States represented in the Council.
That is a more reasonable system.
That, too, is a step forward.
But on our other two criticisms, we are less satisfied.
The first criticism is of the system whereby the Commission is monitored, scrutinised, controlled if you like, only by a committee appointed by Member States or the Council not by Parliament.
The legislative authority, Council and Parliament, should be equal.
We confer implementing powers on the Commission, but then it is only a Council or Member State appointed body that can blow the whistle and say no to the Commission and stop the implementing measure.
Parliament has no equivalent power.
True, we are now given the beginning of such a power in this new system.
We are to receive all the draft implementing measures forwarded to a committee at the same time as it is sent to the committee.
We will have the chance to scrutinise, to debate, to question.
But we will only have the right to formally challenge the Commission if we think it has gone beyond the delegation that we have given to the Commission in the legislation.
In other words, we can challenge the measure for being ultra-vires but not on its content.
And in a democracy, Parliament should be able to challenge the content.
Not that we do so every week.
We are not seeking to immerse ourselves in implementing decisions, but it is a democratic safeguard that we should be able to do so on those few occasions when it really would be necessary.
That is lacking in this new system, or at least is only there in embryonic form.
Finally, our fourth criticism is that if an implementing measure is blocked through the comitology system it is referred back, not to both branches of the legislative authority, but to the Council alone, which has the right possibly to take an alternative measure.
That is not correct.
Both branches adopt the legislation - Council and Parliament - that confers implementing powers on the Commission.
If such implementing measures are referred back, it should be to both branches, not to one branch alone.
Overall we have a system which has made some progress.
The supplementary aspects that arise from the interinstitutional agreement with the Commission are welcome, but that could not change the basic decision of the Council.
Even here, we have renounced voluntarily - because this did not happen automatically - the Plumb-Delors agreement as part of the overall compromise.
We have been willing to relinquish the provisions in that.
We shall have to be very vigilant on what used to be covered by that agreement and is not fully covered by the new decision.
We must be very vigilant.
So it is a step forward.
My group reluctantly accepts it as a step forward.
We are not as enthusiastic about compromising as Mrs Frassoni.
We recognise that there are limitations and the issue will no doubt come back in a few years' time.
If we want a Union that is democratic and transparent to the fullest degree we will have to revisit this subject.
Mr President, first I want to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Frassoni, for her work.
It is never easy working on comitology.
Mrs Schleicher referred to a kind of committee magic, something we have long talked about.
Certainly the process has always been very complex, as a result of historical decisions, and these must eventually be rationalised.
In my opinion, the agreement reached between Commission and Parliament is a clear rationalisation of the process.
From our point of view, it satisfies the fundamental interests of Parliament.
Mr Corbett set out Parliament' s concerns.
He says some of them have been satisfied and others have not.
I would say the ones the Commission was able to satisfy have been satisfied.
Mr Corbett is raising issues the Council decision does not cover, and unfortunately we can go no further on those.
So how far have we come?
There is no doubt that we have reached a fundamental point, highlighted by Mrs Frassoni, given that we now have an automatic information system.
This will facilitate two activities Parliament is especially interested in.
One is knowing how the committees operate, about their composition, agendas, descriptions, and so on, and the other is the right of scrutiny over actual decisions.
I think this is a good agreement.
It is a good agreement which undoubtedly improves the transparency of the process.
From here on things are going to be easier.
But the agreement we are reaching today should not be regarded as a backward step compared with the Plumb/Delors Agreement.
Mr Corbett referred to that, but the new model is certainly much more complex, different because the situation is now different, and, in our opinion, much more coherent.
We have made a start, and we hope the work will produce some excellent results.
We think there are other positive advances too.
To a certain extent we have gone beyond agreements which are already dated and, by realigning old procedures with the new situation, we aim to clear up everything still outstanding from the past.
From the Commission' s point of view, our conclusion is that this is a good agreement, and we want to thank the Members of Parliament who worked on it - especially Mrs Frassoni.
We hope that this new climate means we have achieved the result we were seeking, which is greater transparency and better information about the decisions of the Commission as an executive.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Solbes Mira.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.
Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure
The next item is the report (A5-0013/2000) by Mr Knrr Borrs, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on a proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 3605/93 on the application of the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure annexed to the Treaty establishing the European Community (COM(1999) 444 - C5-0174/1999 - 1999/0196(CNS))
Mr President, I am also pleased to welcome the Spanish Commissioner, Mr Solbes Mira, whom I have congratulated more than once, inside and outside this Parliament, on the excellent work he did in Spain on the subject of European convergence.
The proposal for an amendment to this regulation on the application of the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure, annexed to the Treaty of Maastricht, raises fundamental issues concerning the switch to the 1995 European system of accounts, which, as you know, replaced the previous System of Accounts adopted in 1979, and in particular the emergence of new financial product categories, consistency in the calculation of the ratios of government deficit to gross domestic product on the basis of ESA 95 and, finally, recognising the importance of calculating interest expenditure and the consistency of the latter with this new methodology.
In our view, the main purpose of the proposal for a regulation is to update the definitions and the assessments of some of the economic operations involved in the calculation of deficits, as reflected in the Treaty establishing the European Community, the Treaty of Maastricht, which lays down the maximum percentages which the government deficit must not exceed as a ratio of GDP at market prices in the various Member States.
To date, the Member States have calculated this GDP in accordance with the criteria laid down in ESA 79.
The most recent estimate of the deficit was submitted in September 1999 and it relates to the 1998 financial year.
Therefore, if the regulation is adopted, the estimate which is due to appear in March 2000, the first estimate of the deficit for the 1999 accounting year, will be made using the new system.
We know the Member States have done their duty - if I can use that expression - doing their calculations and preparing their national accounts in line with ESA 95, and they have already published their corresponding estimates.
In addition to incorporating a new methodology, this has meant making slight changes to most accounting aggregates and operations, on account of the aforesaid methodological changes, and also the improved statistical information included in the estimates.
These changes may of course alter the government deficits in terms of the Member States' national accounting.
I will now describe, very briefly, the five areas where the most important changes may occur.
First, the adjustments to the scope of what is meant by 'government institutional sector' under ESA 95.
This is important, since government deficit means the deficit accumulated by all forms of government.
The non-availability of precise criteria for the definition of government deficit would produce distortions in the estimates of the Member States' government deficits.
Secondly, the deficit - or, if applicable, the surplus - means the ESA 95 government sector' s net borrowing requirement or lending ability respectively
Thirdly, government investment means the gross fixed capital formation of the general government sector, as defined in ESA 95.
Fourthly, government debt is defined in accordance with ESA 95, as are the flows or interest stemming from assets/liabilities.
Fifthly and finally, the aggregate to which government debt will relate will be gross domestic product at current market prices, estimated in accordance with the 1995 European System of Accounts' definitions.
To summarise, I consider that this proposal constitutes a satisfactory adaptation of the criteria laid down in the 1995 European System of Accounts, and I therefore approve it in full, as did the committee.
Mr President, Commissioner, let me say at the outset that my group welcomes this proposal because it makes the basic statistical data for an economic and monetary union directed at stability and real growth more harmonised, directly comparable and more accurate.
We have already heard about the various aspects involved.
What I think is crucial is that henceforth the statistical data will be more reliable and comparable.
We need that because the various European Union bodies and all the Member States within monetary union have to be able to depend on one another.
It is important to adjust the procedure for two reasons.
Firstly, for the single market.
It is most important quite generally in a single market to have reliable and directly comparable data and statistics so as to give an accurate picture of the situation and development trends.
Secondly, for economic and monetary union.
The regulation dating from 1993 on the application of the Protocol must be brought into harmony with the methodology of the European system of accounts at national and regional level.
That is vitally important to the accurate and reliable calculation of deficits.
This adjustment will make it possible to estimate the deficits and debts in the Member States more precisely.
These technical changes will have a very real impact on the actual position of the countries, since the data will automatically be amended in line with the public deficit.
I also welcome the fact that the estimates of the deficits for the 1999 financial year that are due to be published in March 2000 are already based on the new ESA, i.e. the analysis is based on consolidated aggregates that are economically relevant.
Let me also briefly use this debate as an opportunity to urge all the governments and political parties to do their utmost to ensure that this procedure never has to be initiated for an excessive deficit.
It is good that the procedure exists.
We need it because it lends our criteria the necessary seriousness and credibility.
The citizens ask what happens if the criteria are not met.
Thanks to these procedures and other measures we can prove that we are taking the criteria and ourselves seriously.
Another important point is that we must do all we can, not just to prevent excessive deficits, but also to further reduce public deficits.
I know what I am talking about and I will conclude by telling you why I am so glad we are holding this debate!
We are currently holding a debate in my own country on whether the former minister for finance actually gave us accurate information on the deficit.
In my country, Austria, new elections had to be held in 1995 in order to meet the Maastricht criteria and persuade our political partner to rethink his approach.
I must also tell you that in the year 2000, when there is so much talk about us, the coalition talks with the SP failed - and unfortunately so - because the Socialist Party brought down the negotiated austerity and consolidation programme.
That is a prime reason why the new government had to be formed in Austria; for the Austrian People' s Party, the VP, wants to continue to act as guarantor of economic stability.
The VP wants to ensure that we continue to meet the Maastricht criteria and reduce the public deficit, as we have agreed here.
Mr President, the beauty of statistical data is that it is not only reliable but also comparable.
This is of great importance, especially in the light of European unification and the completion of the internal market.
This is why this report is also so politically charged: a report, by the way, on which we would like to congratulate the rapporteur warmly.
It also inspires a few political comments.
The Stability Pact is a given in Europe.
All countries participating in the euro have committed themselves, in the medium term, to striving towards a budget which is either balanced or shows up a slight surplus.
This, of course, does not mean that, if the economic climate is less than favourable, the budget could not fluctuate up or down slightly.
It means that, in the long and medium term, there should be a balance or surplus.
The stronger the position of the participating countries, the stronger the euro will be.
As a result, the three percent standard will rarely be exceeded, not even in a bad economic climate.
This is the theory behind it, anyway.
We have always been of the opinion that these criteria should be stringently met.
That is of great importance in order to turn the EMU into a success, now and in the future.
Strict compliance with the Stability Pact can thus contribute to a culture of stability within all EMU Member States.
Various Member States have taken one-off measures to be able to meet the criteria.
We are of the opinion that the Member States' budget policy should be strictly supervised, to ensure that the measures continue to be taken in the spirit of the prescribed criteria at all times.
A drop in standards should not be allowed.
We are also of the opinion that a further reduction in the burden and reducing the national debt should be prioritised.
Indeed, we still have not managed to stop passing on the burden to future generations.
.
(ES) Mr President, many thanks, first of all, to the rapporteur for his splendid work.
It was a subject which called for a large dose of technical skill and I think Mr Knrr has handled it with great precision and professionalism.
I would not presume to be able to summarise the content of our proposal better than he has done;
I would just like to add one small point: in addition to adaptation to ESA 95, there are two small technical changes which Mr Knrr knows all about, relating to interest and the valuation of debt in foreign currency.
I just mention that to complete the view of the process.
Secondly, I would like to thank Mr Knrr for his speediness.
He has done really good work in a very short time.
This is an important subject for certain references which we have heard subsequently.
What we are seeking with this legislation is not to make the statistics reliable and comparable - they already are - but to make them more reliable and more comparable.
Obviously, the fact that Parliament has taken its decision so quickly will mean that the March figures can already be calculated on the basis of these new criteria.
That being so, I believe the final result will be better.
The figures will be more reliable and more comparable and I think the concerns some Members have raised about compliance with the stability pact can be better addressed.
This regulation is purely instrumental.
It does deal with the substance of the problem some of you have raised.
But we do need to think about how we deal with the substance of the problem.
The stability pact is in place and we will continue to press ahead with monitoring compliance by the various Member States, despite the fact that the results are clearly positive in all the Member States where we have analysed the position as regards the stability of the government deficit.
But we see no reason to lower our guard.
We must press on in that direction because we know it is vital.
So, once again - and finally - I want to thank you for your help in allowing us to measure stability with greater technical certainty and better comparability.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Solbes Mira.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.
Increasing penal sanctions against counterfeiting of the euro
The next item is the report (A5-0020/2000) by Mrs Cederschild, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on a draft Framework Decision of the Council on increasing protection by penal sanctions against counterfeiting in connection with the introduction of the euro (5116/1999 - C5-0332/1999 - 1999/0821(CNS)).
.
(SV) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen (all the more welcome for being so few in number), one might have thought that it was an unimportant subject which was to be discussed at this hour, but that is not the case.
It is a definite and concrete issue.
It is about our common currency.
How many people here know that this currency is being counterfeited and that we have a quite unacceptable state of affairs?
We cannot permit our common currency to become weaker through its being counterfeited.
The ECB, ECOFIN, Europol, OLAF and the Commissioner responsible for legal questions have therefore realised that common countermeasures must be taken quickly in order to close the loopholes left by the legislation.
It is easy to forget that it will be possible to exchange the old currencies for twenty years after the new currency has been introduced.
It is therefore important to include these currencies too in the section of the present programme of measures which deals with penal sanctions.
This is something which Parliament has said it wants to see added.
The Council ought to have given Parliament the stipulated three-month period within which to consider, too, the last document produced on this matter, but we are all aware of how urgent it is to have these measures put safely in place.
Because the issue is to be decided upon in March in the Council, Parliament has cause to adopt a position on the proposal now, so that the Member States have time also to take due account of Parliament' s points of view in the decision which has to be made in March.
Any country which began to make difficulties would incur a responsibility for the currency, and that country would be accountable, both morally and economically, if its actions were to contribute to a delay.
A country which acted in that way would bring a lot of ill will upon itself.
On 1 January 2002 the euro will be in circulation.
The whole of the Union must have the same protection, a type of protection which prohibits counterfeiting, not only of currencies in circulation but also of currencies which will be in circulation.
It is important that, in time, there should be a more or less similar-looking form of protection under criminal law in all countries.
The Commission has proposed measures aimed at providing information, together with penal sanctions, preventive measures and the pooling of experience.
These measures do, in fact, entail a certain necessary harmonisation in as much as the lowest acceptable maximum penalty for currency counterfeiting is to be eight years' imprisonment.
Trading with counterfeit currencies and the possession of counterfeiting equipment will also become criminal offences.
Quite simply, we are to have a minimum level for the maximum penalty.
The denominations of the euro are well known.
Modern computer equipment can be used to cause a very great deal of damage if we do not protect ourselves.
Parliament has tabled a number of amendments to the present proposal, for example in regard to jurisdiction, the idea being that a person may only be prosecuted and sentenced in the one country for the same crime.
There are also proposed sanctions against companies which are involved in counterfeiting, this being a measure which we would encourage.
The new applicant States are also encouraged to adapt to these regulations.
It has taken two years for the Council and the Commission to produce this proposal.
It is essential that the decision should now be taken in March.
To delay, or perhaps even risk damage to the euro, would be indefensible.
It would also be a betrayal of the people who will be handling the new, unfamiliar notes.
In particular, it is believed that counterfeiters will turn their attention to countries outside the euro zone, where people are less familiar with the new currency.
The protective measures cover these countries too, and the views expressed by these countries have carried a lot of weight.
The present proposal is therefore staunchly inclusive and reciprocal in character, accepting responsibility for a variety of interests in a way which imposes obligations upon others.
The Council must now convene in March and make the relevant decision.
Thank you for listening.
Thank you, too, those who contributed to this matter' s being dealt with swiftly.
I am thinking in particular of the Group of the Party of European Socialists.
Mr President, first I want to compliment the rapporteur, Charlotte Cederschild, on drawing up this report, which is an excellent point of departure for increasing protection by penal sanctions against counterfeiting in connection with the introduction of the euro.
The euro will enter into circulation on 1 January 2002 and will become one of the world' s most important reserve currencies.
Due to its importance on a world scale, the euro will be particularly exposed to the risk of counterfeiting and forgery.
This draft decision therefore lays down a set of minimum standards intended to harmonise criminal law in this field and make its application by each Member State simpler and more effective.
It also provides for the euro to be protected even prior to its circulation, which will fill a gap in legislation in some Member States.
I expressly support the rapporteur as regards the need to extend this protection to national currencies which can continue to be exchanged after they have been withdrawn from circulation.
This means that every Member State must guarantee the establishment of effective, adequate penal sanctions, which act as a deterrent against the offences covered by the draft framework decision.
As to the proposal to establish a maximum custodial sentence of not less than eight years, I do not think that this will raise any problems as far as my country is concerned, even though the maximum sentence for counterfeiting under its criminal code is currently five years in prison, as it has already expressed willingness to make this amendment.
I also call on those few Member States still harbouring reservations to resolve them so that a decision can rapidly be reached on this matter, for the reasons our rapporteur set out earlier when she called for this to be done.
Mr President, this draft framework decision represents the first time a common proposal on crime has been put forward, with legislation to be applied by all fifteen Member States at the same time.
We are therefore making progress towards the aim of developing and confirming the status of the European Union as an area of freedom, security and justice, as expressed at Tampere.
Mr President, I need not repeat what the rapporteur said or the points Mr Coelho made.
All that is indeed very true and correct.
It is easy to counterfeit the euro.
We are going through a dangerous transitional phase in which a phenomenon has appeared in criminal law that is perhaps unique in monetary history.
It is that a currency that does not even exist yet, that is not in circulation, but exists only as bank deposit money, can nevertheless be counterfeited already.
Yet because that currency is not yet in circulation as such, counterfeiting euros does not at present constitute a criminal offence.
It is a highly complex problem.
If we do not act promptly - as Mrs Cederschild rightly said - anyone can produce a few counterfeit euros now and possibly not be prosecuted for subsequently putting them into circulation.
Let me say in passing that this may seem an attractive prospect for a number of people.
So what is the European Union doing about it?
It is doing a number of things that are right, as Mrs Cederschild has described; but, in the context of these things she described, Parliament must look not so much at the content of the framework decision, not so much at the report drawn up by Mrs Cederschild, but more at the procedures that are being applied.
The manner in which the Council, which is by far the most undemocratic institution in Europe, consulted the European Parliament makes a mockery of the concept of democracy.
We received a text for consultation which the Council had been working on for a very long time, incidentally with only partial success - I will come to that in a moment.
Now the European Parliament is supposed to state its position on this complex, difficult and, at times, contradictory Council document in the space of three months.
It is only thanks to the immense efforts of Mrs Cederschild and to Parliament' s decision not to stand by its democratic right to conduct its advisory procedure over an adequate period of time and to have all the documents available in all the languages, that we have now managed to give our position by the date set by the Council, so that the decision scheduled for March can indeed be taken.
On a subject as important as counterfeiting and protection against counterfeiting and harmonising the necessary criminal law provisions we cannot really work at the ridiculous pace the Council is demanding of us.
So let me state quite clearly here, on behalf of my group, that we discussed at length with Mrs Cederschild whether it is reasonable to work like this.
We concluded that it is not, but given the importance of the issue we nonetheless agreed to accept this procedure.
This framework decision does without any doubt represent some progress.
Only, as Mrs Cederschild pointed out, in the end it does not fully achieve the legal certainty the Council wanted because various shortcomings have not been dealt with.
They relate to the minimum rules we are seeking to establish, the minimum rules relating to a punishable offence and in particular the application of the same criminal law norms in all Member States, including those that have not yet introduced the euro but where it could theoretically be counterfeited.
One reason they have not been dealt with is that as ever the leopard cannot change its spots, i.e. in the case of this framework decision, which specifically relates to judicial cooperation, the Council once again prefers to adhere to the level of government cooperation.
That is why, and I quote, this framework decision "is confined to supplementing the provisions of the International Convention of 20 April 1929 for the suppression of counterfeiting and its Protocol" , i.e. the provisions of a timeworn international convention that is a good 71 years old.
That means that the legal basis we are now seeking to establish to protect the euro does not derive from Community legislation, as it should, but merely takes the form of provisions supplementing an international convention dating back 71 years.
I leave it to the assembled company in this Chamber to decide whether that can be the future of a European Union based on judicial cooperation.
Thank you for your attention during our night sitting together.
Mr President, the launch of the euro could well be a heaven-sent opportunity for counterfeiters.
The fact is people are suddenly going to lose all their currency references, and that means they will be at serious risk of easily accepting forged euros because they are not very familiar with the genuine article.
So the Council is naturally worried and is seeking to establish sanctions, primarily criminal, applicable in all the countries of Europe, against offences of this kind.
No doubt the Council could have been satisfied with a simple resolution recommending that Member States adopt national legislation to that effect.
That is what I would have preferred, personally.
But, probably through lack of confidence in the zeal of certain members, the Council has preferred to implement a legal instrument which is more binding at European level: a framework decision.
Now that is where the difficulties begin, because criminal law comes under national sovereignty and the Treaty of Maastricht contains no specific provision covering this situation for the euro - so as not to frighten the voters by over-egging the pudding.
The draft framework decision before us today tries to cover up this lacuna by referring to Articles 31 and 34(2)(b) of the Treaty.
However, I find these passports inadequate.
Article 31 only envisages minimum common rules for criminal acts in certain cases, specifically restricted to organised crime, terrorism and drug trafficking.
Counterfeiting is not on the list.
Article 34, a product of the Treaty of Amsterdam, only lays down the new form of a framework decision, and clearly this only applies to the existing powers of the European Union.
So we come back to the previous problem.
In other words, the Council has not succeeded in giving this text a credible legal basis.
In a way, this is deferred punishment for its lack of honesty, at the time, in presenting the Maastricht Treaty to the voters.
I would also like to make a more general point.
Not so long ago we were dealing with one or more reports on questions of principle relating to the euro in virtually every part-session.
But there has been nothing for a year.
Just a few little technical reports like this one on counterfeiting.
The Commission' s communication on its strategic objectives for 2000-2005, which we have debated this week, contained absolutely nothing on this vast subject, except the reminder, in a single line, that the euro coins and notes are due to come into circulation on 1 January 2002.
However, there are many underlying problems yet to be resolved.
Let us mention, for example, the disturbing lack of public interest, the definition of monetary policy objectives abusively reduced to the mere fight against inflation, the strange coupling of monetary federalism to a lack budgetary or fiscal federalism, the status of the present applicant countries, when they become members, vis--vis the euro zone, the confused reaction of the international markets to this currency with no homogeneous popular foundation, and so on.
Do I also need to mention that investors who sold dollars to buy euros have lost 20% since 1 January 1999, 40% if they bought bonds, and no less than 55% if they sold yen to buy euros?
Mr President, for those unfortunate investors even real euros are false money.
These are gigantic problems but they seem to be taboo here.
I should like to take over the baton from the previous speaker.
There are a number of questions of principle which are demanding solutions, because the point of departure is, of course, that the regulation of criminal law is a national concern.
Criminal law is part of each individual nation' s own cultural tradition, and it is very difficult to arrive at common definitions of what is to be understood by these basic legal concepts.
I appreciate Mrs Cederschild' s work, and my point of departure will be her search - in connection with the Tampere Summit - for common definitions and common regulations regarding what is punishable and what common sanctions can be applied.
She would like to devise these sanctions jointly so as to arrive at a coherent criminal justice system for offences which have particular relevance for the EU.
But the problem is that there is no legal basis for this, and with good reason, because the regulation of criminal law belongs to the sphere of national jurisdiction.
In that context, I want to ask the following question of the Commission' s and the Council' s representatives: is the legal basis which has been invoked adequate?
In my view, it is clearly in conflict with, and far exceeds the scope of, Article 34, paragraph 2, point b where a legal basis is established for so-called framework decisions which are binding upon the Member States in regard to the desired objectives, but in which it is left to the national authorities to determine the form and methods of implementation.
What of course characterises the present draft framework decision is the fact that the Member States' obligations are laid down in detail.
There is no freedom of choice regarding methods and implementation.
In my view, this exceeds the parameters of the legal basis.
I should like an answer from the Commission and the Council, for I consider it obvious that Article 31 does not supply the relevant legal basis.
Mr President, Commissioner, let me begin by warmly congratulating and thanking the rapporteur and pointing out that, in her report, she does not just welcome the draft framework decision but also proposes a few changes, which have been referred to by various speakers but which we cannot discuss in detail now, to supplement and improve the text.
It is crucially important to continue the success story of the euro and we must make every effort not to spoil this success story or put it at risk by taking inadequate measures to prevent counterfeiting - and we are well aware of the initial attempts that are being made.
We have all noted that the conversion phase will bring uncertainty and risks with it.
So, in addition to the efforts to combat counterfeiting, to ensure the sound implementation of the provisions, the planned information campaign will of course play a key role and here we still have serious work to do.
We are also concerned with the question of cooperation.
We need to define the precise responsibilities of the ECB, the national central banks, the Commission and Europol pertaining to all matters relating to counterfeiting of the euro.
I also think we should perhaps consider setting up an interinstitutional or EU body in charge of coordinating the cooperation work.
In the same context, we could establish an early warning system functioning round the clock, together with a common information system for the rapid exchange of data between the responsible authorities.
Aside from the report, which we welcome, many questions have arisen that still need to be resolved.
I hope the debate we are holding here will bring some clarification.
Mr President, Mrs Cederschild, ladies and gentlemen, how safe is the euro?
That is, after all, a question the people often ask.
And that question will of course become increasingly pressing with the approach of 1 January 2002, the date when they will have euros in their pockets.
For the safety of the euro is not just a matter of the stability and external value of the currency but, in fact, also of protecting the euro against counterfeiting.
That too is a concern of the people, for, as has rightly been said, this will be a new currency for them, new in terms of how it looks and also how it is used.
Of course all the citizens of the EU Member States will also be faced with the novelty of a currency that is valid over such a wider area, and even beyond Europe, as a reserve currency.
They will need time to get used to that too.
So it is clearly necessary to ask what the EU is doing to protect the euro against counterfeiting.
And that is what we are discussing at this late hour.
This really is a subject that is close to the citizen, so it is a pity it is being debated at such a late hour.
But that cannot be helped.
Of course, the European Central Bank has been looking into the matter for a very long time.
After all, it is responsible for technical measures to protect against counterfeiting.
As has also been pointed out, in summer 1998 the Commission submitted a communication listing a very wide variety of areas where measures need to be taken, such as information, further training - an important area, cooperation between the euro-states and of course even beyond them, and measures under criminal law.
That is what this framework decision is about.
Mrs Cederschild, let me offer you sincere thanks on behalf of the Commission and, above all, let me also thank Parliament for being prepared to give its position in the space of such a short time.
I certainly appreciate that.
The framework decision aims to ensure that the Member States apply the same definition of counterfeiting offences.
Of course the first condition for uniform action is always to have uniform definitions and, as was emphasised, what we are basically trying to do is to ensure that the euro is protected even before it is physically introduced.
Naturally, the Commission is also glad that the European Parliament' s prompt decision - and I hope the vote will be in favour - means the framework decision can enter into force very rapidly now, so that we can begin to transpose it.
For the Commission has been asked to report, as it will in the first half of next year, on the progress in transposing it in the Member States, on whether the serious nature of this issue is being matched by serious action.
It has been pointed out that this framework decision is in fact a decision in the area of criminal law.
In that respect we must recognise this innovation, this step, even if, as Mr Schulz just pointed out, simply supplementing a rather old convention is not really a particularly bold step.
In reply to the question whether the Commission considers that the framework decision has an adequate legal basis under the Treaty, the Commission believes that the right basis is being applied here.
The framework decision will, however, have to be supplemented by other legal acts in future.
The Commission will submit a proposal for a regulation on cooperation between all the responsible authorities and on cooperation with Europol.
That proposal will establish a duty to cooperate, and a duty on the part of the national authorities to notify Europol of cases of counterfeiting and to present any confiscated counterfeit money to the European Central Bank for identification and classification, so that effective measures can then be taken.
On the question of coordinating the various measures, since early 1998, the Commission, followed now by OLAF, has been working with experts on the subject from the Member States, the European Central Bank and Europol on means of effectively combating counterfeiting of the euro in advance.
As Mr Karas just pointed out, a few weeks ago the Commission submitted a proposal for an information campaign on the euro, to which it proposed allocating as much as EUR 32 million.
That is a volume of funding that can be put to very effective use, a large amount; and of course the information campaign will also focus very strongly on protecting the euro against counterfeiting.
I believe that this debate shortly before midnight will also teach a salutary lesson to all those counterfeiters who believe their hour has come, because they think the EU is no longer awake at this late hour!
Thank you very much, Commissioner Schreyer.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.
(The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m.)