# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 123
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 and proposed budget for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi
Implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, including the functioning of the existing mechanisms and award of contracts for procurement
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Introduction
The recommendations of the Advisory Committee in paragraphs 14 and 17 below would entail a reduction of $6,178,800 in the proposed budget for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006.
The Committee also makes a number of observations and recommendations with regard to the administration and management of the Logistics Base and opportunities for further savings.
The documents used by the Advisory Committee in its consideration of the financing of the Base, as well as with regard to the implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, including the functioning of the existing mechanisms and the awards of contracts for procurement, are listed at the end of the present report.
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004
On the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, the General Assembly, in resolution 57/320 of 18 June 2003, appropriated an amount of $22,208,100 gross for the maintenance of the Base for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004.
The total amount of appropriation has been assessed on Member States.
As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the Base, expenditures for the period amount to $22,059,100 gross ($20,682,000 net), which is $149,000 gross lower than the appropriation of $22,208,100 gross.
The net decrease of $149,000 reflects a decrease of $1,595,200 under operational costs, which is largely offset by an increase of $1,446,200 under civilian personnel.
The additional requirements under civilian personnel are due mainly to a high turnover of international staff assigned to the Base, resulting in increased costs associated with assignment and repatriation; in addition, post adjustment increased from 19.3 per cent in July 2003 to 31 per cent in June 2004.
The Committee was informed upon enquiry that seven international staff members had recently left the Base and five new staff members had arrived there; the seven international staff members were highly qualified people in managerial positions and most of them had left the Base for new missions.
The Committee points out that, while the missions benefit from receiving experienced staff from the Logistics Base, the Base is losing expertise needed to effectively maintain the strategic deployment stocks and this may have an adverse effect on Base activities.
The Base and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should exercise caution in the number and duration of assignments.
This issue is also addressed in the Committee's general report on peacekeeping operations (A/59/736).
In a related matter, the Committee understands that the administration, in cooperation with the host Government, is taking some measures that could reduce the high turnover of staff and this could ameliorate the situation just described.
According to the administration, an international school will be opened in Brindisi in September 2005 (at no additional cost to the United Nations); this should make Brindisi a more attractive duty station.
The Committee trusts that the administration will undertake other viable measures to stabilize the staffing situation at the Base.
The unspent balance of $1,595,200 under operational costs is attributable mainly to:
• reduced requirements under maintenance of communications and information technology equipment, owing to the launching of new missions and the slower than expected arrival of strategic deployment stocks replenishment, which led in turn to a reduction in maintenance and repair cost of communications and information technology equipment;
• reduced requirements under facilities and infrastructure, owing mainly to the cancellation of three projects for the renovation and alteration of buildings because of the delay in approval from authorities;
• lower than anticipated cost of repair and maintenance of vehicles, owing to a delay in the arrival of strategic deployment stocks vehicles and owing to the direct delivery of the vehicles to the missions; and
• reduced requirements under training fees, supplies and services, owing to the start-up of new missions, which required Base staff to remain at the Base, resulting in the cancellation of planned training events.
The comments of the Advisory Committee on the information in the performance report on individual objects of expenditure can be found, where relevant, in the discussion of the proposed budget for the period 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 in the paragraphs below.
The Committee notes that the 2003/04 period is the first period for which the Logistics Base has submitted its performance indicators against the planned results-based framework set out in the 2003/04 budget.
The Committee encourages the administration to further improve the results-based budgeting presentation by improving measurability and transparency in the presentation of performance indicators and outputs.
For example, consistent with the presentation of the planned output, the performance indicator for handled aircraft movements should have also included aircraft movements for the World Food Programme.
Moreover, the performance report should have provided an explanation of significant variations in performance indicators, compared with the planned output, such as a significant increase in the number of contracts actually administered (448 contracts), compared to the planned 75 contracts.
The Committee trusts that full advantage will be taken of the fact that most activities of the Base are quantifiable and measurable and results achieved can be easily compared against planned outputs.
Information on performance for the current period
The Advisory Committee was informed that the cash available for the Base as at 31 January 2005 was $6.6 million and that unliquidated obligations for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 amounted to $2,148,000.
The Advisory Committee was informed that, as at 31 January 2005, the incumbency for the Base for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 was as follows:
The Advisory Committee was provided with expenditure data for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 as at 31 December 2004 (see annex I below).
Expenditure for the period amounted to $17,333,600 gross ($16,527,100 net) against an apportionment of $28,422,000 gross ($26,861,400 net).
Proposed budget for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
Mandate and planned results
The Advisory Committee notes that, as compared to 2004/05, the presentation of the framework along five programmatic lines has been discontinued in favour of a single support component; the outputs are grouped under the following core support functions: strategic deployment stocks and United Nations reserve stocks management; communications hub and information technology network operations; training services; management and administration of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi; and San Vito refurbishment plan.
Most indicators of achievement and outputs are measurable (see para.
8 above).
The Committee's observation on planned output “Provision of ground support to 140 aircraft movements” is contained in paragraph 8 above.
The Committee is also of the view that the output “Maintenance of worldwide communication and information technology networks” should have contained, in addition to the indicator of 90 satellite links maintained, measurable indicators for voice, video and data network maintained (see also para.
8 above).
With regard to the output “San Vito refurbishment plan”, the Advisory Committee notes that the proposed budget includes a non-recurrent provision of $5,123,700 and a recurrent provision of $233,000, a total of $5,356,700, for the proposed expansion of the Base into the former United States base at San Vito, 10 kilometres from the Brindisi Base.
It is indicated in paragraph 6 of the budget that the Base has outgrown the existing facilities at Brindisi for communication and information technology operations and is constrained in terms of open storage areas, particularly for vehicle parking; the expansion to San Vito is aimed at establishing a state-of-the-art communications hub, business continuity and disaster recovery centre for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other users, and to add an operationally more efficient location to the storage area for strategic deployment stocks transport assets.
The Committee notes that the proposed expansion is projected to be completed in three phases at a total estimated non-recurrent cost of $8.8 million.
Of this amount a non-recurrent provision of $5,123,700 relates to phase I of the expansion plan.
Annex II below provides a breakdown of the non-recurrent provision of $8.8 million by object line and implementation phase.
During its field visit in May 2004, the Committee had the opportunity of examining the site at San Vito.
The Committee was apprised of the advantages of the site and of the various purposes for which the base at San Vito could be used.
The Advisory Committee sought information on the current status of the San Vito project and was informed that negotiations were still ongoing with the Government of Italy.
The World Food Programme (WFP), which also needs space for its expanded operations, has taken the lead in these negotiations.
Negotiations have not yet been concluded.
Proposed arrangements with the Government of Italy, as well as between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and WFP, together with the related financial implications, should be brought to the attention of the General Assembly, through the Advisory Committee, before any agreement is signed; information should also be provided on how the facilities at San Vito could be utilized for training, short-term staff accommodation and other purposes.
Under the circumstances, the Committee recommends that no action be taken at this stage with regard to the provision of $5,356,700 for the first stage of the expansion plan included in the proposed budget for the financial period 2005/06.
Resource requirements
Estimated requirements of $37,691,900 gross ($35,338,200 net) are proposed for the maintenance of the Base for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006.
This represents an increase of $9,269,900 in total gross resources (or 32.6 per cent) in relation to the apportionment for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005.
As indicated in the table “Financial resources” of the summary of the report (A/59/691), this total comprises an increase of $5,366,900, or 52.9 per cent, in civilian personnel costs and an increase of $3,903,000, or 21.4 per cent, in operational costs.
Civilian personnel
Recommendations on posts
Establishment of five international posts (2 P-4 and 3 P-3) and one national post for the purpose of establishing a permanent training cell at the Base.
As indicated in the budget submission, “the training cell will develop the modules and coordinate external resource persons (such as senior Department of Peacekeeping Operations staff) for the four courses which will encompass 240 participants during a 12-month period as part of a programme to build a cadre of civilian peacekeeping professionals.
The courses include: core values and core competencies training (four per year), team-building (two per year), peacekeeping planning and management (one per year) and senior leadership induction (one per year)”.
Additional information on Base training programmes was provided to the Committee upon request and is contained in annex III below.
The Advisory Committee is of the view that the proposed establishment of the Logistics Base training cell represents a new and important phase in the development of a Department of Peacekeeping Operations-wide training strategy that will impact on resource requirements and on training programmes at headquarters, in peacekeeping operations and at the Base.
The Committee requests, therefore, that a comprehensive review of a Department-wide training strategy be undertaken and its results be reported to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.
The report should specifically indicate the role of the proposed training cell in the overall training strategy and provide concrete workload statistics to justify the number of posts requested.
Pending such a review, the Committee recommends that no action be taken in connection with the proposed staffing requirements of the Base training cell.
Establishment of one national staff post under the Office of Administrative Support Services as security and safety assistant, to support the chief security officer in managing security liaison at San Vito in conjunction with the Italian Ministry of Defence, which will provide overall security arrangements at San Vito, and prepare and implement security-related measures to ensure the protection of United Nations assets and facilities at that location.
In view of the Committee's recommendation in paragraph 14 above, no action should be taken at this stage with regard to this post, as it is linked to the decision on the expansion of the Logistics Base to San Vito.
Establishment of two national staff posts under the Office of Technical Support Services for data cleansing and codification of all United Nations property.
As indicated in the budget submission, the proposed staff members will ensure standardization of codes across asset management sections and monitor and periodically verify the ongoing codification used by missions.
This will improve management's view of United Nations property holdings and facilitate the process of recording receipt and inspection of materials by minimizing the future need to assign temporary item codes and reducing data entry time.
The Advisory Committee recalls, in this connection, the recommendation of the Board of Auditors that the Base should ensure that physical inventory description and coding are consistent with the Galileo record to facilitate the ease of use and monitoring of the strategic deployment stocks (see para.
185, A/59/5, Vol. II).
The Committee stresses the importance of proper inventory management and recommends the establishment of the requested two national staff posts for data cleansing and codification of all United Nations property at the Logistics Base.
Conversion of 64 individual contractors into 64 national posts (fixed-term contracts under the 100 series of the Staff Rules).
As indicated in the budget submission, “these contractors currently perform core functions and are required by UNLB on a continuing basis independent of the strategic deployment stocks surge capacity requirements”.
The Committee was informed upon enquiry that additional staff costs related to the proposed conversion of 64 individual contractors are estimated at $3,872,800, to be offset in part by a corresponding reduction of $2,021,800 under operational costs broken down as follows: facilities and infrastructure — $1,074,100, ground transportation — $315,900, communications — $315,900 and information technology — $315,900.
The conversions are proposed for the following areas:
• Office of the Chief Administrative Officer — one post of liaison assistant;
• Office of Administrative Support Services — one post under “procurement”, three posts under “finance” and two posts under “personnel”; and
• Office of Technical Support Services — 15 posts under “engineering”, 10 posts under “supply and warehousing”, 10 posts under “transport”, 20 posts under “communications and information technology” and 2 posts under “air operations”.
The Committee recalls that it had dealt with a request for conversion of 15 individual contractors into national posts in the context of its consideration of the proposed budget for the period 2004/05 and recommended that the matter be reviewed in the light of the Committee's comments reflected in its general report on peacekeeping operations (A/58/759) and, if necessary, be resubmitted.
The Committee was informed that, besides a careful internal review, an extensive study had been undertaken by a consultant company of Base operations, its staffing requirements and assessment of permanently needed functions on the basis of which the proposal for the conversion of 64 individual contractors into national posts was being resubmitted.
The Committee was provided, upon request, with a brief description of functions of the 64 positions of individual contractors (see annex IV below).
The Committee points out that proper budgetary procedure requires that continuing functions should be carried out by staff occupying established posts and the related costs should be charged against staff costs, rather than operational costs.
Functions of a temporary nature should be provided through general temporary assistance (or, in some cases, temporary posts).
The Secretariat, over the years, has consistently misused the provision for special service and/or individual contractor agreements.
The result is a large number of cases that have been improperly treated and which need to be regularized.
This has an attendant financial implication, which reflects the accumulated cost of the failure to observe proper budgetary procedures over a number of years.
In order to correct the situation, and to restore budget transparency, the Committee will not object to a one-time across-the-board conversion.
The Committee has found no basis to conclude that the functions described, which have been performed for many years and will be required in the future, are not of a continuing nature.
As noted above, the proposal for the conversion reflects the outcome of the internal review of permanently needed functions at the Logistics Base and the consultant's study of Base operations.
The Committee emphasizes that proper budgetary procedure would have required specific proposals to have been made and justified for each and every post/function as the need arose.
The Advisory Committee expects that proper procedure will be followed without variation in future.
The Committee requests that future submissions should contain detailed performance information on arrangements with individual contractors, as well as any projected use of such arrangements in the forthcoming period.
The Committee provides more detail on this matter, which, in fact, affects a number of missions as well as the Logistics Base in its general report.
Operational costs
The estimated operational requirements of $22,172,400 (gross) reflect an increase of $3,903,000, or 21.4 per cent, compared with the apportionment of $18,269,400 for the current period.
The increase is mainly due to: (i) increased requirements of $2,913,600 under facilities and infrastructure attributable mainly to phase I of the San Vito expansion plan and (ii) increased requirements of $633,200 under information technology, of which $368,000 relates to the proposed expansion in San Vito.
In view of the Committee's recommendation in paragraph 14 above, no action should be taken at this stage with regard to the requirements related to the San Vito expansion project.
Consultants
The estimated requirements of $446,000, of which a provision of $271,000 is made for non-training consultants and an amount of $175,000 relates to training consultants (see para.
26 below), reflect an increase of $204,000 (84.3 per cent) compared with the apportionment of $242,000.
The increased requirements include $160,000 for consultancy work to survey the San Vito site and buildings, development of detailed plans and designs and certification by a locally certified consultant in conformity with local law.
In view of the Committee's recommendation in paragraph 14 above, no action should be taken at this stage with regard to the requirements related to the San Vito expansion project.
A provision of $175,000 under training consultants reflects mainly a redeployment of funds ($153,200) previously budgeted under other services (see para.
28 below).
Official travel
The estimate for official travel for 2005/06 amounts to $220,000, a decrease of $82,600, or 27.3 per cent, compared with the apportionment of $302,600 for 2003-2004.
The estimate of $220,000 includes a provision of $73,600 for training-related travel.
The Committee was informed that the reduction in the travel requirements is due mainly to increased use of videoconferencing.
The Committee welcomes the efforts of the administration of the Base to use videoconferencing extensively.
Training
Training requirements are estimated at $349,600, including consultants of $175,000, training-related travel of $73,100 and training fees, supplies and services of $101,500.
The Advisory Committee recalls its recommendation that the proposed training programme should contain a brief description of results expected to be achieved in terms of the impact of training on outputs or activities implemented by the Base.
The Committee points out that this recommendation has not yet been implemented.
Moreover, the Committee is of the view that the training programme of the Base should better reflect specific activities implemented by the Base, it should be prioritized and the number of staff to be trained, the duration of the courses and the venues should be fully explained and justified; travel for training purposes should not be undertaken to distant places, when training courses are available regionally.
The Logistics Base should also explore the possibility of e-training, especially between the Base and peacekeeping operations.
Communications and information technology
The estimated requirements for communications ($4,597,900) and information technology ($4,224,700) reflect a decrease of $92,300 and an increase of $633,200, respectively, compared with the apportionment for the current financial period.
The increased requirements for information technology include a provision of $368,000 for the proposed expansion in San Vito, in respect of which the Committee's recommendation is contained in paragraph 14 above.
Other supplies, services and equipment
The estimated requirements of $1,550,200 reflect a net increase of $696,200 (81.5 per cent) compared with the apportionment of $854,000 for the current financial period.
The net increase of $696,200 reflects mainly an increase of $731,000 under other services, an increase of $115,500 under general insurance and a decrease of $153,200 under training fees, supplies and services.
The increase of $731,000 under other services relates to the subcontracting to a service company of 56 individual contractors from April 2006.
The Committee notes from paragraph 21 of the budget that this follows Base policy to discontinue hiring individual contractors for non-core work and surge capacity.
The Advisory Committee sought additional information on this policy, justification for the requested resources and functions of the 56 independent contractors.
Information provided to the Committee is contained in annex V below.
Other matters
The Advisory Committee recalls that the Board of Auditors recommended that the Logistics Base, in conjunction with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, follow up on and obtain acknowledgement of receipt of items shipped to missions and monitor the shipment of stocks to ensure timely acknowledgement of receipt (see para.
188, A/59/5, Vol. II).
The Committee requests that the next budget submission for the Base contain information on the implementation of the above recommendation of the Board.
Status of the strategic deployment stocks
The Committee points out that the report of the Secretary-General (A/59/701) should be read in conjunction with the report of the Board of Auditors on the accounts of the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2004 (A/59/5, Vol. II), which raises, in paragraphs 161 to 193, a number of important issues related to the implementation of strategic deployment stocks, including the accounting guidelines for strategic deployment stocks, central monitoring and accounting for the replenishment and issuance of all strategic deployment stocks, agreements with non-peacekeeping missions and the promulgation and implementation of the strategic deployment stocks policies and procedures regarding the rotation of strategic deployment stocks.
In its resolution 58/297 of 22 July 2004, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to report to its fifty-ninth session on the functioning of existing mechanisms of the strategic deployment stocks, in light of lessons learned from experiences with mission start-ups and award of contracts for procurement for the strategic deployment stocks to all Member States, in particular to developing, least developed and African countries and countries with economies in transition.
The General Assembly, in its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002, endorsed the concept and implementation of the strategic deployment stocks for one complex mission and approved $141.5 million for this purpose.
In its resolution 57/315, the General Assembly extended the validity of the approved resources to 30 June 2004.
As indicated in paragraph 6 of the Secretary-General's report, the approved strategic deployment stocks funds were committed with $9,033 remaining unspent as of 30 June 2004.
The report of the Secretary-General on the status of the implementation of the strategic deployment stocks provides in table 1 a breakdown of the $141.5 million by budget line, as well as information on unliquidated obligations of the strategic deployment stocks.
According to the Secretary-General, the two-year project of establishing strategic deployment stocks is effectively completed and the strategic deployment stocks management in the Secretariat and the Base is fully functional; the procurement of strategic deployment stocks equipment and materials has been completed, and strategic deployment stocks has already been intensively utilized to support many mission start-ups and expansions.
The Secretary-General indicates that, as at 30 June 2004, the strategic deployment stocks funds had savings amounting to $397,322 from the liquidation of prior period obligations and that further savings will be realized from liquidation of obligations in the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005.
The Secretary-General proposes that the savings derived from the liquidation of prior period obligations and the $9,033 that remained unspent as at 30 June 2004 should be utilized to cover any loss on currency exchange incurred on outstanding obligations.
The Advisory Committee has no objection to the Secretary-General's proposal.
The Committee notes that since the establishment of the strategic deployment stocks in July 2002, $131.8 million worth of equipment has been issued to various missions during the period from 1 July 2002 through 31 January 2005.
Table 2 of the Secretary-General's report provides a list of the missions that received strategic deployment stocks equipment during this period.
The Committee notes from paragraph 14 of the report that in the last 18 months the strategic deployment stocks system has supported the deployment of missions in Liberia, Côte d'Ivoire, Burundi, Haiti, Iraq, Sudan and the expansion of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Advisory Committee welcomes this accomplishment.
Also pertinent is the need for accelerating the rate of redeployment of the strategic deployment stocks by adjusting the composition and timely replenishment of the stocks.
The Secretary-General addresses the issue of the composition of the strategic deployment stocks in paragraphs 18 to 22 of his report.
As stated in paragraph 18, the strategic deployment stocks should not be seen as a fixed inventory but rather a dynamic capability that will develop over time, based on the updated needs identified in annual composition reviews.
The Committee notes that while the strategic deployment stocks concept was based on modules, the stocks are not stored, deployed or reconstituted as modules; instead, the Logistics Base will store the materials in a manner appropriate to each of the main commodity types, to support stock rotation and enable optimal utilization of the stocks for deployment to missions.
The Secretary-General indicates in paragraph 22 of his report that to accelerate the strategic deployment stocks redeployment rate, the inventory levels of material with long procurement lead times will need to be increased and the holding of items with short procurement lead times reduced appropriately.
With regard to the issue of strategic deployment stocks replenishment, for the reasons given in paragraph 23 of the report, the proposal is made to approve the inclusion of the provision for replenishment within the $50.0 million commitment authority approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 49/233.
It is further requested that, on an exceptional basis and with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee, the Secretary-General should be authorized to enter into commitments over and above $50 million for the replenishment of the strategic deployment stocks in respect of the start-up phase of a new peacekeeping mission, to be funded from within the authorized level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund (see para.
44 below).
In paragraphs 24 to 40 of his report, the Secretary-General identifies a number of strategic deployment stocks management issues that require increased attention, such as a greater need for the Headquarters to identify and prioritize the release of stocks to missions, an increased need for better material planning for new peacekeeping missions, development of revolving inventory management, which requires sophisticated automated material accounting systems to complement the Galileo inventory management system and a need to introduce contemporary logistics management practices and adopt these to meet the material management requirements in the Logistics Base and missions.
The Committee notes that the Secretariat is finalizing an extensive set of policies and procedures, which define the strategic deployment stocks concept, roles and responsibilities and procedures for its planning, deployment, replenishment, rotation, accounting and support; upon approval, this body of policy documentation will be promulgated.
The Committee notes from paragraph 32 of the report that increasing the speed of delivery of the stocks will require a review of all material management processes and the organizational structure of the Base.
The Advisory Committee requests that it be kept informed of developments in this area.
The Committee observes that the Logistics Base has developed the capacity for deployment of technical support teams along with stocks to assist and train the mission staff in the immediate deployment of the stocks.
The Secretary-General indicates that the concept of technical support teams needs to be institutionalized.
While welcoming the development of the strategic deployment stocks technical support capacity, the Committee trusts that this assistance will be limited to the very initial stages of a mission and cautions that institutionalization should not result in the creation of yet another layer of administrative support to peacekeeping operations.
The Secretary-General indicates in paragraph 38 of his report that the Galileo Inventory Management System will be implemented in all new missions prior to the arrival of the main elements of the strategic deployment stocks.
While welcoming the Secretary-General's statement, the Committee trusts that the implementation of the Galileo System will be closely coordinated with the process of building an adequate receipt and inspection capacity in the rapid deployment teams, so that effective inventory mechanisms are developed at the very early stages of peacekeeping missions.
The Advisory Committee draws attention to the recommendation of the Board of Auditors wherein the Administration was requested to find solutions to ensure the accuracy and completeness of all records of stocks shipped and the related income and expenditure transaction (see para.
170, A/59/5, Vol. II).
In this connection, the Advisory Committee welcomes the Secretary-General's statement that valuable lessons in cargo management have been drawn by the administration from recent deployments of strategic deployment stocks in terms of marking, dispatching and security of containerized cargo and that all high value cargo will be containerized and all containers will have prominent external markings for quick identification.
The award of contracts for procurement for strategic deployment stocks
The Committee points out that information provided in response to General Assembly resolution 56/292, on the procurement contracts for strategic deployment stocks awarded to all Member States, in particular to developing, least developed and African countries and countries with economies in transition could be more useful.
The Committee notes that the total value of procurement conducted in support of the strategic deployment stocks amounted to $140.6 million, of which contracts valued at $12 million (or 8.5 per cent) were awarded to companies from developing countries and countries with economies in transition and contracts for $1.9 million (or 1.3 per cent) were awarded to companies from Africa.
The Committee points out that General Assembly resolution 56/292 has not been fully implemented; it requests that more detailed information be included in future reports of the Secretary-General on strategic deployment stocks procurement contracts to comply with the spirit of resolution 56/292 of the General Assembly.
Conclusion
The action to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of the Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 is indicated in paragraph 17 of the performance report.
The Committee recommends that the unencumbered balance of $149,000 gross, as well as other income/adjustments for the period ended 30 June 2004 in the amount of $2,292,000, be credited to Member States in a manner to be determined by the General Assembly.
The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of the Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 are indicated in paragraph 22 of the proposed budget.
In view of its comments above, the Advisory Committee recommends that the estimated budget requirement be reduced from $37,691,900 to $31,513,100.
The action to be taken by the General Assembly in respect of the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, including the functioning of the existing mechanisms and the award of contracts for procurement, is indicated in paragraph 44 of the report.
The Advisory Committee recommends that the General Assembly:
• approve the use of savings derived from liquidation of prior period obligations and the unspent balance of the strategic deployment stocks to cover losses on currency exchange and replenishment of the stocks; and
• approve the inclusion of strategic deployment stocks replenishment within the $50 million commitment authority.
Annex I
Actual expenditures for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Annex II
Non-recurrent cost of San Vito expansion project (in US$)
Annex III
Civilian Training and Development Section
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi Training Cell 2005/6
Expected accomplishment
The establishment of a United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi (UNLB) Training cell will increase efficiency and effectiveness in conducting, managing, directing and supporting peacekeeping operations.
Output
Core responsibilities
The team will develop training modules to be used in the preparation of four training courses and to deliver those courses — initially in pilot form — multiple times in the coming period.
These consist of a minimum total of eight training courses delivered consisting of:
(a) Four Core skills (with a potential for more),
(b) Two Team building,
(c) One Peacekeeping planning and management, and
(d) One Senior Leadership Induction
with 240 participants and 72 days training delivered, team members will be called upon to assist in a variety of other ongoing training needs requirements.
In future, the number of these four courses run each year should increase based on strategic recommendations and the Department's needs.
Additional responsibilities
This team provides a resource that can meet new training requirements that must be addressed by DPKO.
Some of these requirements already exist, but cannot be met without redirecting limited civilian training resources from other tasks.
Examples of these new training requirements include training for OIOS auditors in DPKO field missions and training of trainers.
In addition to these responsibilities, the team has the capacity to respond to surges in DPKO activity by conducting additional induction training, mission start-up training, training of the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, and supporting the conduct of integrated activities such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) training and Force headquarters training.
In this regard, the team has the capacity to deliver a minimum of an additional 64 days of training to at least 275 participants.
Justification
DPKO has proposed the addition of five additional international staff members for the purpose of establishing a permanent training cell at UNLB to support the implementation of DPKO Civilian Training Section's training and development strategy for civilian field personnel in peacekeeping operations and enhance field mission training capacity.
These staff will develop and implement: four different core courses that will encompass a minimum of 240 participants during a 12-month period as part of a programme to build a cadre of civilian peacekeeping professionals.
The courses include: Core training (4 per year), Team building (2 per year), Peacekeeping planning and management (1 per year), and Senior leadership induction (1 per year), with the capacity to deliver additional courses or conduct activities, as required.
This team will bring together a unique blend of training management, facilitation and evaluation skills (at all levels) across multidisciplinary, international and United Nations peacekeeping environments.
They will be selected based on their depth of knowledge, experience and expertise in both training and development and the specialty training area for the post.
A final selection criterion will be their ability to train/facilitate senior level staff.
To support the five international training posts, one national General Service post is included to provide office secretarial, administrative and logistic support.
The General Service staff will also assist in the preparation of presentations and training materials.
UNLB has been selected as the location for these posts, because it has well-developed training facilities for class and exercise-based training and has become the focus for DPKO training activity.
It is in the same time zone as most of our missions, thereby improving interactions.
Finally, UNLB is physically closer to mission locations than DPKO HQ, thereby reducing time and expense when travel to missions is required.
The establishment of this training cell follows on from a training needs assessment conducted in 2004 of civilian field staff.
The most significant need identified is a broad-based approach to the preparation of staff for field assignments and their ongoing professional development.
The review identified the following priorities for training of civilian staff in the field: core training (common knowledge and skills required by all staff about to deploy to a field mission); mission-specific induction training; written and oral communications skills; team-building skills; and, planning, management, leadership and supervisory skills.
It is planned to address these needs by the development and delivery of four core courses in cooperation with a broad array of partners, including inter alia OHRM, DPI, United Nations Department of Security, DPA, DPKO Best Practices Unit and United Nations Mine Action Service.
Courses
(a) Core training.
All new field staff prior to deployment, 6 days' duration, including subjects such as safety and security, driving, use of radios, United Nations rules and procedures, gender awareness, child protection, prevention of sexual exploitation, mission structures and responsibilities.
Basic United Nations administration, such as pay documentation and health insurance, will be conducted for all staff who are new to the United Nations.
This course is an element of the joint DPKO/OHRM mission readiness training programme.
(b) Team building.
Selected P-2 and P-3 staff who have demonstrated potential for enhanced responsibility, 6 days' duration, covering areas including team-building skills, conflict resolution, written and oral communications, planning, and project management.
The focus is on small group leadership.
(c) Peacekeeping planning and management.
Selected P-3 to P-5 staff who have demonstrated potential for enhanced responsibility, 30 days' duration, with a focus on integrated planning, programme management, communications skills, cross-cutting skills such as budget development, negotiation and conflict resolution, and leadership and management.
The focus is on section or sub-office leadership.
(d) Senior leadership induction.
Senior staff at D-1 and above, 6 days' duration, introduction to the United Nations, including rules, responsibilities and procedures, introduction to the integrated mission planning process and results-based budgeting, responsibilities for safety and security, and best practices from field operations.
This course would be tailored to the needs of participants.
The course is an element of the joint DPKO/OHRM mission readiness training programme.
The establishment of this training team allows staff to conduct courses (in some cases, to run two courses simultaneously), develop training materials, coordinate the participation of external resource persons and refine courses over time.
Course modules
Each course will be comprised of elements drawn from nine curriculum modules.
The development of curriculum modules will ensure that specific skills are built coherently, provide linkages between courses of increasing complexity, and that training is provided to meet the knowledge required by the participants' levels of responsibility.
The level and duration of these modules will be tailored to needs for each course.
The modules and an overview of their contents follow:
(a) United Nations system.
DPKO roles, tasks and relationships with other United Nations organizations; staff rules; standards of conduct; values and competencies; recruitment and career development; pay and administration.
(b) Leadership, management and communication.
Leadership and management; written and oral communication skills; and team skills.
(c) Substantive functions.
Political affairs, civil affairs, DDR, humanitarian, development, human rights, public information, and working with agencies/NGOs/other partners.
(d) Military and civilian police.
Structures, functions and capacities; and military and civil-police coordination.
(e) Mission support functions.
Logistics; budgeting and finance; and personnel.
(f) Mission readiness skills.
Managing stress; working in diverse and multicultural environments; safety and security; driving; use of communications equipment; gender issues, including prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse; and, HIV/AIDS awareness.
(g) Planning skills.
Integrated mission planning process; planning techniques; integration; and problem solving.
(h) Capacity-building.
Human resources management, including reporting, performance management and training and coaching skills.
(i) Exercises and simulations.
Development and implementation of simulations and exercises to support courses and to support broader DPKO requirements; development of integrated exercise materials in collaboration with Office of the Under-Secretary-General, the Office of Operations, the Office of Mission Support, Military Division, Civilian Police Division, field missions and other United Nations/non-United Nations partners.
Staffing
To develop the nine curriculum modules and deliver the four courses, and additional duties as necessary, it is recommended that a training team of five staff be established in UNLB.
The staff would comprise two P-4 and three P-3 training officers and one GS support staff.
The establishment of this training team allows staff to conduct courses (in some cases, to run two activities simultaneously), develop training materials, refine courses, and if necessary deploy to field missions to provide short-term training supplementation.
The team would be an element of UNLB, but operate under the direction (on training matters) of Civilian Training Section in DPKO at Headquarters.
Training Officer, Leadership and Management, P-4
The core functions of this post are:
(a) To manage the UNLB training facility;
(b) To develop and manage the UNLB training budget;
(c) To facilitate (instruct) on:
(i) core skills training,
(ii) team building,
(iii) peacekeeping planning and management, and
(iv) senior leadership induction;
(d) To manage the design (facilitators guide, participant materials) and delivery of:
(i) the team building course,
(ii) the peacekeeping planning and management course, and
(iii) the senior leadership induction course;
(e) To design, develop and deliver and maintain the modules (applicable for each of courses 1-4) in:
(i) leadership,
(ii) management, and
(iii) communication: written (drafting) and oral presentation;
(f) To liaise with field missions to ensure that training continues to meet mission needs; and
(g) To conduct and review mission training needs assessments.
Training Officer, Induction and Mission start-up/Rapid deployment, P-4
The core functions of this post are:
(a) To facilitate (instruct) in UNLB on:
(i) core skills training,
(ii) team building,
(iii) peacekeeping planning and management, and
(iv) senior leadership induction;
(b) To manage the design (facilitators guide, participant materials) and delivery of:
(i) the core skills course, and
(ii) mission start-up;
(c) To design, develop and deliver and maintain the modules (applicable for each of courses 1-4) in:
(i) planning skills, and
(ii) exercises/simulations with the following partners: the Office of the Under-Secretary-General, the Office of Operations, the Office of Mission Support, Military Division, Civilian Police Division, field missions and other United Nations/non-United Nations partners.
Training Officer, Mission components, P-3
The core functions of this post are:
(a) To facilitate (instruct) in UNLB on:
(i) core skills training,
(ii) team building,
(iii) peacekeeping planning and management, and
(iv) senior leadership induction;
(b) To design, develop and deliver and maintain the modules (applicable for each of courses 1-4) in:
(i) substantive functions,
(ii) mission support functions,
(iii) military, and
(iv) civilian police;
(c) To develop and manage the UNLB training calendar.
Training Officer, Mission readiness, P-3
The core functions of this post are:
(a) To facilitate (instruct) in UNLB on:
(i) core skills training,
(ii) team building,
(iii) peacekeeping planning and management, and
(iv) senior leadership induction;
(b) To design, develop and deliver and keep updated the mission readiness skills modules (applicable to each of the courses 1-4) in:
(i) managing stress,
(ii) working in diverse and multicultural environments,
(iii) safety and security,
(iv) driving,
(v) use of communications equipment,
(vi) gender issues and awareness,
(vii) prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, and
(viii) HIV/AIDS awareness;
(c) To deploy temporarily to new or expanding missions as required; and
(d) To manage participant selection and maintain training records.
Training Officer, United Nations system and Capacity-building, P-3
The core functions of this post are:
(a) To facilitate (instruct) in UNLB on:
(i) core skills training,
(ii) team building,
(iii) peacekeeping planning and management, and
(iv) senior leadership induction;
(b) To design, develop and deliver and maintain the modules (applicable to each of the courses 1-4) in:
(i) United Nations system: DPKO roles, tasks and relationships with other United Nations organizations, staff rules, standards of conduct, values and competencies, recruitment and career development, and pay and administration,
(ii) capacity-building: performance management, training skills, and coaching skills;
(c) To design, develop and implement the training evaluation mechanisms for all courses (pre-course, during, post-course — on mission and follow-up) including in conjunction with best practices, identifying and incorporating best training practices in field missions.
Administrative Assistant (GS-4)
Provides administrative support to the five training officers in the preparation of course material, running the training office and routine administration in support of the training staff and the participants.
Annex IV
Brief description of functions of 64 individual contractors proposed for conversion
Administrative Support Services/Procurement Section
Justification
Procurement activities have increased significantly over the past three financial periods without any increase in United Nations staff.
The value of purchase orders increased 66 per cent from US$ 5.1 million to US$ 8.5 million in 2002-2003 and the number of purchase orders increased 42 per cent from 403 to 573.
In 2003-2004 the value of the acquisitions grew again to US$ 12.8 million, a further 51 per cent increase.
The current budget (2004/2005) increases in dollar terms again resulting in even larger procurement spending with a steady state in number of purchase orders to be raised.
The Base therefore requires one additional United Nations national post for procurement to manage acquisition of materiel and services effectively and efficiently.
Procurement Clerk (GS-4):
To facilitate the increase in acquisition activities over the past three years three individual contractors were hired — two act primarily as buyers and one primarily as an invoice matching clerk.
It is proposed to replace these individual contractors with one United Nations local General Service staff whose duties will include market surveys, selecting qualified vendors, preparing bid solicitations, determining bid evaluation criteria, analysing and ranking offers, received, preparing bid evaluation abstracts, drafting and recommending award of contracts/purchase orders, contract follow-up, discrepancy resolution, order close-out activities, invoice processing and vendor roster processing.
Administrative Support Services/Finance Section
Justification
There has been no increase in United Nations staff in the Finance Section despite a fourfold increase in the Base budget and transactions over the past five years.
The increase in workload has been met through the long-term employment of three independent contractors, who carry out functions that should properly only be assigned to United Nations staff.
It is essential that these staff be eligible for formal training in United Nations financial procedures, be assigned responsibilities for financial management of transactions similar to existing United Nations staff and be cross-trained in all aspects of the finance office.
Finance/Budget Clerk (Vendors Unit) (GS-4):
An independent contractor has performed the functions of this post for the past four years.
The incumbent of the new post will be responsible for the processing of invoice matching in Sun Business system, process all vendor-related payments, administer 600 obligating documents and 5,000 payments.
Incumbent would also verify, obligate and track orders, miscellaneous obligation documents, Travel Authorization Forms for the Base and in support of peacekeeping missions, maintain the purchase order database, track training activities, manage petty cash, hospitality funds and related expenditure by direct expenditure.
The incumbent would also assist in the preparation of the inter-mission billings (IOB) and serve as a “back-up” to the Cashier.
Finance/Budget Clerk (Payroll Unit) (GS-4):
An independent contractor has performed the functions of this post for the past four years.
The incumbent will be responsible within the Payroll Unit for functions including the monthly preparation of all local staff salaries, all individual staff fees and monthly payment order for international staff.
The incumbent will also be responsible to process all MIP claims and pension computations and schedules, create staff member data in Sun system and PROGEN, monitor all staff account payables and receivables on a monthly basis and institute recovery action from staff members who are slow to make payments.
The incumbent will also verify attendance records, the notification and recovery of phone bills, liberty mileage and other charges for international staff, national staff, International Computing Centre and peacekeeping management course.
The incumbent would track independent contractor expenditures and issue cash advances, mission subsistence allowance payments and daily subsistence allowance for official travel.
Address all enquiries.
Finance/Budget Clerk (Travel Claims Unit) (GS-4):
An independent contractor has performed the functions of this post for the past four years.
The incumbent will be responsible for processing staff member claims and entitlements, all Personnel Section requests, including the processing of all travel claims, education grants, home leave travel, official travel non-training and training, the processing of inter-office vouchers and the settlement of all debit advices from other peacekeeping missions and agencies.
The United Nations core staff will be back-up for payroll functions and serve as a necessary check and balance within payroll.
Administrative Support Services/CAO/Liaison Unit
Justification
The training activities at UNLB have increased considerably, as highlighted in the table below, affecting the level of activities of the Liaison Office:
The increased number of staff members (including International Computing Centre) and trainees has determined an increase of visas, identity cards and fiscal code number requests.
In addition to the above, this office is in daily contact with the authorities of the host country to obtain clearances, discuss projects and generally maintain a good working relationship; therefore, the current Liaison Office staff dedicate 90 per cent of their working time to the above-mentioned activities.
As UNLB does not have an official translator/interpreter, the Liaison Office performs these functions as well, and, among other duties, is responsible for translating documents and correspondence to and from the Italian authorities, translating engineering projects, staff members' medical records, accident reports, daily press reviews.
During the last budget year the office handled over 300 pages of documents on a broad range of subjects, often characterized by technical terminology (i.e.: aeronautical, medical, engineering, etc.).
Currently there is an independent contractor, specialized in translation and interpreting, working in the Liaison Office, whose task is to translate, subject to revision, both from Italian into English and from English into Italian, in addition to performing other administrative functions.
Liaison Assistant (GS-5):
The incumbent of this post will facilitate support to UNLB staff and United Nations staff undergoing training at UNLB in obtaining fiscal code numbers, identity cards issued by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, mission visas, business visas, visas upon arrival, airport passes, United Nations and UNP licence plates and vehicle registrations, sojourn permits, base entry clearances.
The incumbent will also reduce delivery time of translation services by translating daily correspondence (depending on the length of the document) within 24 hours from delivery date and translating reports and technical documents (legal documents, laws of the hosting country, engineering, communication and information technology-related technical projects, press articles, medical records, aviation circulars etc.), with an average of 8 to 10 pages per day.
Administrative Support Services/Personnel Section
Justification
Personnel Clerk (International Staff Administration Unit) (GS-4):
These duties have been performed by an independent contractor since June 2003 to replace a United Nations local staff member who had to be assigned to the Local Staff Unit to manage the increase in independent contractor recruitment and administration.
Under the direct supervision of the Chief Civilian Officer, the incumbent of the post will provide clerical and administrative support to enhance and improve the overall capacity of Personnel to administer UNLB international staff and United Nations staff temporarily assigned to UNLB for pre-deployment training.
Given the sensitivity and confidentiality of staff records, there is an urgent need for these duties to be handled by a United Nations staff member.
The incumbent will assist in the preparation of relevant background materials and documents, create and maintain personnel databases and will draft and update personnel databases with regard to recruitment, placement, promotion, performance appraisals, vacancies and job classification.
The incumbent will assist also in the administration of UNLB's official staff travel, language proficiency examinations and the medical insurance plan.
Registry Clerk (GS-4):
These duties have been performed by an independent contractor since June 2003.
Given the sensitivity and confidentiality of staff records, there is an urgent need for these duties to be handled by a United Nations staff member.
Under the direct supervision of the Chief Civilian Personnel Officer, the incumbent will assist in the preparation of relevant personnel documents for electronic storage, access, circulation, publication including documentation scanning and conversion.
Other important function includes the review of content and extraction of key data for categorization and indexing.
The incumbent will select and compile relevant background materials, create and maintain personnel databases and provide general office support.
Technical Support Services/Air Operations
Justification
Air Operations Unit contributes to the UNLB objective by ensuring safe and rapid deployment of cargo in support of peacekeeping missions.
Under an inter-agency agreement, UNLB/Air Operations provides support to the World Food Programme for their aircraft based at UNLB on a full-cost recovery basis.
Air Operations Unit is also responsible for implementing accident prevention measures through the establishment and execution of the aviation safety programme.
To enable UNLB to provide effective support to DPKO and WFP flying operations, there is a need to increase the current staffing of the Unit by 1 GS-6 Air Operations Assistant and 1 GS-5 (Ramp Controller).
Both positions are key to the management of air operations and air safety on the ramp.
Air Operations Assistant (GS-6):
The Air Operations Assistant is responsible under the Chief Aviation Officer for all matters related to the operation of United Nations-owned/leased/chartered aircraft at UNLB.
The incumbent is responsible for ensuring that all air operations are conducted in accordance with United Nations policies and international standards.
The Air Operations Assistant is responsible for liaison and coordination with Italian Air Force and Brindisi civilian airport authorities for the safe, expedient and efficient conduct of air operations and, when necessary, the Air Operations Assistant facilitates the processing of diplomatic clearances.
The incumbent manages the UNLB aviation safety training programme, the fuel contract, and the maintenance and operation of UNLB ground support and aviation cargo handling equipment.
The Air Operations Assistant acts as Officer-in-Charge in the absence of the Chief Aviation Officer.
Ramp Control Officer (GS-5):
A ramp control officer is needed to manage, coordinate and safely control UNLB ramp activities.
Seventy-eight per cent (based on 180 flights per year) of the total UNLB flights are conducted during non-duty hours or weekends.
Each IL-76, C130 or An-124 aircraft departure takes 5 to 6 hours to complete.
Each recovery takes 4 hours.
The safety implications require this person to have specialist training and knowledge that can only be obtained by attendance at suitable courses.
Frequency of flights and the heavy workload on the three other staff members of the Air Operations Unit preclude on-site supervision of the ramp on a regular basis.
Technical Support Services/Engineering
Justification
The Engineering Section has three major tasks: to maintain the facilities and infrastructure used by UNLB; to manage engineering strategic deployment stocks (SDS); and to plan and supervise the development of new and refurbished facilities at San Vito.
There has been no increase in United Nations staff in Engineering to manage the additional facilities provided on the base including three new warehouses and softwall facilities at Brindisi and San Pancrazio; nor has there been any United Nations staff increase to manage SDS of more than 12,500 line items of expendables and non-expendable items totalling $38 million plus US$ 9 million in United Nations Reserve stock and US$ 2 million in the UNLB stores.
The development of San Vito, although the work will be undertaken by contract, will require the developing scopes of work (SOW) and analysis of consultant design proposals and supervision of contracts.
To meet its responsibilities, Engineering requires additional United Nations trained staff with full authorization and access to United Nations financial and inventory control systems as outlined below to replace independent contractors carrying out these functions for the past three years.
Architect/Engineer (GS-5):
Prepare scope of work and request for proposal documentation for tender purposes within deadlines; perform technical evaluation of bids; assist the Chief Engineer in the supervision of contracted works; prepare cost estimates of projects and evaluate completed work in order to authorize payments based on compliance with specifications and building standards.
This person will speed up the finalization of projects and is key to the preparation of the scope of work, drawings and specifications for a budget that is set to increase from $1.6m to $3.2m in the 05-06 year, and at the same time to be responsible for coordinating the work done by Consultant Engineers.
The incumbent will also be responsible for preparing the scope of work for maintenance contracts and projects executed in-house with the staff of Building Management Unit, and will assist with the technical evaluation of all contractor bids.
With the assistance provided by this post, Engineering will have better control of documentation and better control of the execution of projects.
Generator Technician (Mechanical) (GS-4):
Current staffing levels do not allow for adequate or complete mechanical testing of all generators by the Generator Maintenance Unit due to a lack of staff.
The Unit is also charged with assisting the Receipt and Inspection Unit in the inspection of generators and equipment for all SDS and other missions.
Generators received from other missions must be repaired, preserved, stored and also frequently maintained.
In order to perform the mechanical repair and maintenance of all SDS (244), United Nations Reserve (69) and UNLB (11) generators, an additional United Nations post is required.
The current single United Nations generator mechanic is unable to handle the workload of maintaining the 324 generators and refurbish generators received from liquidating and downsizing missions and to service the UNLB generators.
The Unit is also responsible to assist missions with the synchronizing of generators and the installation of automatic switchover panels.
To assist the single United Nations staff generator mechanic with this task one additional United Nations post is requested to allow for the training of a specialist in United Nations generator models and makes.
Electro-Mechanic Technician (GS-4):
Generators received from other missions must be refurbished, preserved, stored and maintained.
In order to perform the electrical repair and maintenance of all engineering equipment fitted with electrical installations for power generation two additional United Nations posts are requested.
This is essential if UNLB is to provide the required quarterly maintenance for 324 generators and also for repair and maintenance of the electrical systems associated with cooling equipment.
Over the past two budget periods, the Generator Maintenance Unit has begun providing missions with equipment custom designed to their needs, such as synchronized generator sets (UNMEE) and panel set-ups (UNAMSIL).
This has also included the assembly of electrical panels from the empty enclosure through to the finished product, including the original design of the wiring and installation diagrams.
These projects have provided the requesting missions with ready-to-use and state-of-the-art equipment that has reduced the time required by the mission to assemble the equipment, and put it into operation, thus rendering UNLB's assistance and support to DPKO missions more effective and efficient.
UNLB is unable to provide this sought after improvement in delivery of service with only one United Nations staff electro-mechanic, and therefore UNLB requests two additional posts for electro-technicians.
Air Conditioning Technician (GS-4):
The Generator Maintenance Unit takes care of all UNLB cooling systems including maintenance of the mission critical central cooling system in the network control centre which is the hub for all DPKO communications and information technology.
GMU is also responsible for the inspection, testing and maintenance of the refrigerated containers managed by Supply and Property Management Section, Transport Section and all the Engineering electrical equipment in SDS, United Nations Reserve and UNLB including refrigerators and cookers held in the 50, 100, 250 and 500-man field kitchens.
The Unit also refurbishes, stores, and maintains air conditioning units received from missions.
One staff member must be on 24-hour standby to support the air-conditioning requirement of building 178, the Galileo server rooms, building 92 International Computing Centre offices and the satellite farm.
Since the one United Nations technician cannot perform all of these duties alone and be on call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, one additional United Nations technician is required.
Electrician (GS-4):
Electrical safety best practices require the presence of two qualified electricians whenever work is performed on active systems.
There is currently only one (1) United Nations staff electrician in the Building Management Unit.
This person is not able to handle all the electrical related work orders in this Base and is permanently supported by one (1) independent contractor.
The biggest task is to upgrade the internal wiring network and to replace the electrical distribution boards in buildings turned over to UNLB.
These older buildings are not wired to support air conditioners, computers, copy machines, printers and similar items that dramatically increase the electrical load.
In all cases offices have to be rewired, new fuse boxes installed and additional wall sockets installed to support the electrical equipment according to Italian standards.
Over and above this function, it is the constant flow of normal work orders, pressure for more security lighting, back-up power, automatic switch-over panels and similar tasks that place an incredible workload and responsibility on one person.
An electrician is on 24-hour standby to be able to support electrical problems.
To meet these safety and operational requirements one additional core post Electrician is requested.
Administrative Clerk (GS-4):
Equally important to performing maintenance actions are the administrative tasks of recording, scheduling and following up on actions.
This post is to ensure a smooth and efficient workflow of work orders for maintenance and repair tasks, to process and issue requests for the same, and track and update all relevant databases.
This post would be responsible to maintain database of projects executed in-house with the staff of the Building Management Unit.
As of today this function has been carried out by one independent contractor for more than two years.
One additional United Nations post in this Unit is the minimum needed to maintain up-to-date documentation for all Building Management Unit works carried out.
Store Workers (GS-4):
The Engineer Stores include all assets and expendables for SDS — current value at US$ 13 million rising to US$ 38 million when fully stocked, United Nations Reserve — US$ 8.5 million, and UNLB stock — US$ 3 million.
Engineering stores are currently maintained in 14 different warehouses and, when fully stocked, will include 1,540 containers in 5 outdoor storage yards.
Rotation and maintenance regimes of SDS equipment will greatly increase the level of activities over what has been the past experience.
In addition to the above, Engineering has to carry out write-off activities.
The Engineering Section currently has six United Nations staff store workers.
Four additional United Nations store workers are the minimum required to ensure proper maintenance, accountability and issue of nearly $50 million of engineering stocks.
Administrative Inventory Clerks (GS-4):
These posts are currently filled by three independent contractors who have been performing the functions for the last two years continuously.
Their critical activities include receipt of equipment, coding items, preparing documentation for issuance of material, and preparation of release vouchers.
With an inventory of $50 million, it is essential that properly qualified and trained staff are available and accountable for the processing of inventory documentation and data input.
Conversion of these three independent contractors positions to United Nations posts is essential for maintaining current and accurate documentation and to ensure that records reflect the correct status of material for deployment to missions.
Technical Support Services/Transport Section
Justifications
Senior Vehicle Mechanic (GS-4 (2))/(GS-5 (4)):
When UNLB was given the new mission of the strategic deployment stocks (SDS), no additional United Nations mechanic posts were given to the Transport Section.
The Section is still maintaining the UNLB, United Nations Reserve and SDS fleets, totalling more than 1,300 assets, with only two United Nations staff mechanics.
The gap is filled with 16 individual contractors.
Though United Nations Reserve and SDS fleets will continue to be supported by individual contractors, additional United Nations staff mechanics are vital to act as quality assurance, supervisors and trainers for the independent contractor mechanics.
United Nations staff posts are required instead of independent contractors because of the technical training required for maintenance.
Training is provided by the vendors on a regular basis and is vital for the proper maintenance of the fleets.
By regulations independent contractors are not authorized to receive training, and it is impossible to find mechanics on the local market who are versed in the 92 different types of equipment specific to the SDS fleet acquired from 27 manufacturers (i.e. Nissan, Toyota, Renault, Hyster, Hyundai, Caterpillar etc.) and incorporating a wide range of technologies.
An additional six United Nations posts are required to provide properly trained mechanics in the workshop.
Drivers (GS-3):
Currently the Logistics Base has no United Nations drivers.
All daily driving requirements are handled by independent contractors.
UNLB is home to DPKO's Centre of Excellence, which provides over 100 courses per year averaging 65 students a week requiring daily transportation to and from training.
In addition, the SDS fleet will be stored at San Pancrazio/San Vito, which is located 45/10 km from UNLB.
Every time a piece of equipment requires heavy maintenance, a properly licensed driver is required to move it from and to the site.
The driver also acts as a first-level mechanic handling all basic user level maintenance on the vehicle fleet.
These functions require a United Nations staff member who is authorized to attend training and become licensed on all vehicle types.
For the past several years this requirement has been filled by independent contractor staff on a full-time basis.
Store man (GS-4):
Transport Section has only one United Nations store man for the Transport warehouse.
The current stock of $3 million in spare parts and consumables is expected to grow with the arrival of the full SDS fleet by an additional $2 million and 4,000 line items.
This large inventory is currently managed by three independent contractors.
Vehicles are becoming increasingly complex as are the manufacturers' spare parts systems and United Nations accounting tools.
As independent contractor staff are not authorized to attend off-site vendor technical training, it is becoming increasingly difficult to sustain an ever-growing stores inventory using staff with an uncertain future and with technical skills that cannot be developed significantly.
Without properly trained staff, the warehouse cannot function.
Their stores management function is a long-term requirement and as such a minimum of two additional United Nations positions are required.
Technical Support/Communications and Information Technology Section
Justifications
The increased workload of Communications and Information Technology Section (CITS) staff in support of the DPKO wide area network/hub (WAN) for the support of missions and agencies and UNLB Campus Area Network for UNLB staff and sections is evident in the rise in the number of services provided, the number of users served and the quantities of equipment being installed and maintained for United Nations Reserve, SDS, and UNLB assets.
These are summarized below:
• The information technology and communications equipment allotment has increased by 412 per cent from $1.6 million in 2002/03 budget year to $7.6 million in 2003/04 budget year and $8.2 million in the current (2004/05) budget year.
• The total material release order processed increased by 70 per cent from 162 (valued $23.5 million) in 2002/03 budget year to 275 (valued $24.4 million) in 2003/04 budget year.
• On the local CITS support, the number of supported staff increased by 65 per cent from 189 in 2002/03 budget year to 312 in 2003/04 budget year.
Majority of the increase is in individual contractors and International Computing Centre staff.
• Mission services, such as the DPKO wide area network have also increased dramatically.
For example, web-hosting services, backup of mission data for disaster recovery purpose, centralized Internet services, Tier III type of help desk support, satellite services and telephony services are among the services that have increased dramatically in the last three years.
To ensure stability of the workforce, professionalism, accountability, knowledge in technology and United Nations rules, regulations and policies, it is essential that independent contractor positions performing core functions be converted to United Nations posts.
Unless they are United Nations staff, UNLB is unable to train the staff to improve technical competence, security and efficiencies in the services.
With higher responsibility also comes the need to ensure that they are bound by the same staff rules, regulations and ethics as United Nations staff.
Storekeepers (GS-4):
The CITS warehouses will manage, receive, ship SDS/United Nations Reserve/ UNLB CITS assets valued stocks, in average, 13,400 items valued at US$ 47 million with SDS at maximum capacity, 320 items valued US$ 5.7 million in Field Administration and Logistics Division-Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 3,500 items valued $18.5 million in UNLB and 2,025 items valued $4.2 million in United Nations Reserve.
The services provided include processing material release orders for SDS and United Nations Reserve; support to receiving and inspection actions for SDS, United Nations Reserve and UNLB assets and maintaining CITS inventory of assets in stock and in-use.
These tasks are being performed by six independent contractors in addition to daily work delivering and receiving CITS assets for maintenance and transfer purposes, performing monthly walk-through inventory of main CITS operational areas (NCC/Satellite Farm) and processing write-off assets.
These six positions perform functions that need to be covered by United Nations staff posts to enable CITS to train and provide more efficient and secure service for UNLB and missions.
Administrative Assistants (GS-5 x 1, GS-4 x 1):
Owing to increased CITS activities, administrative support tasks have also increased.
To manage the increase, CITS has employed two independent contractor personnel to cope with daily administrative work, including in the area of CITS human resources (leave, training, attendance, etc.), raising/reviewing requisitions, monitoring and reporting budget and expenditures, managing training plans and coordination with vendors and missions for the repair and maintenance of DPKO CITS equipment.
These two positions perform functions that need to be undertaken by United Nations staff to enable UNLB CITS to train the staff and provide more efficient and secure service for UNLB and missions.
IT and Communication Technicians (GS-4):
The functions presently provided by independent contractors include maintenance of satellite trailers, broadcast studios, mobile deployable telecommunications system and rapidly deployable telecommunications system systems and maintenance and upgrade of SDS, United Nations Reserve, and UNLB assets.
In addition, independent contractors support the UNLB campus network, UNLB Helpdesk and Centre of Excellence.
Many of these functions concern not only UNLB but extend to the critical support provided by UNLB to missions and to the DPKO capacity to rapidly establish new missions.
The skill sets required imply high levels of training in the use of sophisticated technical equipment, a long-term approach to ensure quality of service and consistency.
These are not compatible with the short-term use of independent contractor staff.
The addition of 12 United Nations posts in lieu of 12 independent contractor staff will enable UNLB CITS to train and provide more efficient and secure service for UNLB and missions retaining all investment spent on training.
Technical Support/Supply and Warehousing Section
Justification
Impact of the SDS programme on UNLB is profound.
This programme, worth about US$ 140 million has substantially increased the activity at UNLB.
Without any mission being established it is reckoned that 60 per cent [$84 million] of SDS will undergo a change, i.e. 30 per cent [$42 million] of SDS coming in and 30 per cent of SDS going out and 40 per cent [$56 million] of SDS staying in UNLB awaiting shipment.
As per General Assembly document A/56/871 dated 14 March 2002, UNLB also provides receiving and inspection on all equipment shipped to UNLB but destined for other missions.
This reflects a clear increase in all supply and property management units' activity.
The scope of core activity has expanded owing to SDS factors.
The opening of new missions and downsizing missions will result in surges of activity.
The surges can be handled by the use of individual contractors [independent contractors].
Receiving and Inspection Clerk (GS-4):
Three (3) additional United Nations staff posts are required in the Receiving and Inspection Unit to provide sufficient trained and experienced staff to undertake and supervise duties that include inspection, configuration of equipment, entering the items into the inventory, searching for information, liaising with United Nations HQ technical sections and vendors, verifying data, following up on discrepancies and keeping accurate records.
The three additional United Nations posts required are two Cargo Inspectors and one Receiving and Inspection Clerk, with the functions of data entry of equipment in the Galileo system.
Receiving and Inspection is presently staffed by one United Nations international staff and four independent contractors performing these functions.
One United Nations staff member is not sufficient to perform the functions of receiving and inspection effectively and three additional United Nations staff members are required to meet the increased demands of the quantity and complexity of SDS equipment.
Property Control and Inventory Unit Clerks (GS-4):
Property Control and Inventory Unit is monitoring, physically verifying and reporting on a much higher volume of United Nations-owned equipment.
These functions include: check and analyse newly received assets, follow-up on shipped assets to ensure receipt by mission, update inventory records in respect to written-off and disposed assets, conduct physical verification of non-expendable property, monitor all electronic transfers, create inventory reports (monthly, financial year-end and customs, and various management reports as required) in respect of all three inventories maintained by UNLB.
The Unit presently has one international staff member and five independent contractors in full-time positions to carry out routine tasks in this area.
Two additional United Nations posts are required to provide properly trained staff capable of undertaking and supervising these tasks and to be deployable for short-term assignments to missions to assist with a major influx of new equipment.
Administrative Clerks, Materials Management (GS-4):
The stocks coming in to UNLB and the shipment of SDS to missions requires the preparation of extensive document processing, customs clearances, contracts for shipping, insurance and other related services.
This has created an increased workload in the Movcon and Materials Management Unit areas.
Key tasks include: control all incoming and outgoing cargo deliveries, arrange customs clearance authorization for incoming and outgoing cargo, follow-up on consignment delivery to missions, agencies, United Nations HQ, initiate and oversee insurance claims, update the material release order database and material release order case file on the status of preparation of each authorized material release order, produce operations planning sheets to allow a correct overview of the outgoing shipments under preparation, control and follow-up on status of outgoing shipments to ensure that cargo is received by peacekeeping missions within 30 days of commitment authority or in the shortest time possible, coordinate with vendors delivery of goods to UNLB in accordance with contract arrangements, and handle the traffic flow of cargo within UNLB facilities.
Currently, the Materials Management Unit is composed of five United Nations staff members.
Activities have increased considerably with the implementation and rotation of SDS, making it essential that three additional United Nations staff positions be approved to ensure fully trained and experienced staff are available to perform these key functions.
Store worker, General Supply and Warehousing (GS-4):
Warehousing involves the physical handling of stores, stuffing them into shelving and containers, moving them on the base, loading aircraft, making containers ready for shipment to missions.
Key tasks include: selection of materials in response to headquarters issued material release orders on a first in-first out basis to ensure stock rotation, provide material availability status reports in response to material release orders issued by Logistics Support Division/Office of Mission Support/ DPKO, operate small capacity mechanical handling equipment, including electrical equipment such as trilateral forklifts, prepare and pack SDS stores for transfer to peacekeeping missions, perform physical stock checks and stock reconciliation of inventory against receipt and issues in order to maintain an updated and accurate record of all equipment in stores.
The increased turnover of SDS material and the handover of a new SDS warehouse (6,800m3) requires the increase of one experienced and trained United Nations staff on a long-term basis to supervise the management of the warehouse operations and to guarantee the readiness of the SDS stores and the management of inventories in that warehouse.
Annex V
The 56 independent contractors represent personnel for non-core functions and surge requirements budgeted for an estimated 10 months per independent contractor during the budget period 2005/06.
The estimates for these 56 independent contractors are reflected for seven months under “Facilities and Infrastructure”, “Ground Transportation”, “Communications” and “Information Technology”.
However, for the last three months UNLB plans to sub-contract the 56 independent contractors and therefore the related requirements are shown under “Other supplies, services and equipment”.
UNLB would require the first nine months of the budget period to prepare the tender documentation and complete the procurement process which will also require Headquarters Committee on Contracts approval.
After 1 April 2006, independent contractor contracts will cease and all non-core and surge capacity will be managed through the sub-contract.
Overall estimated cost of 56 independent contractors
Rate = $3,710/month
Three month cost = $3,710 x 3 x 56 independent contractors = $623,280
15 per cent management fee = $93,492
One time establishment fee = $60,000
Total cost = $776,772
Functional titles of 56 independent contractors