# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Firstly: absolute compliance with the UN' s decisions on the area.
Secondly: the boundaries of the states in the area are non-negotiable, even if it proves necessary in critical cases to adopt flexible forms of administrative autonomy and greater decentralisation.
I note that if there are some who think solutions will emerge either by creating new states or by redistribution between states, they are making a tragic mistake.
That would lead to continued and lasting tension with no foreseeable end.
A domino effect.
Without exaggeration, at the beginning of the 21st century we would have a new thirty-year war, 10 years of which, in any case, we have unfortunately lived through.
Thirdly: our policy must concern the peoples, and only them.
That is what is also in Europe' s interests.
Fourthly: the issue of economic and institutional reconstruction is an urgent priority.
Positive results will emerge through development, democracy and prosperity.
For the first time you are passing judgement on a complex problem at the very periphery of the European Union.
The EU' s political credibility and competence must prove successful.
It is a bet which must be won.
I hope that the strong convergence of support for the Lagendijk report achieved in the Committee on Foreign Affairs will find the same response in Parliament, and thereby express the desire of us all for a positive and stable outcome.
Mr President, I would thank the rapporteur for a report that the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party can fully support.
I should like to take up a subject mentioned neither in the Commission' s announcement nor in the report and so run the risk of its being said that I am operating at too low a level.
The subject I want to bring up is that of women' s involvement in the reconstruction programme, and I wish to do so because women and children have always been the major victims when it comes to conflicts, civil wars and wars generally.
Assaults upon women, rape, killing and torture are daily fare and have been so for many years recently in the countries of south-eastern Europe.
I think it is absolutely crucial, if cultural understanding is to be promoted and a proper reconstruction programme prepared, that women should be involved - and involved very centrally - in the processes concerned.
I am taking up this matter because not enough - although, fortunately, a little - has in actual fact been done in this area.
It is in fact the case that a gender task force has been established under working party 1, but this has not happened because of any initiative from above but because of an initiative from below when a number of women have - if I may put it like this - approached the conference table and asked if it were not unreasonable for them, in one way or another, to have a central place in the whole of the reconstruction work.
It is a number of quite concrete, down-to-earth things these women have proposed, such as developing a proper programme for women and involving women in the general development plans.
The initiative is also, of course, about getting women to stand at elections at local, regional and national levels.
If, however, the initiative is to succeed, these women also need to receive money for the projects concerned.
Otherwise, these will not happen.
Moreover, the amount of money involved is small in relation to the other money which, hopefully, will eventually be paid out in this area.
I would therefore ask both the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council to take care to ensure that, where future work is concerned, women are involved in the reconstruction processes.
I do not, in fact, believe that the project will succeed if that does not happen.
Mr President, whatever its positive points, this report is flawed by the demands and requirements set out in the Stability Pact.
In other words, it essentially accepts that the wolf can guard the sheep.
By its very nature, the Stability Pact in Eastern Europe is intrusive, on the pretext that human rights and democracy are being protected.
I will not yet again refer to how the European Union is reacting to the flagrant violations of human rights in Turkey and elsewhere or the strident violations of those rights inside the European Union, i.e. the double standards policy.
For the moment, I will just note that the Pact' s real aim is to ensure the political and economic dependence of the countries in the area, to plunder their wealth and to overexploit their workforce.
As is also stressed in the report, it is particularly worrying that in the area there will be a test of the European Union' s - I quote - 'ability to develop an effective civil and military crisis management strategy aimed at conflict prevention' .
In other words, new interventions are being prepared, even military ones, with the aim of converting the area into a protectorate.
The tragic situation brought on by the criminal intervention of NATO and the European Union in Kosovo and particularly in Yugoslavia is indicative of what is likely to happen.
Besides, respect for borders is not a matter of generalised declarations and wishes, as they occur in the report, but practical respect for the territorial sovereignty and integrity of these countries, in other words precisely the opposite of what the European Union and the USA are doing.
It is clear that those who support this Stability Pact want to frustrate any resistance to their plans, especially when it involves conflict.
They try, either by force or by economic blackmail, to terrorise peoples and subjugate them to the new order.
And the question is this: what principle of international law are they basing their actions on?
Convinced, then, that the Stability Pact will bring new strife to peoples in the area and reinforce the dominance of the USA and the European Union, we will vote against the report and step up our fight against the Pact and on behalf of peace, friendship and solidarity between the peoples.
Mr President, I would like to make three observations regarding Mr Lagendijk' s inspiring and excellent report.
Firstly, the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe focuses on regional cooperation in the Balkans.
It is precisely this cooperation which the European Union wishes to promote in the best possible way.
Well, this regional cooperation still leaves too much to be desired.
The basic pursuit of common interests is being undermined by a longing for prestige and rivalry among the various nations.
In this way, the swift implementation of the innovative Stability Pact is being hampered.
What is needed here is a powerful response from the European Union.
This should go hand in hand with a selfless and more balanced selection of regional aid projects.
Secondly, I consider Paragraph 26 in the Lagendijk report to be a fine idea.
Indeed, the Stability Pact applies just as much across the borders of the region.
As such, the Republic Moldavia definitely deserves the opportunity of being directly involved in the Pact.
After all, the alternative would be that Moldavia would be in danger of finding itself in a kind of political no man' s land.
What is more: Moldavia is linked with neighbouring Romania both culturally and politically.
If Romania falls under the scope of the Stability Pact, so does Moldavia, therefore.
Thirdly, the success of this Stability Pact may well set a positive precedent for the East, with the Pact extended in the direction of the currently very unstable Caucasus.
Am I right in thinking that Russia already subscribes to the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe?
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I would like to congratulate Mr Lagendijk on his excellent report.
I think it is both pleasing and highly productive to have achieved a consensus spanning several groups on how the problems facing South-Eastern Europe should be tackled - one could revert to saying "the Balkans" again in the light of the fact that, interestingly, a representative of Croatia at the meeting under the chairmanship of Mrs Pack, said they would dare to go as far as to say again that Croatia is part of the Balkans.
We must take an overall view of the Balkans or South-Eastern Europe - whichever term we prefer - because there are pronounced similarities between the countries.
However, that must not prevent us from responding differently to individual countries, all depending on how willing they are to take part in this overall process.
We had a discussion on Macedonia recently - I had the opportunity to draft a report on this, and would again like to thank those of you who supported me - in fact we were debating a stabilisation and association agreement.
Croatia is currently the main object of our attention.
Croatia has experienced a political watershed.
I do not want to pass belated judgement on what has been, but only express my hopes for what is to come.
That is why we must support Croatia every step of the way as it strikes out in this new direction, which does not involve excluding the opposition but endeavouring to enlist their support.
But there is a new government and attitudes towards the refugee situation, economic development and, in particular, Europe, have changed.
I would particularly like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council to work together with the other fourteen countries to ensure that the European Investment Bank is at last in a position to extend credits to Croatia.
It is grotesque that Croatia, I am sorry to say, still does not have the option of receiving credits from the European Investment Bank.
Of course the other countries must also be given due regard and support.
That much is clear.
There can be no discussion whatsoever on that point, but for the moment I believe Croatia is to the fore.
If we have a few cornerstones of regional development, such as Macedonia, Croatia, and hopefully also Albania soon, then it will be possible to create a network of stability in South-Eastern Europe.
There is a final point I would particularly like to address: the donor conference, which was highly successful - I am grateful to the President-in-Office of the Council, but I would particularly like to thank the Commissioner, both of whom helped to make the donor conference a success - concentrated above all on material infrastructure, and indeed that is what we need in South-Eastern Europe.
However, we also need the appropriate mental infrastructure.
We need a change of attitude on the part of the people in this region.
That is why I am particularly keen to urge you, despite all the rumours we have heard, to see to it that due attention is given to furthering all matters to do with learning and education, and with the "Graz process" , i.e. to do with changing people' s attitudes and behaviour, solidarity and tolerance.
It may cost relatively little, but it is still important to enable the people there to see that above and beyond the material aspects of their lives - bridges, roads, railways etc. they also share a common future, reached through mutual understanding and support.
Mr President, I will make three points.
The first is that Mr Lagendijk' s report has interesting ideas, positive proposals, but I very much fear that it is a naïve report which cannot be implemented in the Balkans by the European Union' s policy.
When basic factors such as respect of the Balkan borders are missing, when we play games with Montenegro and Kosovo, when this is coupled with the antagonism being shown towards the Milosevic regime, I think we are already undermining every positive effort we should be making.
The European Union must conclude that it should respect the frontiers in the Balkans, and that is something quite different from its attitude towards Milosevic.
The second point I want to stress is that financing part of the reconstruction plans by reducing agricultural expenditure must finally stop.
I think that the donor conference makes this possible, or seems to at least.
The third point I would like to make here is that there are parts of Greece, yes, unfortunately Greece, for example the Prefecture of Pieria, a tourist province in Central Macedonia, which has suffered enormous economic damage because tourists no longer come to that area.
Such issues should be considered by the European Union as well.
Mr President, I am not about to start arguing the toss with Mr Swoboda over where the Balkans begin.
In fact, it was once said that the Balkans begin at the Rennweg in Vienna.
But leaving that aside, the fact remains that this Stability Pact is of course adversely affected by the heterogeneity of its States.
We have first and second wave candidate countries.
We have countries such as Croatia and Macedonia that are about to overtake candidate countries.
We have States such as Bosnia-Herzegovina and Albania in which the State is scarcely functioning, and then the two decisive challenges, namely Yugoslavia, or Serbia, where it is a question of doing everything we can to foster democratisation and develop a long-term strategy for the Europeanisation of Serbia.
Secondly, Kosovo, where we will never achieve success unless elected political structures come into being there, along with a long-term vision of what is to happen to this region, which will never again be a Serbian province.
We cannot afford to hang about over this issue any longer; otherwise all we will be doing is tinkering about at the edges, as it were.
But that is not the only factor adversely affecting the Stability Pact, it is also suffering from a lack of credibility on the part of the international organisations and also the European Union, which owing to a confusion of competences, wastage, and mismanagement, are displaying traits that would be dismissed as being typical of the Balkans, were it not for the fact that this is happening in our own organisations.
We are losing a great deal in the way of credit and respect in this region, and this respect and credibility are fundamentally even more important than the promises of funding that are made and then not kept.
I truly believe we must put this situation in order in the European Union, primarily by strengthening the Commission' s role in the matter.
Commissioner, I have a great deal of faith in your work, but I must say that we as a Parliament must also ensure that you are able to give this work more in-depth attention than you have been able to hitherto.
What we need here is cooperation between our two institutions, so as to strengthen the EU and its credibility.
Mr President, I, too, consider this to be a satisfactory, significant report.
I would, however, stress certain points.
We know that the countries of the South-East are a priority, but we must be careful not to give ourselves more priorities than we can handle and not to establish conflicting priorities or we will lose credibility.
I refer to the Mediterranean policy and the Middle East peace process, which are also priorities.
We must be consistent, as I will remind the Council when we come to discuss the budgetary issues.
Secondly, it should be borne in mind that the regional approach is appropriate and important, and that it is important for the European Union to play a guiding role throughout this matter.
I therefore call upon the Commission and the Council to ensure, in the management of this extremely complex process, that the balance is maintained between the regional dimension of the Pact and the bilateral Association and Stabilisation Agreements, or we may end up sending contradictory signals to these countries.
Finally, I would like to mention two other points: the former Yugoslavia and crime.
With regard to the former Yugoslavia, I feel that we must follow the recommendations of the report and gradually reduce the embargo on the civil community until it has been lifted completely, because to continue to enforce it will only serve to postpone the fall of Milosevic.
The sooner we do this, the better.
Apart from anything else, the embargo is affecting other countries in the region, including several candidate countries.
It is causing serious harm.
And who can lift it if Europe does not?
It appears that even the United States are expecting us to lift the embargo.
We must find the courage to take this step.
Lastly, as other Members have reminded us, we must deal with society as well as infrastructures.
It might be interesting to meet with the chairmen of the three Working Tables to discuss these projects; maybe the Committee on Foreign Affairs could see to this.
Society is important, and that is why we must continue with information and culture projects.
For example, my city, Rome, is organising the young artists' biannual event in Sarajevo and funding the Sarajevo Concert Hall, precisely to give a sense of the reconstruction of a society within which there is dialogue, but which has dialogue with us as well.
Then there is the issue of crime.
My country, Italy, has a very high organised crime rate.
Puglia, for example, is a region which has to tackle crime organisations with a base in our country as well as elsewhere.
I would include this among the priorities I mentioned before, because investments will also be affected if this level of organised crime is maintained.
Mr President, I arrived in the Chamber this afternoon with an extremely good speech, which I would like to thank my cabinet for most warmly; but perhaps I can deliver it on another occasion because I would actually like to respond informally to this debate.
Members of the House will have noticed that the High Representative and I produced a report for the Lisbon Council, and I suspect that Mr Lagendijk might have noticed that it bore a striking similarity to his own report.
I am not sure which was chicken and egg, but I feel that in complimenting Mr Lagendijk on the report he will not take it amiss and think that I am really congratulating Mr Solana and myself.
Yet there was a great deal of similarity.
It is fair to say that our work for the Lisbon Council was very much motivated by the strong feeling that unless we can make a success of our efforts in the Balkans, the whole credibility of our attempts to construct a common foreign and security policy will be shattered.
It is enormously important that we rise to the challenge in the Balkans.
A point we made to the heads of government in Lisbon in our report - which was very much reflected in the week that I spent recently in the region - is that the stabilisation and association process has to be at the heart of our strategy.
To put it in a rather more demotic way, in the phrase used by my honourable friend Ms Pack, what it means is designing, helping countries along the road to Europe.
They want to be integrated with the Euro-Atlantic structures; they want that as an alternative to the traumatic disintegration of the last few years.
We have to make that a real process for them.
There were a lot of references to the Stability Pact conference the other day, which as several people have said was a considerable success.
The offers made by donors exceeded by a comfortable margin the expectations at the beginning of the conference.
There are a couple of points I want to make about it.
One, in response to Mr Lagendijk, it is true that some of the money going into the quick-start projects supported by the European Union was money from the 1998 and 1999 budgets.
There is a simple reason for that, which is that in some cases we had already carried out feasibility studies and made preparations for these quick-start projects.
In my book, new money is money you have not spent already.
Unfortunately, given the fact that our budget is based on commitments and payments, and not just payments unlike the budgets in almost all the Member States, that is a particularly important factor.
Committing money does not always mean spending it, the next year or the year after or even in the next decade.
It is important to be clear about that.
This follows up the point made by Mr Swoboda and it is a point with which I strongly agree.
We are not just talking about infrastructure in terms of hardware, we must also talk about infrastructure in terms of software.
That includes the rule of law, democratisation, the sort of civil society projects to which the honourable gentleman was referring; and it includes education - a point I will come back to in a moment.
I want to make one or two other points which arose at Lisbon and which we are following up.
First of all, we were charged in the Commission at Lisbon to bring forward a package of proposals on asymmetric trade concessions for the region.
It is worth remembering that the total exports from the Balkans to the European Union represent about 0.6% of our total imports.
For agricultural products the figure is about 0.16%.
So this is an area where we could afford to be a little generous.
We are also trying speed up our assistance and make it more effective.
I announced yesterday agreement in the Commission on a rapid reaction facility.
We will be coming forward to Parliament in the next few months with our new regulation for assistance to the West Balkans, which I hope will make it more rapid, more flexible and will, of course, have to include sufficient funding for projects supporting gender issues.
I can think of no single model of successful economic or political development which does not include at its heart sensible programmes to ensure that women can develop their full potential and play a full role in their communities.
One point on education: last winter, despite all the cynicism, our energy for democracy programme in Serbia was extraordinarily successful.
Alas, there are not many occasions when people cheer the European Union in the streets - all too few occasions in the country I know best.
But that happened in some of those cities last winter.
The Mayor of Nis has just written a letter saying that Energy for Democracy was a model of the sort of political support we should be providing in his country.
The winter is over, so there is not the same urgent necessity for oil at the moment.
We are looking at ways to extend that sort of scheme.
What we have been thinking of, among other ideas, is education for democracy: providing schools with equipment, school-books and other facilities, cash to carry out small improvements to classrooms and so on, and with sports equipment - all those sorts of things which can make for a better life for the kids in those towns while they have to wait with their families for the departure - sooner rather than later, I hope - of Mr Milosevic.
I hope we are at last going to see more progress on the cleaning up of the Danube, which is crucial for the region.
We had useful meetings with the Danube Commission last week and I hope that the annual meeting of the Danube Commission this week will see us managing to set all that in motion, with the European Union meeting about 85% of the cost of the clean-up.
I have spoken before of my concerns about Montenegro.
Following my visit there about a month ago, we have doubled our Obnova support for Montenegro from EUR 10 to 20m.
We are also providing a good deal there in terms of food security and so on.
I very much hope that the European Investment Bank will lend some money within reasonable limits to Montenegro before too long.
Finally, the honourable Member asked about the scale of our financial commitments to the Balkans.
There will be other occasions when I can follow this up in greater detail.
For me one of the real tests is whether all those yards of Council communiqués and all those promises about Marshall plans and so on for the Balkans actually amount to a row of beans!
This year we will be spending about EUR 540m in the western Balkans.
Because of the front-loading of our commitments in Kosovo, next year we will need to spend about EUR 800m in the Balkans.
About EUR 350m of that will go to Kosovo.
It must be said that it does not involve huge increases in expenditure elsewhere but we have to provide support in a country like Croatia where there is a good and decent government trying to do a difficult job in extremely problematic circumstances.
We have to spend money with those stabilisation and association countries which are negotiating seriously with us on the road to Europe.
For me, in public-spending terms, the crucial year is always year one - you are lucky if you get to year two or three.
Year one is actually the big year of expenditure for us.
Overall, at Istanbul, when we were asked how much we thought we could spend in the region, recognising that it was subject to the budgetary authority - I know all the theology of these matters now - we reckoned about EUR 5.5bn.
People say that is a crazy figure.
Well, I am keen that we should no longer be in the position we are in now where, despite the interinstitutional agreement, we are told by a lot of people that we have to find the extra money for Kosovo within the financial envelope agreed before Kosovo became a necessity.
One thing I have insisted on is a realistic figure in our budgeting for reconstruction in Serbia, because I do not want to find myself in two or three years time having to find additional costs for Serbia out of that same budget.
We reckon that applying the same sort of figures applied in Kosovo, we would need about EUR 2.3bn for a serious reconstruction programme in Serbia.
That could only start once Milosevic has gone.
However, in my view it would be thoroughly irresponsible for us to suggest figures to this Parliament or Council which did not include an element of what we think would be realistic for Serbia.
That is based on economists' figures and our assessment that we need to meet the same sort of a proportion of expenditure on Serbia that we have met in Kosovo.
The rest - EUR 3.2bn - over seven years does not strike me as being outlandishly generous.
That is how we reached the figure of EUR 5.5bn and I have slightly resented the implication in some newspapers that this is a figure we have plucked out of the air and does not make any sense.
I should be delighted to explain it not just in more detail to Parliament but I am looking forward in due course to explaining it in more detail to the General Affairs Council.
Who knows, if I was lucky enough one day, I might even be able to explain it to finance ministers.
I respond to the honourable Member' s well-intentioned question in that way.
This is not a figure plucked out of the air: it is an attempt to provide an honest assessment of what our rhetoric actually means.
People cannot resent the fact that they do it: they asked us to do it in relation to the Middle East - to give some idea of what the cost of a peace settlement would be for the European Union' s programmes.
So let us see the cost of it in the Balkans.
If we are going to have an argument about the relationship between rhetoric and reality, let us start here.
My final point: we are clearly talking in the Balkans about building peace and security, not just in our backyard but in our front yard too.
We are talking about building peace and security in an integral part of our European common home.
I hope we can do so in practice with the rhetoric, with the promises, with the optimism that we show in all those rhetorical communiqués.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
Question Time (Council)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0216/2000).
We will examine questions to the Council.
As they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 1, 2 and 3 will be taken together.
Question No 1 by (H-0255/00):
Subject: Flagrant violation by Turkey of the rule of law and human rights The leader of the People' s Democracy Party of Turkey, together with 17 other members of the party' s leadership, has been sentenced to a three-year and nine months' term of imprisonment for supporting the hunger strike that took place in solidarity with Abdullah Öcalan when he was handed over to the Turkish secret services in Kenya.
Three mayors of towns in S.E. Turkey, who are supporters of the same party, were also arrested on charges of collaborating with the PKK.
Other Turkish parties besides HADEP have voiced their opposition to the arrests and sentences, arguing that they are a flagrant breach of democracy, freedom of expression and the basic principles of the rule of law.
Will the Council raise the matter of the arrest and conviction of democrats for their opinions, and call for unhindered freedom of expression in Turkey together with freedom of formation and operation for all political parties?
Question No 2 by (H-0286/00):
Subject: Human rights violations by Turkey In December 1999 Turkey became a candidate country for accession to the European Union.
Article 10 of the conclusions of the Helsinki Council Presidency states that Turkey must fulfil the general accession criteria, and in particular the Copenhagen criteria, if it is to become a Member of the European Union.
In February of this year three Kurdish mayors (of the towns of Diyarbakir, Siirt and Bingöl) were arrested on their return to Turkey after they had signed the Aalborg Charter in Hanover in Germany together with 4 colleagues making their towns members of the 'European Sustainable Cities and Towns Campaign' ; they are still being held in prison.
Since Turkey is guilty of continuous and repeated human rights violations, what does the Council intend to do prevail upon Turkey to meet the EU accession criteria?
Question No 3 by (H-0299/00):
Subject: Continued muzzling of freedom of expression and violation of the rule of law by Turkey The leader of the People' s Democracy Party (HADEP) of Turkey and 17 other members of the party leadership have been sentenced to prison terms of three years and nine months on charges of supporting the hunger strike organised in support of Abdullah Öcalan when he was handed over to the Turkish secret services in Kenya.
Three mayors of towns in south-eastern Turkey who are close to this party have also been arrested on charges of collaborating with the PKK.
Other Turkish parties apart from HADEP have expressed their opposition to these arrests and sentences, arguing that this move is totally incompatible with democracy, freedom of expression and the basic principles of the rule of law.
Will the Council say whether it intends to raise with the Turkish government the issue of the arrest and sentencing of democrats merely for making statements and to demand, as part of the pre-accession procedure, that Turkey give guarantees regarding unrestricted freedom of expression and allow all political parties to be founded and function without hindrance?
Mr President, the Council has already raised with the Turkish authorities the issue of the democratic rights of Turks of Kurdish origin, including those mentioned in the question.
It will continue to monitor this situation in Turkey as it develops and to act accordingly.
An Association Council meeting was held yesterday between the European Union and Turkey in which this issue was mentioned again.
The Turkish authorities were told of the EU' s concern about this type of issue and of its hope that the Turkish authorities will end what is currently interpreted as a non-compliance with certain basic criteria of respect for human and democratic rights and the protection of minorities.
Turkey was named by the Helsinki European Council as a candidate country for accession to the European Union.
This status places Turkey in absolutely the same position as any other candidate country in terms of both obligations and benefits.
Therefore, Turkey is subject to the same requirements as those imposed on any other candidate country but also naturally has the same rights.
The European Union cannot make a special case of Turkey which must be treated exactly the same as any other candidate country.
Turkey is therefore currently involved in a process in which its situation must be assessed in light of the criteria of the Copenhagen European Council.
These criteria are clear enough with regard to respect for the rule of law, democratic guarantees, fundamental freedoms and the protection of minorities.
These are a prerequisite for the opening of any negotiating process.
On the road towards this, a pre-accession strategy must be established between the Commission, on the EU' s behalf, and Turkey.
The preparation of this strategy involves non-governmental organisations, the Member States and the Turkish Government.
This accession partnership will define the priority areas for reform on which the European Union considers that Turkey must concentrate its efforts in order to comply, hopefully in a progressive, capable and complete manner, with the Copenhagen criteria.
Clearly it is in this context that the issues mentioned in the questions will be considered.
Yesterday we heard Mr Verheugen and today the Council' s representative acknowledging, even in small measure, some of the problems related to respect for human rights in Turkey concerning which, indeed, they expressed their sorrow.
Yet, both yesterday and today they underlined the supposed progress made by the Turkish regime in that area.
And we heard the representative of the Council telling us the same thing today.
The truth, however, is that contrary to what some people are claiming even in Greece, the Helsinki decisions on Turkey have emboldened the Turkish regime.
It is no mere chance that on the next day Turkey' s leaders declared that Turkey has become a candidate for accession without attached conditions.
It is not by chance that, while they have not complied with any of their commitments, they protest that they have not been given the appropriations provided for under customs union.
They also told us that Turkey intends to take steps.
But we have been hearing that in the Council of Europe for very many years, perhaps more than ten, without anything happening.
If anything, things are worse.
The campaigner for democracy and human rights who was shot was sent to prison again instead of his attackers being punished.
My question, then, is: specifically when does the Turkish regime intend to progress with democratising that country' s constitution and criminal code, to set free the leaders of HADEP and the Members of Parliament as well as all the political prisoners?
Will the Kurdish issue ever be resolved, will all the political parties be allowed freedom of formation and operation and finally, will Turkey ever withdraw its troops from Cyprus?
With regard to the comment that Mr Korakas' question was not a new one, I must say that Turkey' s application for accession to the European Union subjects it to closer scrutiny of its responsibilities in complying with the basic criteria for accession.
I believe that the Turkish authorities are well aware of this.
With regard to defining the pre-accession strategy and the accession partnership, Turkey' s problems will certainly be paid close attention, particularly in terms of respect for the basic criteria of acting in accordance with European standards.
In the past Turkey was a country in which we regularly and systematically undertook certain ad hoc initiatives according to the development of its internal situation.
But no more!
The internal situation is now becoming a strategic element in the progress made by Turkey towards approximation with the European Union.
In the specific case of Mr Birdal, I was able to meet him in Turkey in January of this year and I told him during this meeting of the EU' s solidarity with his situation.
It is clear in this respect that the EU has already indicated its concern to the Turkish authorities, through the appropriate channels, about his status and in particular his return to prison.
For a long time we have adopted a foreign policy which we allege is based on moral rules.
And not just that.
We have come to believe it ourselves and we claim to represent the world-wide moral conscience.
Already, however, we have reached an impasse, and not just in Turkey.
You see, morality must be applied towards everyone equally, regardless of risks and interests.
But that cannot happen.
You see, Belgrade can be bombed, but not Moscow, Beijing or Ankara.
Let us therefore acknowledge the obvious and return to tried and tested prescriptions.
In other words, let us speak of interests, the balance of powers and policy as the art of the possible.
If we do that we will certainly not be more moral, we will be more sincere and in that case we can all put our time to better use instead of play-acting as we are all doing now.
I am not sure that you have asked a question.
If there is no question, the Council is not obliged to answer, only to listen, as you know, Mr Seixas da Costa.
Mr Theonas wishes to rephrase his question.
I recommend to all of you that you begin with the question before making a declaration.
I have a comment and a specific question: would it not be better for the Council to give more specific answers when it asks for specific questions?
That was my comment.
Now, the question: if the pre-accession process for Turkey were to last twenty years, would all those who are imprisoned today have to wait those twenty years for the European Union to express interest?
Secondly, would the Council be prepared, in this whole process, to suspend or cancel obligations of the European Union relating to the pre-accession process as long as the people we are talking about remain in prison?
And finally, could some action ever be demanded from Turkey which would help resolve the Cyprus issue, granted that this is one of the issues which should be addressed as part of the pre-accession process?
Firstly, Mr Theonas, I do not agree with the comment that the Council presidency is not explicitly answering the questions raised by Members.
In fact, quite the contrary is true.
The ongoing process of Turkey' s approximation towards the European Union, which was started with its designation as a candidate in Helsinki, is one of progressive approximation.
The Member should realise that this process of progressive approximation is resulting in greater attention being paid than in the past by the European Union to Turkey' s internal situation and to the way in which this country acts with regard to the requirements imposed by the international community.
It is this point which really must be borne in mind.
Turkey is currently, on its own initiative and therefore as a result of its own political decision, the subject of close scrutiny in terms of compliance with the basic criteria.
This is not to be assessed over the next ten years but rather on a daily basis, usually within the pre-accession strategy process.
If there were a lack of progress on the fundamental issues under observation, the pre-accession process would suffer the respective consequences.
This is very clear to me.
Furthermore, the Helsinki conclusions, regardless of how they may be read, place the issue of Turkey and its relationship with Cyprus in a new perspective, which was in fact welcomed by the Cypriot authorities.
We must draw from this the appropriate conclusions about how the development in the Turkish position on the Cypriot issue may also affect the development of the Turkish position in its approximation towards the European Union.
A comment and question to the Council' s representative: is the answer he just gave us specific?
For goodness sake!
Mr Korakas, I must make a confession.
In political life, people are used to reading between the lines.
On such a delicate issue as the interpretation of a serious situation, like the development in the Cypriot situation and Turkey' s approximation towards the European Union, we must be very careful in our choice of words.
However, I feel that I made it clear that there is a direct link between Turkey' s approximation process and its position on the Cypriot issue.
I cannot make this any clearer.
Question No 4 by (H-0294/00):
Subject: Blatant persecution and violation of the rights of the Assyrian-Chaldeans in Turkey Tens of thousands of Assyrian-Chaldeans in Turkey living in the south-east of the country have found refuge in Member States of the EU after being persecuted by the Turkish Government which has destroyed many of their homes, closed and raised to the ground their churches and banned the use of their language and teaching in this language.
There is a danger that, owing to the use of force, the remaining places of worship and even the traces of the existence of this minority will be lost for ever.
Will the Council say whether it intends to raise this matter as part of the pre-accession procedure, to call on the Turkish Government to respect the rights of the Assyrian-Chaldean minority in Turkey and, more particularly, to ensure that the Mar Gabriel monastery in Midyat and the Dayr Zafaran monastery in Mardin can continue to operate without hindrance?
Very briefly, what I said about the development of the situation in Turkey and the necessary changes in terms of respect for the rights of minorities also applies in this case which specifically involves the protection of Christian minorities.
The reinforcement of the political dialogue agreed in Helsinki requires progress to be made towards compliance with these political criteria, particularly on issues of human rights.
All the situations which have been brought to the Council' s attention during the pre-accession process will be tackled.
This particular question involves the problem of non-recognition by the Turkish authorities of the Assyrian-Chaldean community under the terms of the Lausanne Treaty of 1923.
Under this Treaty, the Turkish Government undertook to ensure full protection for the churches, synagogues, cemeteries and other places of worship of non-Muslim minorities.
At this point in time, the claims of the Assyrian-Chaldean community basically relate to the problem of restoring monasteries and the official teaching of Aramaic and the problem connected with the free movement of citizens from this ethnic group who live outside Turkey.
These are clearly administrative issues.
They do have a human rights dimension which obviously must be tackled - and we will be vigilant in this respect - but they are essentially administrative.
The Council will be vigilant and the Commission will also raise these issues during the pre-accession negotiations.
Mr President-in-Office, I cannot say your answer is satisfactory.
If the Council were truly concerned about human rights one would have expected a more specific answer.
We are talking here about two very ancient peoples who have been subjected to systematic genocide by the Turkish regime, a genocide perhaps not so impressive as in Armenia, but just as effective.
Several thousand people have become refugees or immigrants to the European Union and only a few tens of thousands remain in the area where they have lived since ancient times.
I would like to ask whether you can be more specific.
Of course, your reference to the Treaty of Lausanne is apt, but beyond that, the European Union also has a responsibility to stress certain things to the Turkish regime concerning the need to respect human rights, whether they stem from the Treaty of Lausanne or in a broader sense.
Is the Council going to take any specific action along those lines?
Mr Alyssandrakis says that my answer was not positive enough.
It would be useful to remind him of his question.
He asked whether the Council intends to raise this issue during the pre-accession process and to ask the Turkish Government to respect the rights of the Assyrian-Chaldean minority in Turkey and, in particular, to ensure the operation without hindrance of their monasteries.
He specifically referred to two monasteries.
I have no idea what more positive answer I could give him than to simply say yes.
It is the Council' s and the EU' s intention to raise this issue with the Turkish authorities during the pre-accession process.
Once again, if this is not a clear answer, I have no idea what is.
Question No 5 by (H-0262/00):
Subject: Renewed tension in Kosovo The results of the 'peaceful' intervention by NATO forces in Kosovo are generally acknowledged to be deplorable.
Instead of the 'multi-ethnic' Kosovo which had been the UN' s objective, we have a situation in which the refugees have failed to return, ethnic cleansing has continued, but now directed at the Serb population, partition has taken root and the dispatch of increasing numbers of new military and police forces is considered 'indispensable' .
The current increase in tension is being fuelled by statements by NATO officials and major new military exercises by NATO forces.
Will the Council say what measures it intends to take to safeguard a 'multi-ethnic' Kosovo as part of the Yugoslav Federation?
What action will it take to defuse the crisis and tension in the region?
- (PT) Mr President, the European Union' s objective, in accordance with Security Council Resolution 1244, continues to be the establishment of a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo within the internationally recognised borders of the Former Yugoslavia.
The Council accepts the urgent need to find a solution to the continued outbreaks of ethnic violence, particularly against the Serbs, gypsies and other non-Albanian communities in Kosovo.
The Council has been consistently supporting the efforts made by UNMIK and KFOR to prevent further expulsions and to allow the safe return of all those who abandoned their homes.
In response to an urgent appeal from the UN Secretary-General' s Special Representative, Doctor Bernard Kouchner, and from the High Representative, Mr Solana, the Member States have significantly increased their contributions to the UN' s international police forces with both financial and technical support and human resources.
Several Member States have also reinforced their own contingents in KFOR.
In the past in this House, we have deeply regretted the failure to meet these commitments, which has clearly hindered the action of the international authorities in Kosovo.
There are now new elements involved and some of these commitments are now being met.
This is allowing this issue to be handled differently and more effectively, although we are clearly still a long way from achieving a minimally acceptable solution.
The Council has urged all the political leaders in Kosovo to adopt urgent measures to combat the escalation of violence, to reject expressions of extremism and to support UNMIK and KFOR.
It is very important that the Council manages to further develop the progress already made in the reconciliation between the ethnic groups and that Resolution 1244 can be put into practice.
We are committed to the process of democratisation and coexistence in Kosovo.
Only responsibility-sharing by representatives of the minorities can lead to the construction of a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
We should all ask ourselves whether everyone, particularly within Kosovo itself, is interested in the existence of a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
In this context, the Council repeats its appeal to the Serbian leaders to participate in the joint interim administrative structures.
The Council places great importance on the careful preparation by UNMIK and the OSCE of local elections to be held this year, including the provisions on voting by absentees and the participation of minorities.
We believe it is important to start creating legitimate structures with local authority in Kosovo.
This is the only way we can guarantee that the political forces which are currently working in an unorganised manner, outside any institutions, will return to normal political life and end up working in Kosovo within a democratic society.
In terms of supporting this process of democratisation and coexistence, the European Union has been working together with other international partners to re-establish daily life for the whole of Kosovo' s population, whatever their ethnic background.
In addition to the important bilateral assistance given by the Member States, the European Community has allocated humanitarian aid for 1999 to 2000 to the amount of EUR 429 million for the Kosovar refugees, displaced persons within the country and those returning home.
The aid for reconstruction and the special financial assistance, including the support for UNMIK, will total EUR 437 million between 1999 and 2000.
This set of actions and the commitment shown by the EU in this respect have been recognised by the international community.
Unfortunately, at times the practical efficiency of these actions is not sufficient to end an unstable situation beset by tensions which we hope will decrease in the future.
Let me first comment that the President-in-Office of the Council is besieged by questions from Greek Members.
I think that expresses the great insecurity felt by a Member State, but I would also say the inadequacy of Community policy to address serious issues.
I want to thank him for his answer.
I take note of that position, which I find particularly positive and which we do not often see, namely that the European Union' s objective is a multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo within the framework of the internationally recognised borders of the Yugoslav Federation.
I think that is a positive thing and I have taken note of it.
I would like to ask a supplementary question regarding in particular those minorities suffering persecution today in a situation of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, whether they be Serbians, of Turkish origin or gypsies, who are, on the one hand, under such pressure from Albanian extremists and, on the other hand, living in a Serbia still subject to embargo.
Are there any special support and aid programmes planned by the European Union specifically for these people who are living in such misery and desperation?
Mr Alavanos, I believe it was clear from what I said and in fact you recognised yourself that the general objective of the European Union and the international community is to respect the terms of Security Council Resolution 1244, particularly on the establishment of a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo.
I am not ignoring the major difficulties present on the ground in applying these decisions.
There is no point on this issue using euphemisms or diplomatic language.
The mass return of the Albanians expelled from Kosovo and the tension which has arisen in the meantime, particularly involving Serbian, gypsy and other minorities, have ended up creating a new and different situation.
However, we should not only look at the present.
We must consider what happened in the past which was the cause of all this.
Perhaps by looking at the causes of this situation, rather than fixing on the present, we will have a fairer and more objective view of the partial responsibility of the Belgrade Government, particularly with regard to what happened to it subsequently due to its actions in Kosovo.
However, it is true that, for the Serbian minorities who have had to leave the country since the return of the Kosovo Albanians, the conditions have not yet been established to allow them to return.
Those still living in Kosovo are having problems coexisting with the Albanian majority.
However, the Member must recognise the clear efforts being made by the international community to protect these minorities and to achieve a safe situation allowing them to coexist with the Albanians.
We cannot ignore the fact that this joint effort also needs the Serbian authorities to be involved in the consultative structures.
This would be one way of making its own actions in Kosovo credible.
Our only objective is to guarantee the continuation of multi-ethnic integration.
We realise that there is a long way to go and probably the situation of the Serbs living outside Kosovo, and who cannot return because it is unsafe, is unfair.
There is no point beating about the bush on this.
This situation is unfair.
However, we must realise that the international community is doing its best.
Furthermore, we should always remember what happened before, in order to justify what is happening now.
Mr Alavanos said that until now all the questions we have heard have been Greek.
I would like to say that the Spanish and the Portuguese, as well as other Mediterranean people, are accustomed to speaking with the Greeks.
I believe that Lisbon, the ancient Olisipo, was founded by Ulysses.
The President-in-Office of the Council therefore comes from a country with a long tradition of Greek presence.
Mr President, could I ask the President-in-Office of the Council - all of whose good intentions for a multi-ethnic Kosovo I accept - whether he would not admit that the international community' s policy there in all its facets - the European Union, the United Nations, KFOR, NATO et al - is really an unmitigated and disastrous failure and getting worse by the day.
What is being done to get the KLA and the Albanian bully-boys, who clearly have no interest in a multi-ethnic Kosovo, under control?
There just seems to be an ineffectual permissiveness of the situation despite all these wonderful, pious good intentions.
Firstly, to comment on what the President said, I must say that I am very happy to be grilled by the Greek Members.
I have some great friends in Greece where I have spent several holidays.
As for the situation you describe, Mr Purvis, I do not believe that the policy is disastrous.
This is the only possible policy, as you know, and it is a result of everything that has happened in the region in the last few years and even in the last few decades.
We must realise that the international community' s position, which is not brilliant in terms of the practical application of these measures, is the only one which can resolve a conflict on which the international community was only called to act due to the total inability to find a solution within the Former Yugoslavia.
It was precisely the situation created in the Former Yugoslavia which caused this reaction.
You refer to the KLA.
Remember that the KLA only exists because the Albanian community in Kosovo was systematically persecuted and totally besieged.
Clearly the need to organise themselves militarily to respond to this threat led to the KLA' s action.
The problem now facing us is to try and ensure that the structures created outside the democratic process, simply because this did not exist in the Former Yugoslavia, allow an approach of solely political action to be adopted in a democratic Kosovo.
We are still a long way off from finding such an approach, but I believe that the international community' s action is very positive in this respect.
Mr President, if a mark between 1 and 10 were now to be given for success in pursuing the two objectives of the action programme, namely that Kosovo should be multi-ethnic and that it should remain a part of Yugoslavia, I believe that the President-in-Office of the Council and I can probably agree that the mark concerned would be fairly low.
We agree, however, that this is the result of a policy which has been pursued up until now, that is to say a result of what has happened.
My question is this: is the Council giving any consideration to how this policy can be changed in the future, or is the intention to go on using the same tools, that is to say military action and initiatives against troublesome areas in the region?
What is the basic idea behind setting up a 60 000-strong rapid reaction force when we all agree that a number of other initiatives are presumably required if there is a desire to solve conflicts in Europe and in neighbouring countries?
Firstly, I regret not having the opportunity to put questions to the Members.
If I did I would ask them what other solution they propose.
As a specific example of what military forces can do, I would refer you to the case of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Just think what the situation was like there for several years.
Just think about the international community' s failure to act faced with this problem and then just look at the situation today.
This is clearly unstable but it is one of peace due to the presence of the military forces.
It is clear that there are certain situations in which attempts to deflect ethnic tensions can only be successful by using mechanisms which involve the protection and separation of the waters.
This is very probably what is needed in Kosovo, who knows for how long, but hopefully for the shortest time possible.
We should also bear in mind that the international community and particularly the Member States have no specific interest in intervening in Kosovo and in mobilising human and physical resources for an action of this kind.
In fact quite the contrary.
The international community and the European Union in particular were aware that it was their duty and responsibility to react to a totally disgraceful situation in terms of international standards of behaviour.
It was the genocide and siege behaviour of Mr Milosevic with regard to the Albanian community in Kosovo which led to our intervention.
You say that the practical result of this action is not what was wanted.
I would point out, however, that the practical result is that today, with a few exceptions and despite everything, this situation is under control in terms of security.
We have made and are making efforts to achieve greater integration of the minority communities.
A more effective result has not been possible.
We will try to continue exerting pressure in this respect and we believe that renewing in some way the institutional organisation of civil society through independent elections may contribute significantly to this stability.
Question No 6 by (H-0279/00):
Subject: Protection of European undertakings in Kosovo Despite the fact that the Council is unaware of this (answer to Question E-2425/99), the above undertakings have indeed appealed to the EU to protect their interests, as this matter falls within the Council' s remit.
Given that UNMIK and its head, Bernard Kouchner, do not act of their own accord, but under international supervision in which the Council is also involved, the latter should scrutinise their actions more closely where they affect the interests of European undertakings, if it wishes to avoid raising doubts about its intentions though the answers it gives.
Furthermore, the proper management of the fourth Pillar entails a number of additional obligations for the EU institutions.
Since the Commission, which is unfortunately taking an unconscionable amount of time to reply, is well aware of the actions of the undertakings concerned, and in order to avoid any doubts about whether the Council is responsible for failing to act, will the latter say to what extent it is prepared to act in accordance with the obligations imposed on it by the Treaties and to support the interests of the undertakings in question?
.
(PT) Security Council Resolution 1244 gave UNMIK, the interim administration in Kosovo, authority over the territory, including full legislative and executive powers, and control over the legal system.
The aim was to establish a transitional administration whose mandate was described in the resolution itself.
This mandate also includes the development of a phased economic recovery plan.
This means that the individual cases mentioned in the Member' s question should be dealt with directly by the UN Secretary-General' s Special Representative for Kosovo, who is responsible for the territorial administration of Kosovo, or by the Foreign Minister of the Member State in which the undertakings are established.
The Council assumes general political responsibility for the EU' s participation in UNMIK which is focussed on reconstruction and economic rehabilitation.
However, neither the European Union as such nor the Council has any competence or direct responsibility with regard to the administration of the territory and the protection of the individual interests of undertakings in the region.
These elements are, on the one hand, the responsibility of the United Nations, as the administrator of the territory, and on the other, of the governments of each Member State which may act to protect these undertakings.
I have been waiting about six months for an answer on this.
There is a whole raft of questions and answers and we are becoming schizophrenic over the substance and content of the answers.
What is hiding behind all that?
Either the services are not doing their job properly and are giving you wrong information, or there is something rotten in the Kingdom of Denmark and there are many who say that there is something peculiar about Mr Kouchner' s administration.
My question is this: if the services are not doing their job properly, what are you going to do when they leave you high and dry?
If Mr Kouchner is not doing his job properly, what are you going to do about it?
And the third question: how can it be that the citizens of the European Union are being called upon to pay for the Stability Pact even though European undertakings established there cannot be protected by the European Union?
That does not happen anywhere, it is unreasonable.
We should therefore see things as they are, because my impression is that Mr Kouchner is not playing his part properly there.
That is where the problem lies and that is what we should all realise, as European citizens and people interested in developments in the Balkans.
The question raised has never been submitted to the Council of the European Union, particularly by the undertakings which are complaining.
The Council presidency has no knowledge of this issue.
Complaints are submitted to the Member States whose Foreign Ministries are responsible for dealing with this type of question.
It should be borne in mind that the administration in Kosovo does not come under the EU' s competence but under that of the UN.
There is a specific body responsible for this administration.
Each country is normally obliged to protect the actions of its undertakings within the international sphere.
Each country has structures to protect its citizens and undertakings internationally and for this reason there are specific mechanisms which we all use every day in our international action.
The European Union is not a country.
I do not know under what circumstances the European Union would have to have a global and specific action plan in this respect or why, as a Union, it would have to deal with this issue.
That is unless we reach a point at which national governments prove to be incompetent in protecting their own undertakings.
Mr President, an essential element in the reconstruction of post-war society is always that recovery of the local economy should be as rapid as possible, so that it becomes viable once more.
Local businesses in Kosovo now, however, have one substantial problem: a dearth of qualified and linguistically competent labour, as all those who can speak English, or nearly all, were recruited for reconstruction projects in Kosovo, and local businesses cannot compete with the high salaries being paid.
Many entrepreneurs are naturally very bitter about this consequent stagnation in activity.
Mr President-in-Office, I do not know if you have come up against this problem, but I would nonetheless ask you what you think can be done about it at EU level.
Doctor Bernard Kouchner has at times referred to the difficulty he has in recruiting staff, not only for the country' s administration but also for the normal structures of economic reconstruction.
It is clear that the cost of recruiting staff is high.
We consider that this type of question comes within the framework of Doctor Kouchner' s work which, as I have said, is outside the control of the European Union, although we are cooperating on this issue.
The Union as such does not therefore have a specific and direct response to this type of question.
We are ready to listen to and consider the requests made to us by Doctor Kouchner and to give him any possible answer within the commitments assumed by the European Union with regard to the extremely high costs involved in the region.
Mr President, my question is quite specific and is, I believe, of direct concern to the EU.
Is the Council aware that the Serbian government is planning to sell mines and mineral resources in Kosovo to EU companies and to portray this as privatisation?
Does the Council know that there are problems here associated with ethnic cleansing in one part of Kosovo, in that Serbs are being settled in one area, which is the area that is richest in raw materials, and there is a risk of the area being partitioned in order to safeguard these raw materials?
Mr Posselt, I have no knowledge of this issue.
However, we will consider the information you have given us.
Question No 7 by (H-0274/00):
Subject: Joint efforts to coordinate IT development The Portuguese Presidency has commendably highlighted the need for development of the IT sector in order to promote competitiveness and employment.
Coordination at European level would be conducive to the further development of the IT sector.
What is the Council' s view of the need for coordination at European level to develop the IT sector and, in that context, of the need to set up a European IT agency?
Mr Andersson, to answer your question I should like to start by confirming that a coordinated approach at European level to the information technology and telecommunications sectors is essential for the future development of the European Union.
We have already discussed in this House the Special Meeting, which was held in Lisbon on 23, and 24 March.
At this it was clear that improving the Information Society policy is central to achieving the objectives which this meeting set and which involve the issues of employment, social cohesion and reinforcement of Europe' s competitiveness at world level.
In particular the Special Meeting invited the Council and Commission to prepare an action plan on e-Europe, which will be presented, to the European Council in June.
The idea of launching an agency devoted to information technology was presented at the Lisbon European Council in the document provided by the Swedish Government.
This idea was not followed up but it responds to our concerns and will definitely be considered and developed in the future.
It was discussed, however, particularly in terms of possibly being added to the existing Community mechanisms, which include the Information Society Project Office.
This has been producing a range of initiatives during the Portuguese presidency.
On the issue of a possible European telecommunications regulation agency, I would remind you that a study carried out for the Commission in October 1999 concluded that there was no immediate need for such a body.
At the same time the Council concluded that regulation should be applied at the closest possible level to that at which the activities to be regulated are carried out.
This too involves the principle of subsidiarity.
I want to thank the Council for its answer.
I was pleased to see that the issue of information technology and its link to growth and employment were so high on the agenda in Lisbon.
What happens in the future is important.
The political task is not, of course, to set up IT companies but to build an infrastructure which stimulates development in this area.
We do, of course, have shortcomings within the EU.
Moreover, there are major differences between the EU' s Member States and also between different regions within the EU.
Different population groups have varying opportunities and knowledge when it comes to exploiting this technology, and this may lead to great inequality in the future.
I would therefore ask the question: how are we successfully to devise a form of coordination which enables information technology also to be used out in the peripheral areas so that we create greater equality between different regions and between different population groups?
Is there not a need for a joint authority to coordinate this work?
Mr Andersson, you have asked me two separate questions.
The first concerns the substantive issue of democratising the Information Society itself, which was at the root of the concerns of the Lisbon European Council.
This involves the need to spread throughout European society, precisely in the area where it is less competitive and in order to give added value to the usual elements of its economy, all these new dimensions of the society of innovation and knowledge.
This effort is scheduled to use specific measures contained in the conclusions of the Lisbon European Council, particularly with regard to the Internet and methods of apprenticeship and vocational training.
In our opinion, these may be able to form a future action plan, which will be assessed every year at special meetings of the European Council, which will always take place in the spring.
This is the answer to your first question.
Your other question concerns the need to have an organisational structure and an institution to supervise this process and to pay specific attention to the similarity between these types of question within the European Union.
You rightly make the point that on many occasions specifying these measures may create and worsen inequalities.
This is a danger and risk to which we are alert.
In the meantime, the governments have decided that the creation of a new structure and bureaucratic mechanism with high costs is not necessary.
They in fact consider that the structures which currently exist for monitoring this process are sufficient for this purpose.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, as an Austrian I am extremely proud of the fact that the Council Presidency has focussed on development in the IT sector.
I would be interested to know how the President-in-Office of the Council views the sale by auction of UMTS licences.
The proceeds from this sector could create a huge amount of impetus and, above all, boost the Portuguese programme accordingly, if, for example, we were to make the proceeds from the licences that are sold by auction available for research and development, education, training and further education, or for infrastructure.
What do you think to the idea of developing incentivisation programmes for the Member States, so as to enable the proceeds to actually be ploughed back into this sector?
The conclusions of the Lisbon European Council specify national actions which are therefore the responsibility of the national governments.
These are objective commitments which the governments assumed in signing these conclusions and which involve the reorientation of the mechanisms and structures and action plans and programmes which exist within the European Union.
With the exception of the possibility of recourse to the European Investment Bank, there are no new elements in this respect for mobilising financial resources.
This was one of the objective concerns raised during discussions of this issue in Lisbon.
It was decided to try and achieve greater coherence between the current instruments for the simple reason that we believe that, rather than creating new instruments, we should reorganise the current ones.
Having said this, it is necessary, as we have done in the employment and macroeconomic policies, to try and achieve greater coherence between the national actions on the society of innovation and knowledge and to ensure that these actions are subject to a specific plan which each Member State undertakes to implement internally.
This will occur in accordance with a set timetable of objectives and using benchmarking processes which allow us to see which are the best practices and to try, based on these, to encourage similar practices in the other Member States.
This process has this national dimension of a commitment on objectives and it is therefore obvious that there are no financial resources for this other than those available in the budget of each country.
In the other dimension, in which recourse to the European Investment Bank is possible, there is a set of actions within the competence of the EU itself, which not only complements previous actions but also ensures greater coherence between the EU' s programmes and actions in this area.
The Commission has been extremely active in this field and the e-Europe programme presented by the Commission and whose action plan will be approved at the Feira European Council in June provides new guidelines for this area and a new reorientation of Community policies on this issue.
As the author is not present, Question No 8 lapses.
Question No 9 by (H-0275/00):
Subject: Women in the new CFSP decision-making bodies Has the Council provided for any measures for women to be adequately represented in the new CSFP decision-making bodies, or made any recommendations to this effect?
How many women will there be in the crisis management bodies and the security and conflict-prevention political committee?
Will the Council be taking due account of the specific contribution women can make to working for peace?
- (PT) The issue raised by the Member is of fundamental importance.
It concerns the involvement of women in the common foreign and security policy and the new crisis management structures, such as the security and conflict-prevention political committee.
The Member has asked whether the Council will be taking due account of women' s particular skills in working for peace.
It is quite clear that the contribution of women in working for peace and in other similar respects, particularly in mobilising civil society, is well-known and unquestionable.
We all know, without bothering to be diplomatic about this, that the role and representation of women in the decision-making process, either within the CFSP or generally within other structures, is inadequate.
We all know the efforts made by the international community in this area and we remember the conclusions of the Beijing Declaration of 1995 on this issue.
Next June there will be a Special Session of the UN General Assembly to draw international attention to the need for women to be involved in actions implemented within the Beijing Declaration.
In particular, specific measures will be taken to encourage this involvement.
It should be realised that pro-active policies do not work in some areas of the decision-making process.
Greater involvement is needed in political actions, in the training process and in the administrative process in general.
We believe it is impossible to implement just one specific action, for example introducing quotas in the common foreign and security policy structures.
In our opinion, this is not appropriate and the Council has made no proposal in this respect.
However, it is the responsibility of each national government to carry out the necessary reforms of its own system of representation in order to guarantee adequate participation by women.
These issues are now being regulated at European level and recommendations are being made as a result of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
We believe that, as all representation within the European Union is carried out by people from the Member States, it is the latter which are mainly responsible for mobilising as many women as possible who can rise within the decision-making process.
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Seixas da Costa, very much for his reply, which gives us hope since it demonstrates that the Council understands the problem, is responding politically and perhaps even sympathises with the idea.
Nevertheless, I consider his reply to be basically too retrograde.
The Helsinki and Cologne Summits specifically gave the Portuguese Presidency the job of strengthening this new protection policy.
You have said that you are against quotas but in favour of references.
I would like to ask the Portuguese Presidency: do you not think it would be highly appropriate to include a reference, in the form of a recommendation, in this respect?
I believe that the role of the European Union should not be to remain behind the United Nations or to be content merely with a reference to what Beijing was about.
The European Union must be progressive.
Women must clearly be involved in political decisions - also decisions with regard to peace - and I ask the Portuguese Presidency to make some reference in this respect.
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, thank you for the hope which you have placed in the Portuguese presidency.
However, I am sure you are aware of the limits of what we can do, particularly in an area such as this.
I have no hesitation in saying this because in my own departments 80% of the officials are women, even in managerial posts.
It is therefore clear that hope must always be the last resort of political action and that equal opportunities and equal representation of the sexes must be the practical and specific goal in our daily life and actions.
To be totally frank and at the risk of being considered behind the times, I do believe that there are limits to what can be achieved by pro-active political action in this area.
Bearing in mind these limits, it will be rather difficult, when we set out to assess the new common foreign and security policy structures in terms of defence, to say to the Military Committee or the Military Staff that half of their soldiers should be female.
This is because it is up to the Member States whether or not they have female generals or brigadiers.
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I cannot raise an issue like this just to appear politically correct.
I must always be objectively honest.
Question No 10 by (H-0276/00):
Subject: Participation of research partners from the developing countries in environmental research programmes funded by the EU The key to the development of the developing countries is their ability to participate in development work themselves both as definers of problems and as seekers for solutions.
On the other hand, at EU level this approach is being poorly applied in relation to science and technology projects affecting developing countries.
The EU' s framework programmes do not extend to the developing countries.
This means that North African partners, for example, are not able to be involved in science and technology projects relating to the environment.
In fact no-one is preventing them from carrying out the research, but there are no funding opportunities, and thus the developing countries have no access to consortia as partners entitled to apply for funding.
Why is this not the case, given that opportunities have been devised for even Russia, for example, to be involved?
Has the matter been considered from the point of view of the extent to which, for example, desertification in North Africa or the problems of the Mediterranean affect the EU?
Is the EU prepared to provide greater responsibility in the form of funding to local researchers, so that research activities can combine even after the funding bodies have left, and to ensure that projects can be carried out without the investment of local researchers?
In 1998, the European Parliament and the Council adopted the Fifth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development to run from then until 2002.
One aspect of this Framework Programme is its four thematic programmes, which define priority areas for research, and its three horizontal programmes.
One of the latter is entitled 'Confirming the international role of Community research' and is intended to promote scientific and technological cooperation at international level and to help implement Community foreign policy in this area.
The general objectives of this international scientific cooperation are also set out in this Framework Programme and include support for the development of a Euro-Mediterranean partnership and a contribution to the economic, social and scientific development of developing countries.
In December 1998, the Council also adopted rules on participation by undertakings, research centres and universities and on disseminating research results in order to implement the Fifth Framework Programme.
With regard to the participation of legal entities of third countries and international organisations, all the indirect research activities under the thematic programmes are open to research bodies in Mediterranean non-Community countries and developing countries, in principle without Community financing.
The only exception to this involves situations in which Community financing is regarded as absolutely vital to achieve the aims of the activity.
Article 6 of the Framework Programme authorises the participation by entities of third countries in specific research and technological development activities under the horizontal programme on the international role of Community research.
In January last year, the Council adopted the specific programmes for the Fifth Framework Programme which set out the objectives and activities for the various categories of third countries.
With regard to Mediterranean non-Community countries, an indicative allocation of EUR 55 million was established for research and development activities such as integrated coastal management in the Mediterranean, including environmental aspects, water management, natural resource management, conservation and restoration of the cultural heritage, socio-economic modernisation and so on.
With regard to developing countries, an indicative allocation of EUR 210 million was made available for specific activities such as those involving the adoption of innovations, the promotion of a sustainable relationship between population pressure, food safety and the use and management of ecosystems, the improvement of productivity and the prevention of damage to natural resources.
In addition, a grant system was created under a specific programme which allows graduates and doctoral students from developing countries and Mediterranean non-Community countries to work on European projects.
Funds were also allocated for coordination with Community technical assistance programmes, including the MEDA and EDF programmes, and also for Latin America and Asia.
The application of these three decisions is clearly the Commission' s responsibility, supported by the committees for the relevant programmes.
So far calls for specific proposals aimed at developing and Mediterranean countries have been made with a total budget of EUR 85.5 million.
Mr President-in-Office, I thank you for this reply.
I would, however, like a brief answer that is clearer and more precise.
Do we then have a situation where the developing countries may now apply for funds?
They were not able to before.
How is the situation different from, for example, that regarding the INTAS and Interreg programmes in Eastern Europe?
With regard to matters falling within the Commission' s specific competence, the only promise I can make, in answer to the Member' s supplementary question and her concerns, is that I will try to obtain a more concise answer which will probably have to be given in writing.
As the author is not present, Question No 11 lapses.
Question No 12 by (H-0277/00):
Subject: Common defence policy at the IGC There is a 'shortlist' of proposals for the IGC, according to which the Conference will confine itself largely to 'institutional' issues.
It is generally supposed that Portugal plans to expand the list at the June meeting.
Is this true, and will Portugal then bring the common defence policy onto the agenda for the IGC?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Helsinki European Council authorised the Portuguese presidency to establish the EU' s interim security and defence structures as from 1 March of this year.
These structures were established on this date.
Their activities are currently being developed so that they can assume a more specific and practical form and in particular so that the definitive model which we believe could start to operate next year can be agreed.
In parallel with the work on these practical aspects, a discussion is ongoing within the European Union on determining the mechanisms for participation both by EU Member States which are not members of NATO and by NATO countries which are not EU Member States.
This discussion is occurring within the overall context of action on the Petersberg tasks specified in the Treaty of Amsterdam.
The question which has arisen and which has also been raised by the Member - for which I thank you as it is my responsibility to chair the preparatory group of the Intergovernmental Conference - concerns the extent to which this issue may or may not fall within the scope of the IGC.
It will only be placed on the IGC' s agenda if and when it is confirmed that amendments need to be made to the Treaty on European Union in order to bring these structures into practical operation.
It is still not clear at this stage of our debate within the European Union whether or not amendments to the Treaty will be necessary.
As soon as this becomes clear, we will announce this.
The Portuguese Presidency will present a report to the Feira European Council in June giving an assessment of the state of progress and an opinion on whether or not these issues should be included within the IGC.
If these are to be included, this would only be confirmed during the French Presidency.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, European defence policy is at present being drafted, and different countries are involved in the task.
There are Member States in NATO and there are countries which are not in NATO.
Mr President-in-Office, do you believe that the European Union can frame a defence policy that would be independent of NATO, or will all the new arrangements be in harmony with NATO' s basic structures?
Mr Seppänen, your question indicates that you are clearly confused, unless there has been an interpreting error.
We are not talking about defence policy but about crisis management for which powers are now included within the Treaties.
The issue in question is not therefore a European defence policy or the creation of a European army.
The issue is crisis management and humanitarian actions which are commonly referred to in Community parlance as the 'Petersberg tasks' .
All the EU countries, including yours, can make a valuable contribution to this area.
We are trying at the moment not to create a European defence policy but rather a common culture of security allowing us to participate in crisis management.
In this respect, I can see no major problems.
We hope to ensure that all the various cultures which exist within the Union are compatible.
I would thank the Council.
I am nonetheless a little surprised at the answer.
I was under the impression that it was not possible to act if it was a national legal system which had pronounced judgement, because that would amount to interfering in national affairs.
In that way, Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam would really, of course, be revoked, that is to say if action were to be taken on the basis of national legal systems.
It can hardly be intended that a Member State should be able to do whatever it likes as long as it does so via its own legal system.
I would also ask if the Council intends to look more closely into this issue and perhaps examine it in more specific terms.
The crisis management and humanitarian actions specified in the Petersberg tasks to which the Helsinki European Council referred are actions which may be carried out by the European Union.
However, our intention is to guarantee that these actions are totally compatible with what currently exists in the relations between certain EU Member States and the NATO countries.
The reason for this is that the mechanisms and means which exist for managing these crises are not extensive.
In fact, most of the time, these means belong to NATO.
As it is the means for military and security action which currently exist within the EU and NATO which will be mobilised, it is therefore essential to guarantee effective cooperation with all the NATO countries, including non-Community countries and particularly the candidate countries such as Turkey, Norway and Iceland.
It is clear that at a much wider level and bearing in mind the dimension of the operations, these actions will also require the involvement of the United States of America and Canada.
We therefore need broad cooperation which aims to guarantee the sharing of responsibility among all those countries which currently have a similar security and defence culture and objective.
Question No 13 by (H-0283/00):
Subject: Violation of the right to freedom of expression The Court of First Instance of Thessaloniki, presided over by a single magistrate, recently banned from circulation a book by the author Mimis Androulakis, describing it as irreverent.
Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam states that the European Union is founded on the principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Furthermore, Greece is a contracting party to the European Convention on Human Rights, which guarantees the right to freedom of expression and religious freedom.
In view of these considerations and given that the cornerstone of a people' s Europe is the fundamental commitment to freedom, pluralism and human rights, what view does the Council take of such a measure and will it intercede with the competent Greek authorities to put an end to the persecution of the author and the ban on his book?
Mr Papayannakis is asking the Council how it interprets this judgement of the Court of First Instance of Thessaloniki banning from circulation a book by the author Mimis Androlakis which it describes as irreverent.
He is also asking whether the Council intends to intercede with the Greek authorities.
I should like to explain that, under Article 6(1) of the Treaty on European Union, as amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam, the Union respects a set of basic principles by reference to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The underlying aim of this article is to establish a kind of political supervision over the actions of Member States and to ensure that democratic principles and values are respected.
It is intended to guarantee the sharing of common values.
However, Article 6 cannot be invoked for the purpose of any type of interference in the administration of the internal affairs of Member States, particularly at judicial level.
The Union has no competence to intercede in the exercise of legal power by the Member States.
Therefore, the Council cannot interfere in the decision-making of the authorities.
The judgement delivered by the Court of First Instance of Thessaloniki, which is a judgement of a legal body of a Member State on a specific case, may be subject within the Greek legal system to an appeal to the higher national courts.
Having exhausted this recourse to the Greek courts, there would always be recourse to the Court of Human Rights.
My follow-up question is about how the decision at the Helsinki Summit about military, peacekeeping and peace enforcement operations is to be interpreted.
The decision provides an opportunity for the Applicant States too to participate in the military structures to be established by the EU.
Does this also apply to Turkey which has, of course, applied for membership?
Does this mean that a door has been opened for military cooperation between Turkey' s and the European Union' s forces in, for example, peace enforcement operations?
Mr Sjöstedt, the Member States undertake to act within the framework determined by the Treaty.
This is why they signed the Treaty.
If a serious and persistent violation of citizens' rights were to be identified, according to the terms of these articles, then there would clearly be ways of interceding with the Member States.
The Union itself has ways of doing this but only in specific cases.
A case like this, in a democratic country like Greece, meets all the conditions to be judged and handled within the Greek legal system until the capacities for recourse within this system are exhausted.
If we were to intervene in a case like this, we would clearly be transposing to the Community dimension an issue for which there is a whole range of recourse in a country which fully respects human and citizens' rights.
Thank you very much, Mr Seixas da Costa.
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed, Questions Nos 14 to 31 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes Questions to the Council.
(The sitting was suspended at 7.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)
Address by Mr Klestil, President of the Republic of Austria
Mr President, you expressed the wish to speak today at our Parliament' s formal sitting.
It has always been the case that any EU Member State Heads of State who express that wish are received among us with the consideration due to their person, the high office they hold and the nation over which they preside.
(Loud applause) It is in that spirit that I now welcome you on behalf of the European Parliament.
At the beginning of this year 2000, the constitution of the present Austrian Government has, as you know, given rise to some strong feelings in all the EU Member States, among their governments as well as their people.
(Loud applause)In the case of this Parliament, one question broadly transcends any political or national divergences between its Members, and that is their attachment to the values on which the European Union is founded and their determined resistance to the rise in racist and xenophobic ideologies.
(Loud applause)Mr President, we know that you were not in favour of this coalition, in which an extreme right-wing party has an equal share, and that you spared no efforts to find an alternative solution...
(Uproar on the far right)...and that, before agreeing to what you believed you could not prevent, you demanded and obtained from the political leaders concerned a strong commitment to the values on which the European Union are founded.
(Applause, and protests from the far right)It is in that context and in a spirit of profound friendship and respect for the Austrian people that we will listen carefully to the message you wished to pass on to the European Parliament.
We have no doubt, Mr President, that it will take account of the very serious concerns our Parliament expressed by an overwhelming majority, on 3 February last.
Without further ado, I therefore give you the floor.
(As President Klestil prepared to take the floor, many left-wing Members left the Chamber.
Interjection from Mrs Muscardini: "So that is democracy, not to give a hearing to speakers..." )
Before I take the floor, I have this to say to the lady who just spoke: according to my understanding of the principles of parliamentary democracy, one is supposed to listen quietly when someone else speaks, even if the person in question holds a different view!
(Loud applause)
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Representatives of the Council and the Commission and all those present, first of all I would like to thank you, Madam President, and the Members of the European Parliament, for giving me this opportunity to come and address you here today.
I have come to Strasbourg to affirm Austria' s firm commitment to the European Union.
Recent opinion polls have confirmed that some 80% of Austrians continue to support Austria' s membership of the European Union.
That is a very important and a very positive signal as far as I am concerned.
I have come to Strasbourg, with the backing of my fellow countrymen, to deliver an unequivocal declaration of belief in the European Union as a Community of values.
I believe that since its accession, Austria has shown itself time and again to be a conscientious European and willing to engage in constructive cooperation in the Union.
A few days ago the European monitoring centre for racism and xenophobia was opened in Vienna.
I took part in the opening at the invitation of the board, and I said in my speech that I fully understood why people should fear a resurgence of racism, intolerance, xenophobia and anti-Semitism - not just in Austria but also in other countries and regions of Europe.
I emphasised how important it still is today to nip things in the bud whenever human dignity and human rights are at stake.
We must not hesitate to clamp down on any form of radicalisation and polarisation.
And we must take decisive action against those who endeavour, by means of opportunist and populist policies, to stir up people' s fears and worries in order to make political mileage out of it.
(Applause)
It is young people, in particular, that we must warn against policies of this kind, and against the risks these policies present to their own future.
Present-day Austria, which was resurrected from the ruins of the second world war in 1945, was the product of a generation that learnt the lessons of the terrible experiences of the first half of the twentieth century - from the pessimism and resignation, the propensity to violence and susceptibility to delusions.
From the very outset, the Second Republic was marked by the firm commitment of the Austrian people to their State, and it was underpinned by their determination never again to allow themselves to fall prey to nationalism, extremism and xenophobia.
There are at present around 800 000 foreign nationals living in our country, which is approximately ten per cent of the total population.
Over the past few decades, Austria has admitted and integrated a total of one million people.
Therefore, in relation to the size of our country, we have offered more refugees sanctuary than any other Member State of the European Union.
(Applause)
Think of the waves of refugees that came from the East in 1945, from Hungary in 1956, from Czechoslovakia in 1968 and those that have come from former Yugoslavia over the past decade.
Then there are the large numbers of people from other countries.
In addition, Austria has helped Jewish emigrants from the former Soviet Union to travel to Israel and other countries or to stay with us.
There have certainly been many shortcomings as far as our more recent history is concerned, and we are more conscious of them these days.
For example, I would not wish to conceal how sad I am that Austria failed to invite the Jewish fellow citizens it expelled in 1938, to return, or did so only when it was far too late.
It is these very people - and this never ceases to move me - who have often continued to nurture a deep love for what used to be their native land, despite their terrible fate.
There is still a great deal of work to be done on the reappraisal of our past.
We will not be back on firm ground again until the historical facts have been laid bare, the victims have been compensated, and full cognisance has been taken of our historical responsibility.
However, as Federal President, I am also absolutely determined to counter any unwarranted criticism directed at Austria and its people, and to repudiate it emphatically.
There has been a great deal said and written over the past few weeks presenting a distorted picture of Austria and not the facts of the matter, be this for reasons of ignorance or superficiality.
I therefore appeal to the political leaders and also to the media in the European Union - in the very spirit of European values, which are justifiably regarded as the bedrock of the European unification process - to not lose sight of the need to be objective and fair.
I believe that it is in the interests of all Member States to commit themselves to obtaining a clear picture of the true situation in Austria, curtailing criticism, endeavouring to make common cause, and helping to speedily resolve, by means of dialogue, what is a difficult situation for all concerned.
(Applause)
I am also convinced that it is in the interests of the European Parliament to see to it that work within the European institutions proceeds in the proper manner and in accordance with the law, thereby securing Austria' s full and unconditional cooperation...
(Applause)
... particularly in view of the major issues facing us, such as EU enlargement, reform of the institutions and the European security policy.
Ladies and gentlemen, Austria is a stable democracy and a functioning state under the rule of law.
The Austrian constitution stipulates that the Federal Government must have the confidence of the Federal President.
This bestows a special responsibility on me, also with regard to the policies pursued by the government.
Therefore, working together with the leaders of the two governing parties, I have drafted a declaration which compels the government to uphold European fundamental values and principles of law.
As Federal President, another of my tasks is to represent the Republic abroad.
I have declared before this House on two previous occasions, in 1992 and 1998, that in view of its history and its position at the heart of Europe, Austria feels it has a special mission to make a committed contribution to the completion of the European unification and peace process.
There is no doubt but that Austria has a special interest in the enlargement of the European Union.
In view of the fact that we have coexisted down through the centuries with the people of Central and South-eastern Europe, we have gained a wealth of experience that could be of particular benefit to the enlargement process, which would be in the interests of Europe as a whole.
We do not want to be one of the EU' s border states forever, living along a frontier of affluence that runs through Europe.
Only enlargement will afford us the unique opportunity of creating an area of peace, stability and prosperity at the heart of Europe.
In a few days time, the next annual meeting of the Presidents of Central European countries will take place in Hungary.
Four Presidents attended the first meeting of this kind in Strasbourg in 1993, at my invitation, and there are now 12 participating countries.
We must also consider the position of the small and medium-sized States within the European Union.
This is one of those key, intrinsic elements that have characterised European integration from the outset.
The time when Europe' s history was dictated by the dominance of large powers is now past.
It is Central Europe that now has the unique opportunity to be at the heart of the new, enlarged Europe, and a lively Community, founded on a common history and shared experiences, and which can make a special contribution to the completion of European unification.
If the enlarged Europe of the future is to endure, then it must gain a full awareness of its common intellectual and cultural foundations.
All the people of Europe must play their part in this.
Thus, for example, that which we deem to be Austrian in our own culture is ultimately the product of a heritage drawn from European sources, from an awareness of the significance of the Central European area, from the historical and human links we have with the people of this region, from our practical experience of federalism and subsidiarity, and from the insight our common history has given us, namely that supranationality in no way implies the loss of one' s own identity.
If the enlargement process is to succeed, then the right conditions must be put in place within the Union for this to occur.
The second phase of the internal reform process began with the opening of the Intergovernmental Conference almost two months ago.
Austria welcomes with open arms the European Parliament' s involvement in the labours of the Intergovernmental Conference.
Indeed, when reforms were undertaken within the European Union in the past, it was often Parliament that made the most courageous and visionary proposals, thereby underlining in a credible manner its claim to be the parliamentary driving force of European integration.
Security policy is also one of the major challenges facing the European Union.
Bearing in mind the terrible conflicts that have plagued our continent over the past few years, largely in the south-east, it is also essential for the countries of Europe to unite over the issue of a common defence.
Military crisis management is precisely the area in which Europe must be seen to have a particularly high degree of credibility, determination and strength.
I am pleased that the debate on this important issue began under the Austrian EU Presidency.
More milestones were reached at the EU Cologne and Helsinki summits.
Before the European Council takes place in Nice, we must create the conditions that will enable the Union to realise its ambitious goal of creating a European capacity for crisis management.
Austria declares its solidarity with those who wish to see the European Union become a security and defence community.
We know that the security of a union is indivisible and we know that the key to the future security of our own country is to work with each other and for each other.
Another matter of special concern to me is the framing of a European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights, relating as it does to quite crucial issues pertaining to the protection and furtherance of fundamental and human rights, and to making them more coherent and effective.
This is further illustration of the fact that in many respects, Austria' s stance accords with that of the European Parliament.
What we need to do today, therefore, is to further deepen the European Union in important areas and to tailor it to the requirements of the twenty first century.
What continues to be of overriding importance is that this is the first time our continent has been peacefully and democratically united.
That is what makes this process so unique, but also so vulnerable.
We must make quite clear to those who are already taking the idea of a united Europe for granted, that it is of fundamental importance to the peace and stability of the whole of Europe to press on with the European integration process.
Democracy is always a painstaking business.
It is especially important in this great union of European countries for democracy to have the active participation of the Europeans, to whose scrutiny we must lay ourselves open on a daily basis.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the situation Austria currently finds itself in is an unpleasant and grave one for my country and, above all, for its people.
However, it is also unpleasant and grave for the other 14 Member States of the European Union.
There have been no indications of any kind that Austria is deviating from the path of parliamentary democracy and European values it has trodden hitherto.
I therefore appeal to you to join me, and my country, in seeking and finding a solution to this situation, in the interests of the people of my country, but also in the interests of the European Union.
On a final note, allow me to thank you once again for inviting me to speak here in the European Parliament.
I can assure you that Austria will continue to work towards the completion of the European project of peace and unification, using all the strength and conviction it can muster.
We Austrians are committed Europeans, and we intend to stay that way!
(Loud, sustained applause)
Mr President, we have now heard you.
Thank you for your statement and for the personal convictions you expressed.
We have been aware of them for many years; they are strong and we did not doubt them.
In a few hours' time, the group chairmen and I myself will be meeting you again, this time for an informal exchange of views in camera.
So I will not comment at any length on what you have just said to us.
To conclude this formal sitting, let me simply point out that our vigilance is not directed against the Austrian people as a whole, whom we respect and love and who, as we know and as you reminded us, remain strongly attached to the European Union.
Our vigilance is not partisan.
We are not trying to impugn anyone' s motives, nor are we unaware of the particular political situation your country found itself in at the last elections.
Nor are we interfering, for the European Union is not only a market, it is a community of values, and I am grateful to you, Mr President, for pointing that out again.
What happens in one country cannot be a matter of indifference to the others.
We are concerned and vigilant because of one fact and one memory.
The fact is that a party of a xenophobic persuasion forms part of the Austrian Government, and you said with some force, Mr President, that you understood the anxiety about a possible new upsurge of racism, of intolerance, of xenophobia and of anti-Semitism.
The memory is of a time in history that tore Europe apart because peoples, and above all their leaders, did not have the strength to react while there was still time.
(Applause) It is because of that duty to remember that we cannot accept the way that the extreme right is gaining ground.
(Applause)
Nothing would be more dangerous to a human society than for its collective conscience to weaken, for it to become accustomed to the unacceptable and for it to relativise the intolerable.
(Applause)
Thank you, Mr President, for your replies a short while ago to our questions, which give us hope that Austria can once again become a full partner in our Union, which it has never ceased to be in legal terms...
(Uproar on the far right)... but what we hope, Mr President, is that it will also become so in our minds and, to tell the truth, in our hearts.
(Loud applause.
Uproar on the far right)
(The formal sitting was closed at 12.30 p.m.)
Financial services and complementary pensions
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
A5-0059/2000 by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission communication on implementing the framework for financial markets: Action Plan [COM(1999) 232 - C5-0114/1999 - 1999/2117(COS)];
A5-0053/2000 by Mr Kuckelkorn, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission communication "Towards a single market for supplementary pensions - Results of the consultations on the Green Paper on supplementary pensions in the single market" [COM(1999) 134 - C5-0135/1999 - 1999/2131(COS)].
Before we begin I would like to advise you that, since this is a night sitting and we have a lot of work to get through, I am going to be very strict in applying time limits.
I therefore also ask Members to show an appropriate degree of self-discipline so that we can finish at a reasonable time.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, if I had to point here and now to two complex issues in the economic field, I would no doubt choose the following: the consolidation of the financial markets and the approximation of the direct taxation regulations - specifically tax on savings - which is under discussion.
The debate which we held recently on the bodies for collective investment in transferable securities and the reactions to the report on pension funds, which we will hear shortly, demonstrate the complexity and importance of these issues.
These two issues, the liberalisation of the financial services market and taxation, are dealt with in the action plan which is the subject of my report.
It is therefore appropriate to thank all the groups for their cooperation and confirm once again to the Commission that it can rely on the active cooperation of the European Parliament in the implementation of this plan, and we will not disregard our duties, but exercise them responsibly.
The complexity of the action plan also reflects the ambitious nature of the report presented by the Commission, which contains 43 measures and involves all the sectors in the field (stock exchanges, banks, investment funds, insurance, etc.) and which applies to what has come to be called the 'new economy' , which is - according to the Lisbon Summit - one of the elements which will help to put an end to unemployment in Europe.
What is included in these measures?
What is intended through these measures?
In my judgement, to sum up, it is the following: the liberalisation of the financial sectors and the updating of the regulations on supervision and control in order to achieve a European financial market which is at least as competitive as the United States financial market.
In the explanatory statement, I offer a detailed comparison of the two types of market.
In order to achieve these two objectives, the Commission proposes a truly arguable and risky formula: the speeding up of the legal process, which, in turn, would involve three actions.
Firstly, a reduction in the standards which need to be included in a regulation or directive, that is to say, which require the participation of this Parliament.
Secondly, limiting those standards to the definition of the general approaches and basic principles which must be established in this field, allowing the Commission the possibility of implementing them.
Thirdly, granting the Commission broad powers of interpretation.
I do not doubt that we have to speed up the process, Commissioner, but this Parliament is not prepared to relinquish the powers which it has taken so long to acquire.
Therefore, one of the first tasks which we will have to undertake together is to find a model which will satisfy both objectives.
With regard to liberalisation, the first of the tasks which the Commission proposes, the Commission starts from one premise: the consolidation of the single market in financial services requires the removal of the barriers which hinder its operation.
We could not agree more.
The consequence is that, in order for the market to function, these barriers must be removed.
Again we agree, but we know that there are difficulties in this approach resulting from the need to reconcile the objective of liberalisation with the objective of protecting investors.
Firstly, the barriers are not identified.
Commissioner, it is not sufficient to be able to deduce what they are from the measures proposed by the Commission.
Personally, I would have liked to have seen a list of those national measures which, in accordance with the Directive on financial services, are hindering the operation of the market in each country.
Secondly, the solution proposed by the Commission still raises difficulties.
It is ridiculous that a financial company has to operate while being subject to, and having to have knowledge of, fifteen different legislations, but it is at least as ridiculous that an investor - especially a non-professional investor - should end up needing to contract services, bound by regulations which he or she does not know, from companies whose solvency is unknown, and, in the event of legal dispute, he or she has to take action in a foreign country, with foreign jurisdiction and procedures.
Liberalisation must therefore be implemented in parallel with the increase in measures relating to control and taxation.
With regard to control measures, we have a new problem: the need to adapt the competence and jurisdictions of authorities which are still national and which, on the whole, apply differing models, to a different world affected by globalisation, international competition and free movement of capital.
Finally, Mr President, my personal conviction is that, if we do not want liberalisation to give rise to distortions in competition and the flight of capital to more beneficial climates inside and outside the Union, the correct operation of the market in financial services will not be possible without a certain degree of approximation of the laws which regulate savings.
These are the concerns which are raised in my report.
These concerns reflect a constructive attitude towards cooperation with the Commission, which I have always considered to be a loyal ally of this Parliament, in the development of an issue which is so very complex.
- (DE) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, supplementary pension schemes in the internal market are taking up more and more of the political institutions' time, both at national and European level.
The long run-up to this debate on a communication from the Commission is proof enough of how high feelings are running on this issue.
The issue of 'supplementary pensions' is a complex one and has implications for social policy, company policy, taxation policy and the capital markets.
Since the publication of the Green Paper, the Commission has been concentrating on the capital market aspect and working towards the short-term aim of harmonising the prudential rules governing pension providers under the heading of "supplementary pensions in the internal market" .
As such, it has already defined, in an ill-considered manner, what pensions are, thereby establishing a definition that points the way for further legislative initiatives in the taxation or social sphere, and, what is more, has initiated European legislation that will influence national legislation.
It is precisely this short-sightedness, this search for a quick fix solution, with no thought for setting long-term objectives, that the Commission is guilty of, for the goal, and what constitutes European added value from the point of view of the European citizen, companies, employees, and pensions recipients and providers, is for pension providers to have cross-border membership, which will ensure that pensions are properly integrated into the internal market.
It is this European added value that we have our sights on when we urge the Commission to draw a distinction between pure capital formation and pensions in its future legislative proposals, in other words, to distinguish between providers that cover biometric risks and those that only place capital.
In common with the legislators in many Member States, our position is that one can only talk in terms of pensions if life risks such as invalidity, longevity and surviving dependants are covered.
What exactly does that mean?
By "covering longevity" I mean that the pensions provider is obliged to pay me a fixed pension until I die.
Therefore, they can neither fob the individual entitled to receive the pension off with a fixed amount, nor reduce their pension because the person concerned is getting too old by their reckoning.
Provisions for surviving dependants cover those of the surviving dependants - i.e. family members - that are entitled to receive the pension of the deceased, and are dependent on this.
In its turn, invalidity cover provides for a pension in the event of complete or partial inability to practise one' s profession.
If we are serious about reinforcing the statutory pensions schemes with supplementary pensions in the internal market then pensions must provide cover for these risks.
If we fail to take biometric risks into account, then what we will have is not provisions but 'previsions' for old-age.
But this is not just about the quality of pensions in Europe.
In calling for different legal bases to be established for products and product providers that are defined in different ways, the main aim is to achieve legal certainty in Europe and to afford better opportunities for future integration into the internal market.
Equal treatment of products that do not cover biometric risks and those that do is completely at variance with our intention to introduce supplementary pensions for the European internal market.
Clearly then, the Commission' s main concern is to boost the European capital market.
I would take issue with this on several counts: the implementation of taxation during the pension payout period in all Member States would not just make supplementary pensions more favourable, it is a fundamental prerequisite to resource-saving, cross-border membership.
In other words, companies, be they large or small, will no longer have to put fifteen different systems in place for their employees; one pensions provider will suffice.
Yet taxation during the pension payout period will entail loss of income for Member States.
It will only be possible to reach a consensus on taxation policy amongst the Member States if the EU provides a clearly defined legal framework - using whatever directive is appropriate - and keeps the loss of income to the Member States within bounds.
Hence our demand for two directive packages: one governing pensions with obligatory coverage of biometric risks, and one for old-age provisions.
Using both of these, we can attempt to achieve full European integration.
When it comes to pensions, we have a good chance of finding the solution we need in the very near future.
Therefore we should not allow banks and the investment industry to talk us into short-term or short-sighted decisions.
I have this request to make of you, ladies and gentlemen.
Let us, as participants in codecision on future directives, use tomorrow' s vote to send the right signal to the Commission, with a view to bringing stability to old-age provisions in Europe and providing future supplementary pensions in the internal market that are in every sense worthy of the name.
Mr President, I am referring, as you have said, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, to the Commission communication on the action plan for the implementation of the framework for the financial markets.
As the main rapporteur, Mr García-Margallo y Marfil, has pointed out, in this regard there are two questions which are, firstly, taxation - without fiscal harmonisation it would be very difficult to establish Community financial markets - and secondly, a legal framework.
With regard to the legal framework, I believe that there is a paradox in this sector.
The more liberalised an economy is, the more necessary it becomes to rigidly regulate the financial markets.
The American economy, which is probably one of the most liberalised economies in existence, is the economy which lays down the most detailed regulations for the financial markets.
The Commission, in its proposal, on page 18 of the Spanish version, after recognising the competence of Parliament by means of codecision, in accordance with Article 251 of the Treaty, tells us that we should move towards very flexible procedures by means of comitology.
Comitology in these cases usually means taking away with one hand what is given with the other.
In this respect, I am in total agreement with the conclusions of the rapporteur.
I believe that we need some very specific legislation and I am sure that the Commission can count on the support of Parliament in the drawing up of this legislation.
As the rapporteur said a moment ago, we cannot expect confidence on the part of investors, consumers and, ultimately, the financial markets, if they do not have a specific legal framework in which to operate.
The only way to do this is to replace the current rigid regulations with a set of specific Community regulations which will produce certainty in this very delicate sector of the economy.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy deplores the fact that the action plan for the financial markets does not take into account the problems which industry, small and medium-sized businesses in particular, is facing with regard to financing cross-border activities.
Many businesses, ranging from small businesses in border areas to large multinationals, would like to treat their accounts as one national account.
For example, they would like to use funds in their euro account in country A to settle an account in debit in country B. In this way, they would pay less interest.
Existing legislation, however, prohibits or hinders this type of cash management technique.
The world of banking has already driven this problem home to you on numerous occasions.
On behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, I would now like to ask the Commissioner whether it would be possible to set up a forum group which carries out market research into the legal and fiscal obstacles for businesses, SMBs, in particular, when they finance their cross-border transactions within the euro zone, in order to solve this problem.
I would appreciate a reply to this.
Mr President, in view of the Resolution of 3 December 1998, to which the Kuckelkorn report does not appear to contain a reference, Parliament once again is obliged to request that the Commission produce as soon as possible a directive or, as Mr Medina Ortega appropriately suggested, a Community law coordinating the various national laws.
The Commission appears to be somewhat apathetic in this regard, and seems to be concentrating rather on producing a directive on prudential rules for pension funds, which is easier to achieve but less effective in terms of decision-making in relation to the elimination of barriers to labour mobility and the coordination of taxation systems.
The legal bases are very important, and, clearly, different: in view of the various judgements delivered by the Court of Justice, pension funds could be governed by Article 47 and Article 55, the removal of barriers to labour mobility could be governed by Article 42 and the coordination of national tax systems by Article 94.
However, I would stress the need and the desirability to develop a single package, because this is the only way to achieve an overall framework which tones down the extreme positions contained in certain proposals for amendments.
I refer, in particular, to biometric risks, which are a very important factor but which should be dealt with on the basis of paragraphs 7 and 8 of the opinion drawn up by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
Indeed, making cover for biometric risks obligatory would be likely to make the system very inflexible.
I therefore feel that funds which cover biometric risks should receive privileged treatment, and that any inflexibility of the system could, in effect, result in negative imbalances for the beneficiaries.
Mr President, we see the reality of the situation all around us.
If 23% of Europe' s population is over 65 years old today, this figure will have reached 40% by 2025, and the proportion of four working people to every retired person will have become two working people to every retired person by 2020.
This demonstrates the pressing need to allow the development of supplementary self-funded high return pension schemes in the European Union to usefully supplement state contributory pension schemes.
As we all know, our Member States are working towards ambitious structural reforms, but it is also up to the European Union to intervene in the area of pensions, particularly supplementary pensions, in order to facilitate the free movement of workers in the context of the single market, to establish a genuine single capital market and also to ensure that equality between men and women is respected.
With this in mind, the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has been concerned to reconcile the security and efficiency of supplementary pensions for future pensioners as it is true that the guarantee of a high level of security for beneficiaries encourages healthy and desirable competition between European pension funds.
This is why our Committee feels that the proposal for a directive on Community prudential regulations applying to pension funds must be tabled and adopted as quickly as possible, bearing in mind our discussion today, with proper guarantees for the external and internal supervision of the funds concerned and for the calculation of their prudential commitment.
Furthermore, in order to encourage the free movement of workers, we felt it essential to quickly improve the transferability and the acquisition of pension rights from supplementary schemes from different European countries.
This is the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.
.
(FR) Mr President, I would like to say first of all in this debate that we are expecting to see a proposal for a framework-directive very soon, which will guarantee the development of a genuine single market for supplementary pension funds under the second and third pillars, given that the first pillar, which covers all biometric risks, must remain the cornerstone of the European Union' s social protection system.
This directive must in particular establish a framework to remove obstacles to the free choice of a pension fund, to the free movement of people, to the free provision of services and to charging double taxes.
We recommend a solution based on the principle that contributions should be tax-deductible, and that supplementary invested income should be taxed in accordance with the income tax law in force in the country of residence.
On the controversial issue of whether supplementary pension schemes should cover biometric risks, I wish to state that from the point of view of taxation, pension funds that do not cover these risks will not be discriminated against in relation to those that do.
With regard to prudential regulation, this should not be disproportionate, so that the security of the fund is guaranteed.
That covers the general framework.
I am grateful to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for having included all the relevant conclusions of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities in the motion for a resolution.
I now come to the report by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil.
With regard to the action plan which seeks to deepen the internal financial services market, I would like to issue a warning about certain strategists who are attempting to hold the liberalisation of the financial services sector hostage, because the work that has been undertaken on the taxation of savings has not made the progress they would have wanted.
As matters currently stand, we should remember that a single market for capital and financial services can function perfectly well without tax harmonisation.
Faced with proposals that confuse ambition and reality, I wish to emphasise that establishing a European Committee for stock exchange operations is certainly not the number one priority and, as I have no speaking time left, Mr President, I will give an explanation of vote tomorrow to say the rest of what I still wanted to say, because as draftsperson of the Committee' s opinion and as a speaker on the second report, it is really impossible to say everything in two minutes.
Mr President, representatives of the Commission and the Council, Mr Kuckelkorn, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I would like to thank the Commission for the sterling work they have done.
The communication from the Commission is liberal-minded and forward-looking.
Why should Parliament now adopt a less liberal position and vote in favour of stagnating structures?
We should not define the form and scope of the directive too narrowly.
What we need to do instead is to view the issue openly and from a wider perspective.
It is essential that we do not define the nature and scope of the risk coverage in a restrictive way.
Instead, we should be open-minded and look at the issue from a wider perspective and encourage a framework which is based on liberal markets and vigorous competition between different types of pension schemes.
What we should promote is the freedom of choice of the employee and the employer to choose the kind of scheme that best suits their interests
The question of biometric risks has proved to be of a controversial nature.
My firm opinion is that all the different pension schemes should be covered by the same directive in order not to protect certain types of schemes from competition.
Consumers and employers must have the right to choose the most suitable form of pension scheme and, therefore, schemes covering biometric risks should be treated under the same directive as schemes not covering these risks.
Both form a pension scheme but focus on different competitive benefits.
Mr Kuckelkorn, no-one in this Parliament is of the opinion that supplementary pensions should not cover the longevity risk, through the purchase of an annuity or by some other tool.
It is not the task of the European Union to define the nature and scope of the risk coverage concerning other biometric risks.
But it should be determined individually by each employee, as the Commission proposes.
Leaving this kind of decision to the individual is consistent with the principle of subsidiarity.
Allowing supplementary pension scheme managers the freedom to invest in a diverse range of instruments increases the security of the overall investment portfolio.
Increased freedom promotes the functioning of the capital market and has a significant impact on the growth of venture capital in Europe.
I am committed to the idea that we, as the European Parliament, should encourage healthy competition and the freedom of choice of the individual.
This must not only mean a single market for supplementary pensions, but the whole package of legislation concerning the financial services.
Mr President, the Socialists support the Commission' s efforts to establish a transparent and fluid internal financial services market.
It is in the interest of economic operators and all consumers that the costs of capital and financial intermediation should be as low as possible.
European financial markets are currently suffering from compartmentalisation along national lines, even though, following the globalisation of the international financial system, we are seeing the widespread phenomenon of mergers and internationalisation.
The action plan aims to make the European market equal to the American market.
The success of the American market is basically due to 'king dollar' .
It is paradoxical in this context to note that some of the most ardent supporters of financial liberalisation at the same time oppose the euro.
The real introduction of the euro in 2002, however, will result in transparency and competition, which will force the national markets to adapt more quickly than they had anticipated.
The problem is that the legislative bodies, both national and European, are taking a long time to adapt the law to reality.
Personally, I would not be opposed to an accelerated legislative procedure, on condition that it does not end up as a mere exercise for non-accountable technocrats.
The Commission could make a useful contribution in the form of proposals simplifying and codifying the 11 or so directives that govern the banking sector, the 8 directives on investment funds, and the 21 directives dealing with the insurance sector.
There is not only a problem of coherence in the various legislations on the different sectors of the financial world, but in particular there is the problem of supervising and protecting the public interest.
John Kenneth Galbraith condemned the mistaken idea that there is any link between money and intelligence.
The lure of profit is such that the financial world tends to create a form of collective euphoria, which often leads to financial crisis.
The free movement of capital must be accompanied by an efficient regulatory and prudential framework, because supervision of the various markets is divided up according to country and sector, but at the same time, as a result of mergers, acquisitions and amalgamations, boundaries between banks, insurance companies, investment funds and pension funds are disappearing.
Finland and the United Kingdom have drawn conclusions from this and have established a single prudential authority for the whole sector.
Article 105(6) of the Treaty stipulates that the Council can entrust the ECB with specific tasks relating to policies on the prudential supervision of credit companies and other financial companies, with the exception of insurance companies.
Should the Council not use the Intergovernmental Conference to establish the necessary legal basis for the Council to be able to entrust the ECB with certain specific tasks relating to the prudential supervision of insurance companies too?
I must congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Kuckelkorn, for the tenacity with which he argues in favour of supplementary pensions and for these to become in effect a second pillar of insurance for old age.
I shall conclude, Mr President, by pointing out that it amounts to saying that whilst we should not discard insurance products we must favour products which cover biometric risks.
Mr President, Commissioner, if Europe is to grow, attract capital and create jobs, the single market for financial services must be turned into a reality.
Up until now, it has mostly been a matter of words and all too few concrete measures.
At present, the financial services market and, through this, Europe' s power to grow have been impeded by countless national regulations and administrative complications.
These are detrimental not only to companies but also, of course, to Europe' s citizens.
The development of the Internet is, and will be, of great importance to the provision of financial services across national borders.
Above all, it is consumers who will benefit from this development because they will have greater choice and access to lower prices.
We Liberals do not regard tax harmonisation as a prerequisite for bringing the single market for financial services to fruition, even if a degree of harmonisation may prove to be necessary to avoid harmful competition over taxes.
The euro has stabilised economic development and provided better opportunities to reduce the costs of acquiring capital, something which benefits both companies and private households.
It is my conviction that, if the EU is to be able to provide Europe' s citizens with growth and strength, then all Member States must participate fully in the EU project, that is to say, be members of EMU.
Mr Romano Prodi' s statement today in a Swedish newspaper to the effect that Sweden could stay outside EMU is therefore both surprising from an economic point of view and doubtful in terms of the Treaties.
The Commission' s Green Paper on liberalising complementary forms of pension protection is something we welcome.
It is nonetheless important to emphasise that pension cover in Europe is characterised by national diversity and that there is no need to harmonise the various systems in order to create a single market.
It is important that a large number of systems should exist side by side.
This increases choice and diversity.
However, it is desirable, in order to avoid double taxation, to introduce a minimum degree of harmonisation in regard to the Member States' treatment of supplementary pensions for tax purposes.
I also consider that the Member States themselves should be able to determine what the system should look like, for example whether or not the care of relatives should be covered by pensions.
This is an issue which can be resolved better at national level.
In committee there was lively discussion on biometric risks.
Views were put forward to the effect that only those systems which cover risks of this kind are to be included under the directive.
We do not believe that this should be the case, especially in view of the need for small and medium-sized companies to be able to do business.
Freedom of choice is emphatically a good thing.
Finally, I want to congratulate Mr García-Margallo y Marfil and Mr Kuckelkorn for two important reports designed to create a competitive Europe.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, since the Single European Act was ratified, the financial products market has been developing, despite the warnings of the Greens, without regard to the minimum harmonisation of taxation on income from savings.
What was bound to happen has happened.
There has been fiscal dumping onto the most mobile factors and a transfer of the tax burden onto the least mobile factor, which is labour.
The responsibility for blocking the tax harmonisation provided for in the Monti package currently rests entirely with one country: Great Britain.
Great Britain is trying to shift the blame onto Luxembourg, which is actually willing to compromise.
Let me formally notify our British colleagues that this attitude is irritating the rest of Europe.
Great Britain is the mother of democracy and of modern capitalism.
Its attitude of encouraging tax fraud has a corrupting effect not only in economic and social terms, but in moral terms as well.
It is challenging the civic foundations of European construction.
That is why the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance has decided to reject any new proposal to liberalise the capital market, unless the Monti package is first adopted.
This is the suggestion, moreover, of Mr Prodi' s Commission itself, and that was the key point of the García-Margallo y Marfil report on the action plan to unite the financial services markets.
Unfortunately, this point has been changed out of all recognition by the amendments of the right within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
Mr President, where supplementary pensions are concerned, the crucial issue is whether one wants to provide pensioners with security in their old age or to reinforce Europe' s capital markets.
These are not only two quite different goals, but it is also difficult to combine them in one and the same system.
The Commission' s proposal and both the reports we are debating today give priority to the needs of the capital market.
The hope is that the market-based pensions will then also prove to be good for pensioners in thirty or forty years' time.
How matters will turn out, however, we do not know.
If one considers how Europe has changed during the last thirty to forty years and acknowledges that circumstances are going to change just as much in the future, then one can see how uncertain such forecasts are.
There is a large deficit when it comes to security and solidarity in the pensions area because the risk is so great and because there can never be enough security and solidarity.
Supplementary assurances are therefore a problem.
They are, of course, much less secure than a system of basic pensions which has been financed on the basis of solidarity.
I also believe that supplementary assurances and supplementary pensions may be needed, but then their managers ought to be obliged to invest in such instruments as provide solid savings in the long term, instead of having short-term rates on the stock exchange and global financial capitalism determine how matters will stand for pensioners in the future.
I also believe it would have been commendable if these supplementary pension systems could have been run as pension funds on the basis of solidarity under the aegis of trade unions, as happens in certain Member States.
Even if these too are market-based, they offer much more in terms of stability and security than the privatised pension assurances.
It now looks as if we are to have a liberal arrangement in the pensions field in Europe, and I shall therefore advise my voters to invest their surplus funds in safer instruments than private pension assurances.
To young people I would say: pin your hopes on education and on developing your skills.
And to older people I would say: acquire a nice, inexpensive place to live in the autumn of your years.
We politicians ought to be putting our faith in a good, sound system of basic pensions.
Mr President, the European Commission' s Green Paper has caused many to reach for their pens, so much so that in the motion for a resolution, the objective of the Green Paper has been lost almost completely.
Similarly, the intention of the rapporteur, Mr Kuckelkorn, who has carried out a vast amount of work, for which I would like to thank him, is not expressed very well in the motion for a resolution.
It is now up to us to see that an acceptable document is produced tomorrow during the vote.
The principal aim is for workers, when they move to another Member State, to be able to transfer their supplementary pension schemes and continue to pay into them without forfeiting their pension rights and with a guarantee that their accumulated pension rights will retain their value.
Unfortunately, the Commission has not really made any headway towards fulfilling this wish.
We have a long way to go before the compulsory transfer of value between Member States will be a reality.
The first obstacle we need to negotiate is the mutual recognition of supervisory rules.
It is then important that an adequate distinction is drawn between pension funds and commercial insurance companies.
A pension fund has an obligation to be generally acceptable.
A full-value pension scheme covers biometric risks.
Insurance companies do offer their participants a choice, and their products do not cover biometric risks.
Since the risks covered are not identical, government inspection will also vary for pension funds and insurance companies.
On account of this supervision, complete freedom of investment is justified in both cases.
This leads on average to higher returns.
We need to avoid creating a situation where the individual is forced, on account of significantly lower returns on pension funds, to enter the wild investment woods in search of their supplementary pension schemes, where the big bad wolf is after their money.
The second obstacle is the levying of taxes within the Member States.
Taking into account the fast approaching ageing of the population, it is desirable for fiscal systems to promote the development of supplementary pensions.
The EET model, where premium payments are tax-free and the retirement payout is taxed, meets this requirement and is also common in most Member States.
I hope that Parliament and the Commission will make the internal market for supplementary pension schemes a reality along these lines.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, safeguarding pensions is an extremely important task facing our age.
We are conscious of the fact that numerous pension schemes in the various Member States, based on the intergeneration compact, are encountering ever-increasing difficulties.
That is why the issue of supplementary pensions has become so very important, and that is what we are discussing this evening.
When it comes to supplementary pensions and pension funds, our first priority in regulatory terms is to ensure that the rules governing the Common Market are upheld, and that no additional restrictions to the free movement of persons within the European Community are created, as is often the case.
We are aware that this is still the case today for many social security systems, and we must avoid the possibility of similar restrictions to the free movement of persons arising in this new sphere as well.
That is why certain common minimum provisions need to be put in place here.
We need certain minimum regulations for the protection of financial investments, and we anticipate that suitable proposals will be drafted and improved on to this end.
The second quite crucial issue is that of tax breaks, this being possible at three different stages: at the paying-in stage, then afterwards on the interest that is paid, and then at the payout stage.
The arrangements for this vary from one Member State to another, and if we want these funds to be compatible throughout the European Community then we are going to have to produce common provisions.
This is not going to be a piece of cake.
We all know that taxation is subject to the unanimity principle, but this is one of the fundamental demands we have to make.
I now come to the crunch question of this debate, namely what are pensions?
What are pension funds?
I have to say, we are still only halfway through the debate where this is concerned.
We have not reached a conclusive opinion within our Group either.
There is only one thing I can say with certainty: biometric risks must play a part in this overall assessment in some respect.
In other words, if we do not take biometric risks into account, then it will not be possible to address the other issues I have mentioned.
But we are quite deliberately proposing an open style of wording, as chosen by Mr Ferri for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market in points 7 and 8.
I believe this kind of wording will attract the broadest consensus here, and therefore enable us to make progress, for what matters most is that the directives are now put forward to us.
I believe it will not be possible to answer some of the questions we are discussing today until we can assess them in the light of the Commission' s proposals, the actual draft directives, that is.
Mr President, as the rapporteur, Mr Kuckelkorn said, state pension schemes, as the first pillar, must be supplemented by supplementary company pension schemes which are efficient and therefore also increase legal certainty, and which actually do justice to one' s entitlement to a pension.
A directive must not be used to make a name for a particular form of insurance and what is more, to equate provisions for old age with capital building processes, because at the end of the day, supplementary pensions products are no ordinary investment products.
That is why I really think it is very important for us to have different taxation systems in the Member States, particularly for those products that also cover biometric risks.
That is why today' s debate has in fact enabled us to embark on the further deepening of the single market, for in the single market and the euro we have, for the first time, the environment we need to get the financial service providers in the EU to operate in a truly efficient manner, and to enable us to take account of the idea of financial legislation and financial supervision.
Of course we would not wish to deter the market participants from making good use of improved business opportunities.
On the other hand though, we also want to safeguard financial stability and consumer protection interests.
The European Summit in Lisbon was right to emphasise again the importance of having integrated and efficient financial markets, and this House will also be in favour of keeping to a strict timetable.
At the same time though, we must do all we can, in view of the single market and the introduction of the euro, to improve the capital base for small and medium-sized enterprises and high technology companies in particular.
We must also do all we can to take account of measures favouring effective, cross-border consumer protection in the process.
It will also be necessary, to this end, to improve cooperation between the regulatory and supervisory authorities at European level.
There is also a need for financial stability, and it has to be said at this point, that the increase in company mergers in the financial sector constitutes a serious problem at present.
We would also do well to refer to the OECD reports, which make clear reference to the risks posed by megamergers in this sector.
At the end of the day, when financial conglomerates that are too big to fail come into being, not only does this increase the moral hazard of the institutes concerned, but the economic and financial policies of the States concerned are also faced with new risks.
We must do everything we can to prevent any weakening of financial stability, for this would lead to companies making use of the profits and tax payers having to sustain any losses.
It is regrettable that there is no direct consideration of consumer protection in the Lisbon Conclusions.
Unless we establish a reliable legal framework which is as informative and transparent as it could possibly be, not to mention liability for the benefit of the consumer, it will not be possible to complete the single market...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, I would like to express my opinion on the single market for supplementary pensions.
Firstly, I would like to express my agreement with the model based on the intergenerational solidarity of the basic state systems, to which are added the supplementary capitalisation systems.
On the other hand, I would also like to express my agreement with what Mr Kuckelkorn says in relation to the correlation established between pension systems which cover biometric risks.
We are not talking about systems for financial investment but about pension plans.
On the other hand, we are also in agreement with the participation of workers and the urgent harmonisation of the tax provisions.
Nevertheless, we have to clarify the basic concept of pensions in a way which includes the supplementary pension schemes which cover biometric risks.
It is necessary to clarify, on the other hand, that the single system applies to every type of worker in the European Union; there are not only workers who work for themselves in the European Union but also many cooperative workers, fortunately.
We must opt for collective systems, but not only company systems - something which is mentioned in the report - but also sectoral ones, taking particular account of SMBs, which have been mentioned by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel.
We must take account of the great difficulties which exist within the Union with regard to the development of supplementary systems.
We therefore understand and support the regulatory and supervisory systems for the protection of the rights of participants, but we must put the emphasis on the areas where systems are still underdeveloped, in aspects such as providing information or implementing new plans.
Finally, I would like to underline our support for the creation of a European pension fund with the participation of the different economic sectors and the pension providers.
Mr President, the ageing of the population and the reduction in the numbers of people of working age, while real enough, have been put forward by the Commission and other Members as a reason to open up the way for pension funds for supplementary pension schemes.
The dynamic of growth and job creation has run its course.
The capitalisation mechanisms mean adapting retirement pensions to the single market and the introduction of the euro.
Moving in this direction entails the risk of a system based on private insurance, which would gradually replace social security.
Welfare and retirement pensions would no longer be rights but would be commodities subject to the laws of the market.
The set pension fund strategy essentially aims to drain savings away toward the financial markets.
A system of this type is very dangerous and deeply unfair as it benefits the richest people, those who can save money, and leaves the poorest with a pittance of a retirement pension.
Mr Kuckelkorn' s initial report considered the retirement pension primarily as social insurance against certain life risks, rather than a process of accumulating capital.
It has been radically changed, however, by the adoption of amendments unreservedly supporting the mechanisms of capitalisation.
I cannot, therefore, approve this report which makes the Commission' s approach even worse.
On the contrary, we think that a high level of social protection must be maintained, based on solidarity, regardless of financial profitability.
The contributory system guarantees the rights of the employed and provides them with a pension, in the framework of national solidarity between the working population and the retired population, between generations, between men and women, between the public and the private sectors.
The objective should be to obtain new resources and to upgrading the purchasing power of retirement pensions from contributions which could be raised from taxes on financial products at the same level as those which apply to wages.
Employers' contributions should be linked to companies' employment policies and taxes set up on those which make people redundant.
Mr President, as medical advances contribute to a steady ageing of our populations, the burden of pension provision throughout the Union becomes ever more costly.
In the UK, as in the US, Chile and Singapore and, to a lesser extent, the Netherlands, the burden on the state and succeeding generations has been significantly eased through the successful provision of supplementary second and third pillar private and occupational pension schemes, involving funds which grow to provide pension benefits following the retirement of the individuals.
Both pillars have the advantage of being resistant to demographic change, and third-pillar portable schemes, in particular, which are not restricted to single companies, enhance labour mobility and choice for the investors and are much more affordable to small and medium enterprises.
I welcome the fact that there is widespread recognition in this House to extend these supplementary schemes throughout Europe, even if there are disagreements over their precise nature and the way that the funds are to be invested.
The problem needs to be addressed urgently in my opinion, with demographic pressures in recent years already generating deficits in the pay-as-you-go schemes in France, Germany, Italy and Spain.
It is even predicted that if the current trend continues some countries will be facing costs of up to 20% of their GDP in the next ten years for their pension liabilities.
There are, of course, many risks with equity investments, but there are even greater risks to Europe with stagnant economies.
Growing pension funds will dynamise our economies by providing large additional capital funds for investment not only in the EU, but also in developing markets, with greater prospects for future growth and returns on investment for our pensioners.
In the case of defined contribution schemes, which give the investor a direct stake in the overall health of the national economy, there will also be a sense of participation in the country of that individual.
The state scheme will of course remain the primary mechanism for basic provision in old age.
But personal responsibility and choice will become the watchwords of success if the demographic challenges of the coming century are to be met successfully.
That is why we should not be too prescriptive regarding the issues of biometric risks or investment strategies.
We need a light-touch regulatory framework, with bilateral tax agreements, which will ensure the portability for those EU nationals wishing to work abroad throughout the Union, achieve a genuine single market in financial services and provide maximum choice to the European investor.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the crux of this evening' s debate obviously seems to be that unless clear and unmistakable distinctions are drawn between products that cover biometric risks, as the rapporteur, Mr Kuckelkorn, has proposed, there will be no single market for supplementary company pensions, or not a genuine single market at any rate.
We need tax harmonisation if we are to make the single market an attractive proposition.
We need taxation during the pension payout period, as proposed in the agreement, because only then will the cross-border aspect hold some appeal for potential members.
After all, why should the Finance Ministers pay twice?
They will have to pay once for departing from an input taxation system, and they will then have to take a decrease in tax revenue on board at a later date.
At the same time, they will have to help foot the bill for any unsatisfactory products they have helped to promote which do not prevent poverty in old age, and they might even have to pay a third time because, in addition, they will have to finance poverty in old age from public coffers.
These Finance Ministers may then have to pay yet again because they will have to resign their posts, as punishment for their foolish actions.
That is why the debate as presented to us in Amendment No 30, on the freedom of choice of the insured, is a pseudo discussion.
I have this to say to those of you that support this argument: these are the same insured whom only a few weeks ago a majority of you undertook to allow to participate in decisions on the fund capacity, on the use of the amounts paid in, which are often a slice of people' s wages, and you gave an undertaking to these same people that those who act on your behalf would be involved in making sure that the funds in question were put to good use.
We are very much in favour of the citizens of Europe having the freedom to decide, but, that being the case, let us be quite clear about what we mean by the principle of subsidiarity.
According to catholic social doctrine, subsidiarity means that we should actually enable the small units - the families and most dependent employees - to make their own provisions for old-age, and that we should concern ourselves not so much with the investment interests of individual suppliers of products as a criteria, but with how we can reduce the number of hurdles to vesting periods.
We must talk about how we are to organise the codecision rights of the insured and their representatives, and we must also discuss how investment capital is to flow into spheres that will generate worthwhile new jobs.
Mr President, this report seeks to harmonise supplementary pensions in Europe.
In fact, it seeks nothing less than to open up all European pension schemes to the financial markets.
Indeed, it recommends the development of a truly single pension fund market by referring to the inevitability of resorting to capitalisation.
It should be noted, by the way, that when the financial interests of the most powerful are involved, they are not slow to forget the principle of solidarity and to propose a single model.
This report puts forward cynical arguments and seeks to give credence to the idea that only capitalisation would ensure better protection of low incomes.
The truth is that it is not an attempt to supplement state pension schemes, but rather to gradually empty them of all substance.
Those who are employed know full well, however, that a pension is theirs by right.
They fought for this right, which is based on intergenerational solidarity.
That is why they do not, under any circumstances, want to see their pensions gambled on the stock exchange.
In several countries, powerful social movements have already opposed similar attempts.
Their threats have to this day prevented the French government, for example, from introducing pension funds.
This is in perfect harmony with past, present and future struggles, and it is in support of them that we shall be voting against a report that reduces this Parliament to the level of a lobby for high finance.
Retired people need an adequate, stable and safe pension.
Pension funds and the stock exchange will never be able to guarantee that.
On this issue, as on many others, a choice must be made between increasing the profits of a few or satisfying the needs of all.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we are all in favour of securing future financing for pensions, having an equitable and stable inter-generation compact, and creating a workable, clearly defined three-pillar model that increases the individual' s range of options and supports the mobility of employees.
All of us here say "yes" to minimum rules because they increase mobility.
We are all in favour of having clear minimum rules alongside supervisory rules.
However we do not agree - and this is a matter of regret to me - on what we mean by supplementary company pensions.
We are not in agreement on whether supplementary company pensions supplement the first or the third pillar.
We do not agree on the opportunities employees should have to participate.
There is a reason for this.
The reason is that each of our countries has a different system, although we have the same headings: we have different tax provisions, different levels of performance, different cultures and a lack of mobility.
I will therefore tell you what I think: I am in favour of having a single market for financial services and liberalising the market, but, when it comes to supplementary company pensions, protective mechanisms must be put in place for employees, and the social market economy must be stimulated.
Therefore I also advocate that the supplementary pension packages, which include biometric risks, should offer special advantages to those entitled to benefits and to society as a whole, and that they should therefore receive preferential treatment, whilst allowing people to retain the option of choosing one of the others, because what I do not want is for those who are mobile to be socially worse off than those who stay at home.
Mr President, I would like to start by paying tribute to Mr Kuckelkorn, because he has drafted a courageous report in my opinion, given Germany' s rigid and inflexible pension situation.
He clearly wants to take steps towards developing a European internal market for supplementary pension schemes.
I think he deserves tribute for this.
I myself come from a country where a very extensive second pillar of supplementary pensions exists.
Almost 90% of the professional population in the private sector are in pension schemes which guarantee a wage-related pension.
This also includes small and medium-sized businesses.
With a capacity of over EUR 150 billion, the pension fund of Dutch civil servants is the largest institutional investor of its kind within the international capital market.
Pension funds in the Netherlands are daring to take increasing risks in their investments.
In 1999, nearly half of the pension money was invested in shares, albeit under strict prudential conditions.
But the average return over the past five years has been around 15%, instead of the usual 4%.
It has been shown that it is precisely the compulsory nature of participation in collective pension funds which encourages these excellent results.
The fact that funds are spread over generations and risks means that the funds can invest in shares to such a high level.
On balance, this yields a far better return for individual members, much better than they could ever achieve on their own via a savings plan or investment fund.
Therefore, I must open Mrs Kauppi' s eyes and disprove her reasoning that individual workers would be better off making their own choices, even if they belong to the fortunate ones who do not have any hereditary diseases, who are young and male, because, unfortunately, Mrs Kauppi, we women are even worse off under individual schemes as we live longer than men on average.
Consequently, I would strongly discourage you from formulating a principle of free choice at European level.
If I were you, I would leave this to the Member States and the free market.
As for biometric risks, other speakers have already talked enough about this.
I fully endorse Mr Kuckelkorn in this respect and would argue that such a definition is very important because we are expecting a number of additional directives from the European Commission.
Mr President, we are voting against this report advocating self-funded pension schemes.
This system restricts employees who want to guarantee a retirement pension for themselves that will give them enough to live on, to make their money available to investment funds, trusts, insurance companies or other private financial groups.
At the same time, it makes the value of pensions subordinate to the financial markets, in other words, to speculation.
What is more, all those whose salaries are too low for them to be able to pay into a pension fund will be entitled only to a very meagre pension.
Referring to demographic changes in order to justify this is a swindle.
Productivity has increased tenfold in the last fifty years and if company owners and shareholders had not transformed the fruits of this productivity into purely private profit, it would now enable salaries to be higher and would guarantee appropriate pensions for everyone.
If contributory pension schemes are having problems, it is only because there are fewer employed people in proportion to the number of retired people, because there are too many unemployed and because salaries are too low.
So, if there is a shortfall in pension funds, States should take over by deducting the necessary amounts from the profits of industrial and financial groups.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the pensions issue, which is what we are discussing today, is a very sensitive one.
As a young Member of this Parliament I am of course thinking of young people, whose pensions are currently the least secure.
We also need to safeguard freedom of movement in Europe and to ensure that those individuals, particularly young people, who are mobile within Europe do not suffer any disadvantage compared with those who remain in their own country all their lives.
So as not to lose sight of the fact that we want secure pensions, what we also need to do is to liberalise the financial market in Europe and to create a framework so as to make the single market, as well as the German and the European financial market, competitive in the face of global competition.
The PPE Group has not taken the easy way out.
We are still having intense discussions on this, focussing in particular on the second pillar, in the course of which we have learnt that the first pillar, state pensions, is no longer viable and we must strengthen the second pillar.
Two arguments are in order here.
If we are to strengthen the second pillar then it must be made equivalent to the first and built up accordingly, that is, it must take account of the biometric risks.
Or one could argue that it is necessary to admit new products so as to enable this sector to develop in an effective manner and yield the necessary return, thereby securing pensions for the future.
My personal preference is to make people fully aware of the biometric risks and to put this issue right at the heart of the Commission' s agenda over the next six months.
When it comes to the three biometric risks in question, I have a particular preference for longevity, which is an unshakeable fact in my view.
But we should not establish a system today.
The world keeps spinning, as do the financial markets, and we should also be open to new influences.
We must accommodate subsidiarity within the competition of systems, but also within the competition of taxation law.
I hope that the Commission will do justice to this task.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, supplementary pensions and complementary pensions schemes are of course gaining constantly in importance and in market value on account of democratic development.
Increasing mobility on the part of employees in the European Union necessitates a Community legal framework for managing complementary pensions schemes.
But there is also a long overdue need to bring order to taxation systems.
Incidentally, it has of course occurred to me that the Commission' s proposal is definitely only aimed at harmonising investment regulations, which does not do justice to the issue, that is to say, it completely misses the point.
What I am saying is that we now have the perfect opportunity to extend the European social system further and to develop it further in a judicious manner.
Remember that complementary pensions schemes are schemes that make provision for old age.
This makes sense and there are many reasons as to why it is absolutely essential that we bear this in mind for the future.
If pensions are one of our real concerns then we must ensure that they are of a high quality, and account must be taken of the biometric risks.
Only good quality products will be able, in the context of the second and third pillars, to fulfil a social function for the European social model.
Otherwise, all we would be talking about here would be capital redemption insurance, which is not the same thing at all.
That would constitute misrepresentation of the product.
Therefore please do not support the idea that it is necessary to channel the capital investment products already in existence into the European social model.
That would do our cause no good at all.
I would like to dedicate the last sentence, in particular, to Mr Balfe.
Mr President, the ageing of the European population means that we will have huge problems when it comes to footing the bill for our statutory pension schemes.
Member States where supplementary schemes are under-developed compared to statutory pension schemes will feel the pinch most.
Unfortunately, we are forced to note that this is the case for the majority of Member States.
A developed collective system of supplementary pensions, compulsory if so required by the relevant Member State, considerably reduces the dependence on demographic factors and enables the pension fund, in the role of investor, to derive maximum benefit from the possibilities which financial markets have to offer.
Needless to say, the objective of making employees more mobile and flexible within a large single European market and the euro zone will inevitably lead to interest in supplementary pension schemes.
One of the philosophies underlying the European Union and the Monetary Union requires that the internal market should be used to the full.
As such, you, as a worker, should be able to take your accumulated pension rights with you to another European country.
To this end, we need to develop a legal framework at European level at the earliest opportunity.
Why should a German employee, for example, have to wait ten years before he has built up a pension and a Dutch person only one year?
As such, this German person suffers a considerable handicap with regard to mobility.
What is more, the fiscal treatment of pensions at the time when contributions are made and at the time of payout should be brought into line.
Commissioner, you deal with taxes, what is the latest on this score?
I have to say that this parliamentary discussion seems to be more about a complete harmonisation than coordination.
This, unfortunately, is at the expense of Member States which already have their house in order.
One such country is the Netherlands, initially presented as a role model for all other Member States and gradually relegated to curiosity status.
But the Dutch system is a worthy system which accepts old age, surviving dependants and vulnerable groups within the labour market as they are.
The supplementary pension scheme is based on collective feeling and solidarity.
This enables SMBs - and specifically SMBs with reference to the UK MEPs - to cover biometric risks at relatively low cost.
Top of the list are payability and security, which is not the case for the proposals submitted by some MEPs.
Mr Bolkestein, how do you intend to bring the discussion back to the crux of the matter, namely mobile pensions for mobile people?
Mr President, firstly can I say that the EMAC report is pretty good and I hope we do not amend it too much.
The key word is "supplementary" pensions.
We are not trying to relieve poverty or provide a basic income in retirement.
The second point is that it is important that we provide decent pensions to enable citizens to move around Europe.
So I welcome the emphasis on removing the restrictions on the investment of pension fund portfolios and support the objective of removing barriers to labour mobility.
The key is to keep it simple or it will not work, it will not remove the obstacles.
As Mr Tannock has said, there are demographic pressures upon us and it is in our interest to facilitate the development of supplementary pension schemes both around Europe and also in many countries within Europe.
On the issue of biometric risks, which we have heard a lot about, clearly a pension by definition has one biometric risk, which is longevity.
Once you start building on top of that, you are on dangerous ground if you make it a condition of a passport.
What we need is to have a very simple proposition, and then let the market sort the rest of it out because that is what the market is for.
The biometric risks problem means many different things to different people.
We must try and get a simple product which is marketable and can be moved around this market, because if we do not, we will end up with a product that does not work at all that the different Member States cannot make use of.
So the key is to keep it simple and make it work.
Mr President, for how long will workers be forced to sacrifice one-third of their salary to government and state pension funds, in the hope of receiving a pension in their old age, while those government and state funds are so designed that they make pensions vanish faster than Houdini himself could have done?
Mrs Laguiller, the people trusted the states and the governments, especially the pledges made by left-wing governments, but they have been left with peanuts.
Every day, thousands upon thousands of elderly people reach retirement age and ask their governments, "Where are our pensions?"
And the governments reply, "You are living too long and there is no more money left to give you" , concealing the truth.
And what is the truth?
The governments have squandered the funds and made off with the workers' salaries.
Shame on the Socialist governments for failing to provide for workers in their old age!
Despite the fact that there may now be a way of safeguarding this capital - the sweat of the brows of the workers - by capitalising pension funds, we are told that we must not do this, because the national governments want to get their hands on private pension funds as well.
It is time to change the tune.
We must give to Caesar what is Caesar' s and to God what is God' s.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Kuckelkorn' s report deals with a very important and very sensitive issue, namely pensions.
In almost all Member States the pension systems comprise three elements: statutory pension schemes, company pension schemes and supplementary private pension schemes.
The point has already been made on numerous occasions that action is called for, in view of the falling birth rate within the European Union, to make pension schemes more efficient than they have been hitherto.
Discussion is currently ongoing in all Member States as to how we can reform the pensions system.
All Member States are also agreed that our goal must be to safeguard people' s standard of living in old age.
Statutory pensions will no longer be able to fulfil this task on their own in the medium- to short-term.
Consequently it is only right to extend pensions in the second pillar, i.e. company pensions, and private pension provisions.
As has already been said repeatedly, the Kuckelkorn report concerns itself with pensions in the second pillar, i.e. company pensions.
What do we understand pensions to mean?
Again, as has already been said, opinions differ here.
I intend to confine myself to this point in what I have to say.
In many Member States, pensions are understood to mean the safeguarding of fundamental aspects of life.
This entails covering what are known as the biometric risks, and providing financial security in old age, in the event of invalidity or for surviving dependants in the event of the death of the insured party.
What this actually means, for example, is that an employee who has a car accident at the age of 35 and becomes an invalid, receives not only the capital he has paid in up to that point but also a proper company pension, because he is the same position as if he had worked until he was 60 years old.
The same applies when a 35 year-old employee has a fatal car accident, leaving a wife and two children.
If the biometric risks have been covered, then the surviving dependants will receive a proper company pension in this case as well, and not just the capital he had paid in up until his death.
We must ensure that the concept of a pension is not just understood to mean a form of savings scheme, for a capital investment...
(The President cut the speaker off.)
Mr President, we are facing a difficult issue, as evidenced by the large number of speakers.
I would like to extend warm thanks to Mr Kuckelkorn as rapporteur, for the huge effort he has made to achieve this report.
I am slightly less pleased with Mr Kuckelkorn' s tabling of amendments, because he has tabled a great many and they go beyond the requirements of the current objective.
I think that we should differentiate between the two Kuckelkorns.
I believe that the systems we should pursue in Europe should be based on two principles.
One of them is simply the statutory pay-as-you-go system and the other is the system of capital cover which is an extension of the former, it is just that the only problem we are facing is that all countries have very different starting positions.
It is true that a country such as the Netherlands has managed to strike a fine balance between the two.
Other countries have managed to do this to a lesser extent.
Also, for example, countries where nearly all pensions are capital cover systems, such as Great Britain, do not meet expectations because, although the risks for the government are reasonably small, the cover for the retired is extremely modest.
In England, if there is a hard frost, for example, people are unable to pay their bills.
I do not think that this is the right way forward.
First and foremost, we need to remember that this is about people and based on this, we must develop a system which makes sound pension schemes possible, and we must, as far as we can, leave this task to the Member States.
We should keep intervention to a minimum.
We need to bear our starting point in mind, namely that if people move from one country to another to work or retire, it should be possible for them to take their pensions with them.
The Commission has always attempted to do this and I do believe that it has succeeded in its aim.
I think that two issues still need tackling.
Firstly, risks tied in with the second and third pillars should be sufficiently covered, because far too little has been said about this.
Secondly, the first pillar should at long last be defined, as the first pillar in one country is quite different from that in another country.
And if we could bring all of this a bit closer together, we would perhaps have far fewer problems than we have at the moment.
Mr President, the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs makes it clear that the pay-as-you-go based, statutory pensions schemes in the Member States need to be supplemented by capital-backed company or other supplementary pensions schemes.
Mr Kuckelkorn has provided an excellent analysis of the situation and is to be congratulated.
There are differences of opinion between and within the groups.
It is both possible and necessary for there to be compromises.
Why should we not include schemes with and without biometric risk coverage in one directive, but treat them differently?
It would be possible to favour cross-border pension funds or similar schemes, which cover many of the aforementioned risks, for example by having minimum regulations governing tax law.
Quite often, a reduction in contributions is taken account of with statutory pensions schemes in the Member States, as in Germany, with any shortfall to be made up by supplementary company schemes.
Naturally the statutory system makes provision for widows and invalidity pensions, for example.
We therefore need appropriate regulations for supplementary schemes, otherwise the collective agreement we need will simply not be feasible.
A second moot point is that of codetermination.
I am in favour of compromising with "cooperation" rather than introducing the frequently obstructive concept of "codetermination" .
Minimum codetermination rights for the beneficiaries are what we need to aim for, at least in the case of closed systems such as company pension funds, for example through an investment committee which establishes the principles of investment policy.
We need, as a matter of urgency, to set the course for the future.
It is becoming increasingly important for people to make their own supplementary provisions for old age, in order to safeguard their standard of living.
People need time to make these provisions.
That is the alternative to manipulating and fiddling statutory pension schemes.
Mr President, may I start by extending warm thanks to both rapporteurs, Mr García-Margallo y Marfil and Mr Kuckelkorn, for the reports they have drafted and the efforts they have made.
In fact, could I also warmly thank all other speakers this evening - nearly thirty of them - for the comments they have made and questions they have asked.
This is an important matter, both the action plan for financial services and the pension issue, and it is heartening to see so many speakers take part in the exchange of opinions.
As far as Mr García-Margallo y Marfil' s report is concerned, I would like to note that, according to the Commission, it is an even-handed report which strikes the right balance between an important political vision and the technical measures required in order to make progress.
Perhaps you will allow me to make a few observations in this respect.
I hope, at the same time, to comment on the amendments which have been tabled.
The Commission welcomes the attention which the report pays to the need for capital markets to function to optimum effect.
In this context, I would also refer to Parliament' s request for streamlined rules for stock market access, market manipulation and revision of the investment services directive.
The opening up of financial markets should, naturally, go hand in hand with an adequate level of consumer protection, and this was also requested this evening in this debate.
They are thus parallel processes, with liberalisation on one side and consumer protection on the other, and these are the two objectives which you will find wherever financial markets are at issue.
These are the European Commission' s twin objectives.
We also have a few specific proposals in this respect.
Firstly, we would propose the provision of better information on financial products for citizens.
Secondly, we would like to see better and clearer dispute procedures for citizens who are dissatisfied with foreign financial dealers.
Thirdly, we would propose better harmonisation for the present national consumer protection rules.
The fourth proposal concerns electronic commerce, or e-commerce for short.
Policy and legislation should make provision for e-commerce without creating unnecessary barriers.
Our citizens, on the other hand, must experience the same level of confidence and protection for transactions on-line as they do off-line.
Finally, an adequate supervisory structure is essential to guarantee the financial solvency of our institutions.
Does this mean that the European Central Bank in Frankfurt will be given a central supervisory role?
The ECB itself is of the opinion that this is not necessary.
There is in fact an alternative, to wit, a coming together of supervisory systems.
At this juncture, Mr President, I would like to bring up a remark made by Mrs Randzio-Plath.
It is an important remark.
Mrs Randzio-Plath has picked up some noises from the OECD and mentioned the word mega-risk.
Indeed, I think she is right to indicate the risks which can be inherent in financial movements.
She has referred to large mergers which are taking place and, without necessarily sharing her view regarding these risks, I would also like to refer to statements made by Mr Lamfalussi, who is well-known within the European financial system, and who has also indicated the need to be able to cope adequately with the financial risks and system risks which are heading our way.
This is a very important matter.
I still believe that coordination, cooperation and harmonisation of supervisory systems are enough to withstand the risks, but, once again, in the interest of the case itself, I would like to draw the attention of Mrs Randzio-Plath and other members of this meeting to a report recently drafted by Mr Brouwer, second-in-command at the Central Bank in the Netherlands.
This report was commissioned by the Economic and Financial Committee, which, as you are aware, is the gateway to the ECOFIN Council, and the report deals with financial stability.
The report will be made available shortly.
No doubt you will be able to find it on the Internet.
This report deals with the issue which is close to Mrs Randzio-Plath' s heart and once again, I would strongly recommend all members attending this meeting to read it.
Well, most of the points I mentioned a moment ago can be found in the draft report of the rapporteur, Mr García-Margallo y Marfil, and also in many of the tabled amendments.
In sum, I would like to say that we will undoubtedly continue to discuss the nuts and bolts but as far as the main points are concerned, I do consider Mr García-Margallo y Marfil' s report as welcome confirmation of the Commission' s vision.
I would now like to say a few words on the way in which a number of these measures need to be implemented, the need to take a close look at our legislative ethos and the way in which legislation is established.
Everyone is currently in agreement that we need to drop over-complicated, fossilised legislation, in other words, rules which cannot keep pace with fast market development.
Accordingly, the process by which the European Union, i.e. the concerted efforts of Commission, Parliament and Council, lays down rules should be quicker.
But how exactly can this be done?
There are quite a few different ideas and quite a few misconceptions, because if Mr García-Margallo y Marfil tells me that the European Parliament does not want to give up any of the powers it has only recently acquired, then I naturally share his view.
I myself have been a Member of Parliament for a long time, so I fully understand where Mr García-Margallo y Marfil is coming from.
In fact, this is not the Commission' s intention, even if it was authorised to take decisions in this respect, which is not the case.
Nonetheless, we need to proceed faster in order to lay down the necessary rules.
I would invite the Members of this Parliament to come up with any ideas as to how we could speed up and enhance the process.
Should we make more use of comitology procedures?
Should more weight be given to agreement reached between the institutions upon first reading?
At any rate, the Commission intends to keep Parliament and the competent committees informed of the agendas more quickly and more effectively, so that these agendas can be better harmonised and we can speed up the drafting of the required legislation.
In any event, I would like to keep this Parliament informed of all the developments regarding the action plan.
Every six months, we send a progress report to the ECOFIN Council and it seems to me that these reports could be used to exchange views with Parliament on this matter.
Mr President, most speakers have expressed their thoughts on the issue of pensions and I would like to say the following on this matter.
In its communication on pensions, the Commission has included proposals on three fronts.
The first area is prudential rules for pension funds, and protecting pension scheme members should take centre stage.
There is no question that rules could be introduced which could threaten the rights of future pensioners.
This is beyond dispute.
However, this does not detract from the fact that investment and management rules can also serve the interests of people other than pension scheme members.
In fact futile provisions that inhibit the results of investments, do pension scheme members no favours and must be repealed for this reason.
Secondly, the coordination of national tax systems is a condition for cross-border participation.
Mrs Peijs has asked me when we are getting mobile pensions for mobile people?
Other Members too, such as Mr von Wogau and others, have talked about the need to enhance the mobility of workers within the European Union.
As already stated, this does not require harmonisation (a word we need to use with discretion because it conjures up incorrect associations in certain Member States) so much as coordination.
So it requires the coordination of tax systems which differ in terms of tariffs.
This coordination is a precondition for cross-border labour mobility.
The Commission is in the process of drafting a proposal, a general framework, intended to facilitate the payment of contributions by occupational pension institutions which are located in other Member States.
This general framework has also been requested, of course, in this meeting by Mr Medina Ortega, for example, while Mrs Peijs has also indicated the need to set up this general framework.
Moreover, I would like to refer to the constant jurisprudence of the Court of Justice.
This jurisprudence has demonstrated that the restrictions which apply to cross-border contributions and premiums are at odds with the Treaty.
The Commission' s third objective is to remove the obstacles which migrant workers are faced with.
More than anything, and this is also underlined in the draft report - rightly so - we should facilitate the transferability of rights from one Member State to another, and this is also very much in the interests of employee mobility, of course.
Mr President, concerning the motion for a resolution, I would first of all like to remark that this Parliament' s support is crucially important if we want to translate these proposals into specific measures.
It was with great interest that I read the sterling report of the rapporteur, Mr Kuckelkorn, and the competent committees, a report that so far has covered an extensive and technically complex area.
I did not fail to notice that Parliament is backing the lines of policy proposed by the Commission.
With regard to the motion for a resolution, I would like to make the following brief comments.
The motion presses for the general introduction of the tax levy model that relies on the taxation of the pension payout whilst providing for tax exemption for contributions to the fund and returns on the fund.
The desirability of this model was once again underlined this evening by Mr Blokland, among others.
Mr Blokland pointed this out and I share his view on this.
This is also echoed in the motion for a resolution.
Agreement on this approach would solve the problems of either double taxation or no taxation, which is what citizens and Member States are struggling with at the moment.
However, I would like to point out that this issue, as is known, only and exclusively concerns the competences of the Member States and, as such, falls outside the scope of the European Commission.
The Commission should ensure, however, if different systems continue to coexist in future too, that this does not have any adverse effects on workers exercising their right to mobility within the Union.
Regarding the amendments tabled, I would like to stress one point in particular, namely the scope of the future proposal - as the directive is not yet finished - for a directive regulating the activities of occupational pension funds.
In other words, the question is, and many Members attending this evening' s meeting have spoken about this, Mrs Kauppi, in particular: should this proposal, which we are about to disclose, provide for all forms of pension schemes or should it simply be restricted to pension scheme products which cover the members against biometric risks?
My answer to this is as follows, I hope it is clear: we need European prudential standards for all forms of occupational pension schemes.
These standards will differ in certain aspects according to the risks actually covered by the institutions.
But there is not one single technical reason why these different types of savings schemes could not be combined in one and the same directive.
It would, in my view, be incorrect - and the European Union would impose artificial restrictions on itself - if the Commission were to restrict the directive to be proposed to pension schemes which only cover biometric risks and if it were to exclude other pension provisions which, although they are full pension provisions because they cannot be collected before pensionable age, should nonetheless still be excluded from the directive, according to a number of delegates.
I believe that this is not right.
I think that the European Union would not do itself any favours if the subject of the directive were to be limited to biometric risks and I can honestly see no reason why other forms of pension schemes could not be included in the same directive, as I pointed out a moment ago.
Well now, Member States are thus given every opportunity to give certain pension products preferential treatment by using tax incentive measures, for example.
They can also demand that the products offered on their market, even if the institutions offering the service are based in another Member State, meet certain social criteria.
Employees and employers within one company or one sector are free to choose, according to the benefits and drawbacks of the products available on their market.
In other words, there is still a large degree of freedom for the Member States to arrange the pension systems within their own country as they see fit.
This freedom remains.
The Commission' s ambition is to create, I repeat, one framework which liberalises the setting up and scope of pension funds for the benefit of all the members of such pension funds.
Accordingly, we need to set up this legal framework within the European Union which enables businesses and future pensioners to choose the products on offer within a transparent market by institutions which are adequately supervised.
Adequate supervision is crucial, as is liberalising the scope of pension funds.
It is not up to the Commission to specify a pension product in every detail.
Indeed this is a matter which falls under the subsidiarity principle, and the European Commission would not wish to do anything which could compromise this principle.
Mr President, I would like to ask the Commissioner if he could also reply to my question.
I have been waiting for a reply for one and a half hours now.
I would, at long last, like to have a response to my question on cash management and the solution to this problem which is particularly hitting small and medium-sized businesses.
Mr President, I would prefer to address Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel' s issue when I respond to the report on the internal market.
This would, however, mean that Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel would have to stay even longer at this meeting.
This is not such a bad thing, in my opinion.
In the final analysis, many remarks made in this meeting will also be of interest to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, but since she has reminded me of this question, which, as I have already said, I would have addressed at a later stage, let me just say that this is of course an issue pertaining to the internal market.
It is true that small and medium-sized businesses are facing obstacles in their cross-border activities.
The Commission is acutely aware of this.
Needless to say, the scope of the internal market is intended to facilitate cross-border activities for small and medium-sized businesses.
The new strategy for the internal market comprises one hundred or so measures, many of which will be beneficial to small and medium-sized businesses.
But if Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel would like to approach me with specific problems relating to small and medium-sized businesses which are not covered in the new strategy for the internal market, I shall make every effort to address these points to her satisfaction.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The joint debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Strategy for Europe' s Internal Market
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0098/2000) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council: The Strategy for Europe' s Internal Market [COM(1999) 464 - C5-0212/1999 - 1999/2167(COS)]
Mr President, Commissioner, the report which I have the honour to present is the result of an extraordinary collaboration - which I am grateful for - between people and committees.
Allow me to make two observations: the Committee on Legal Affairs has not accepted all the suggestions of the committee asked for an opinion.
We were in complete agreement with most of them and they seemed to us to be very interesting, but we consider that this resolution was not the right place for them and that, by incorporating them, its message would be less clearly expressed.
That has been my criterion for recommending a vote in favour of the amendments presented in this House.
I therefore insist - and the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries is a good example of this - that they have not been included in the resolution, not because I reject their content, but because the message in relation to the internal market strategy had to be clearly expressed.
What was that message?
That message stems from the position adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs in our resolution of 4 November 1999.
If you will allow me, Mr President, I will concentrate on three ideas.
The first concern of the Committee on Legal Affairs -and I hope this House will ratify it tomorrow - is the concept of the situation of the internal market.
What does the internal market mean to European construction?
These days we hear the siren song of globalisation and together with that goes the idea that we are international.
The internal market appears to have become very small in this new globalised economy.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
This document on the strategy for the internal market expresses this very clearly.
The internal market is Europe' s platform in the world.
The internal market embodies the key principles of a globalised economy with advantages for Europe in terms of competition.
That is the first message of the Committee on Legal Affairs.
We need to put the emphasis on the principles of the internal market: the principle of proportionality, the principle of mutual recognition, the principle of control of origin.
These must be the great pillars upon which this strategy for the internal market is built.
We will not make the headlines with this, but it is important nonetheless.
The application and control of Community legislation is also important.
The Member States must cooperate in this application.
We must oppose procedures which are used too frequently, such as 'gold plating' .
We need to strengthen our infringement procedure, we need to consolidate it, make it more transparent and more accessible.
We ask that decisions on the outcome of infringement proceedings be explained and that Parliament be informed of them.
We ask that infringement cases be processed more quickly and that they be more effectively presented to the citizen.
The second message of this resolution is that we need to make the present, rather disorganised laws, which the citizens see as a burden, into a genuine legislation, a coherent and clear framework of rules and regulations, without any overlapping or contradictions.
These contradictions are seen by the citizen and by industry as burdens, as a lack of clarity in the message regarding the direction we are taking.
Lastly, the third message is a change in the business culture in Europe.
We need businesspeople who are more willing to take risks.
To this end we will have to change certain laws, such as for example the European laws on insolvency in general, on the suspension of payments and bankruptcy.
We need to put the emphasis on the creation of a genuine capital risk market.
We need to convince young Europeans, as young Americans are already convinced, that the best option is not to join a large company, on a long-term basis, but to create new companies.
In all of this, electronic commerce, the Internet and new technologies must offer a good platform.
Finally, Mr President, to sum up, I hope that tomorrow, on voting for the resolution, Parliament will send a clear message.
We are behind the Commission in this initiative and of course we want to participate in the whole process, permanently, cooperating, offering ideas and monitoring the situation.
Mr President, once again the European Parliament must express its opinion on the Commission communication on the construction of the internal market, in this case, a new version of it.
A proportion of its content affects the competences of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
It is these points which I wish to discuss specifically.
Firstly, I would like to say that, in general, one of the criticisms levelled at previous versions of this documents no longer applies.
The European Parliament' s resolution of 4 November 1999 said that the document was rather unspecific, that it did not contain specific actions.
This new version does contain specific measures and proposals.
Let us then analyse the content of these proposals, albeit in general terms.
With regard to taxation, the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is that the Communication is not ambitious enough, especially when compared to previous documents.
We are aware of the stumbling blocks encountered in relation to the tax package and that some of its chapters have been blocked, but in situations such as this large doses of political courage are necessary to push proposals forward.
We notice a lack of such political courage in this document since the chapter on tax simply reproduces previous Commission commitments, and even leaves aside some of the European Parliament' s proposals.
Secondly, in relation to the rules on competition, the Communication opts for deepening the process of reform underway, and this deserves our support.
Finally, in the chapter on financial services, it should be highlighted that up to now important progress has been made but, as indicated in the recent single market scoreboard, there is still a lot to be done.
Mr President, as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, it is natural that I should speak about the problems which the strategy for developing the internal market may pose from a social point of view.
We are starting with a European social model - which is a national model - and we are transforming the economic structure of that society.
In doing so, we are concerned that the effort to liberalise should not transform the essence of the current European social model.
An example of this can be found in an area as apparently banal as urban transport.
If urban transport is not subjected to political considerations and the intervention of local authorities, for example, straightforward liberalisation could make it practically impossible for us to reach our workplaces.
We have had examples such as the case of Venezuela where a strictly private system of public transport led to a profound social and political crisis in that country.
Liberalisation presents other difficulties.
For example, when public services and public companies are privatised and those public companies come to be controlled by a private sector which in reality replaces the state monopoly with a private monopoly, liberalisation may not come about effectively at all.
Liberalisation by means of privatising public companies may end up consolidating dominant positions and private monopolies which in my opinion may offer fewer benefits than a monopoly conceived in the public interest.
Another aspect - which we referred to in the recent debate on the Kuckelkorn report - is the need to coordinate social protection.
Social protection in a single internal market cannot simply be left to subsidiarity.
Lastly, cohesion also seems to me to be important.
If there is no economic and social cohesion, if we do not balance the quality of life in the different regions of the Community, we may find ourselves in a situation where the European Union is an unfair European Union in which some regions will make more progress and others will be left behind.
This is the basis of the amendments which Mrs Berger and I are presenting, representing the views of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.
- (ES) Mr President, Commissioner, firstly I would thank the rapporteur for explicitly mentioning the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries, although we regret that it has not been included in the report.
I say this especially, Commissioner, so that you can communicate to the Commission, and particularly to Mr Fischler, the fact that the common fisheries policy is one of the few areas of Community activity where until now very few steps have been taken in the creation of a genuine internal market.
The lack of action is related to the original conception of this policy.
The current Council Regulation No 3760/92 establishing a Community system for fisheries and aquaculture, provides for derogations in respect of the internal market, notably in Articles 6 and 7, which allow derogations from the principle of freedom of access to fishing grounds, so that Member States have the right of exclusive exploitation of their fisheries resources within a 12-mile coastal band, as well as a series of preferential fishing rights, through application of the 'relative stability' principle, which distributes national fishing quotas.
At the same time it lays down restrictions on exercising fishing activities in certain areas known as 'boxes' .
These restrictions on the principle of freedom of action, which were originally intended to be temporary restrictions, have been extended and will be in force until 1 January 2003 as a mechanism to allow certain Member States' fishing industries to adapt to the rules of free competition in an increasingly open and globalised market.
Over 20 years have passed and, as we are about to embark upon a general review of all aspects of the common fisheries policy which, for compelling legal reasons, must take place in 2002, it is now time, I believe, to examine whether the transitional period for adaptation to free competition provided for in the said regulation should be ended.
In my opinion, the fishing industry and the common fisheries policy should also be subject to derogations in respect of the internal market.
Therefore, the principles and fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Treaties should also be applied to fisheries, in other words, the framework of the common fisheries policy should be brought into line with the general legal framework of Community legislation.
Mr President, on behalf of our Group I should like to warmly welcome Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s excellent report.
As she said in her introduction, she has made the very wise decision to focus on what are the most critical issues for the creation of the single market.
I want to focus on a couple of the principal points that she makes.
The first one is the need to address, within the Union, the impact of legislation on business.
It is particularly important that we ask the Commission to reinforce its activities, to ensure proper compliance cost assessment and to assess the costs on businesses of the new legislation.
I say to the Commissioner that we do not expect this to be done as an after-thought, after all the departments in the Commission have developed legislation.
It needs to be an integral part of the policy and regulation process.
He must make sure that from now on that a central objective is to help the internal market to move forward.
We were delighted to see a second point on the agenda at Lisbon.
Our committee and, indeed, our Group has been emphasising, since this new Parliament started last year, the need to encourage the development of small- and medium-sized enterprises across the European Union.
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s report emphasises a number of key points such as the need to make business formation cheaper and quicker and the need to remove some of the barriers preventing entrepreneurs from benefiting from the risks of putting capital into starting up new businesses.
I am disappointed to see that our Socialist colleagues are proposing that clause should be taken out of this resolution.
I can assure them that we will vigorously oppose that tomorrow.
I invite colleagues to reject that proposal.
I conclude by confirming that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market will continue to press vigorously for the speedy completion of the internal market.
I give credit to all our colleagues, across all political groups, for the speed with which we have dealt with the electronic commerce directive this week.
I hope that is appreciated.
I hope it will demonstrate that we are prepared to work with speed.
I hope that, together, we can really make the internal market work as quickly as possible.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it has to be said that the European Commission' s current strategy for bringing about the actual realisation and improvement of the internal market has already been the subject of debate in this House on quite a number of occasions.
This ongoing discussion process is now encapsulated in the report by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, and I would like to thank her very much for this work, particularly as I am aware that it is often a thankless and less than exciting task to have to work on existing projects.
One tends only to make the headlines when one brings new ventures in to the world.
However, we must not discard the internal market as if it were an old hat.
The introduction of the euro has already brought all the shortcomings of the internal market into sharper relief and it will accentuate them even more clearly in the future.
Any failing on the part of the internal market weakens Europe economically and in terms of its credibility vis-à-vis the citizens.
If it helps to give the internal market project renewed impetus then we should in fact welcome the new packaging that the Commission has come up with, even if it appears slightly over-contrived and complicated for my taste on many issues.
It is important to get the proposed measures underway quickly.
In common with Mr Harbour, I believe that in adopting the common position Parliament has made an important contribution to electronic commerce.
The Council has been dilatory in many areas.
I am thinking mainly of such fundamental draft directives as those pertaining to "copyright in the information society" , "distance selling" , and "financial services" , where we have already been kept waiting for the common position for a very long time.
If we want to bring the internal market closer to the citizens and make it relevant to their lives, then we should also give the same amount of attention to all issues connected with it.
We will only strengthen the internal market and enable it to function at long last if issues such as consumer protection, employment policy, social security, taxation policy, environmental protection and regional policy are included in the debate from the outset, rather than being regarded as incompatible.
To this end, we have taken the liberty of tabling a number of amendments supplementary to Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s report.
Finally, I have a request to make of Commissioner Bolkestein.
We gathered from the Commission' s statement on the Echelon case that, in at least one Member State of our Union (I suspect it is not the only one and that this applies to several) secret services undertake activities with the aim, as permitted under national law, of protecting the economic well-being of a nation, a Member State that is.
I believe it would be worth looking at these legal provisions in the light of the fact that we have an internal market and a common European economy, i.e. a common European economic area.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I feel nothing but appreciation for Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s clear draft report.
It concisely outlines and highlights the key points from the Commission' s communication on the strategy to be followed for Europe' s internal market.
I would like to highlight some of these points.
The promised dialogue between the Commission on the one hand and business and citizens on the other is to be welcomed because the relationship between the Commission, the European Parliament and society should, after all, be interactive.
In order to keep pace with the present breakneck speed at which technology is developing, it is not only desirable but essential to keep the dialogue going.
So far, the average citizen has had insufficient insight into what drives the Union and what can be gained from European cooperation.
This is why information campaigns are essential.
After all, Europe cannot afford to remain a remote spectacle.
Back to basics should be our motto.
The e-Europe initiative praises the use and expertise of Internet and multimedia.
This is very commendable indeed but, rather than just creating a frame, it is more important to give substance to education.
I would like to repeat the words of the French President spoken at the official opening of this Parliament building and I quote: "We must create a citizens' Europe in which each individual gradually comes to see that he or she has a role to play.
We have a duty to build this great common house in which each individual nevertheless feels at home.
A house in which everyone lives together, in a spirit of solidarity, but in which each individual retains his or her identity" .
In order to meet these objectives, the residents need to get to know and get a feel for their house, or rather their home.
In order to build a genuine internal market, we should, more than anything, concentrate on promoting the interests of small and medium-sized businesses.
To this day, there are still too many obstacles.
Companies' competitiveness and dynamism depend directly on a regulating climate which is conducive to investment, innovation and entrepreneurship.
Finally, I can only echo the need for SLIM.
Legislation must become simpler and must be written in a clear language.
Superfluous legislation should be withdrawn.
It would therefore be beneficial to draw up a scoreboard of laws which have been abolished.
Mr President, I would like to speak on a point of order.
During the debate, Mr Harbour referred to an amendment tabled on behalf of Mrs Berger and myself - Amendment No 2, paragraph 22(2).
If I am not mistaken, Mr Harbour said that he was opposed to our amendment.
I believe that there has been a little confusion.
In the Spanish version which I have there is no problem.
The amendment is based on the German text, which causes some concern because it refers to the issue of share options.
I imagine that in the English text which Mr Harbour has there is no problem either.
The Spanish text simply says "remove the barriers imposed on entrepreneurs capitalising on company value through the issue of share options on the stock exchange" .
If this is the correct text, there is really no problem, in which case I would withdraw that amendment and simply ask for the German version to be adapted to what is said in the Spanish text.
Mr President, many thanks for giving me the floor regarding an issue which is very dear to the Commission as a whole and myself, in particular, namely the new strategy for the internal market.
To begin with, I would like to extend my warm thanks to Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi for the ardent support she has shown for the set of measures proposed by the Commission.
The Commission feels confirmed in its intention thanks to this important vote of confidence coming from this Parliament.
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has mentioned three topics.
First of all, she stressed the importance of the internal market as a forum in the world, which is essential for the competitiveness of European industry and the European service industry, and she is absolutely right, of course.
This is, in fact, echoed in Mrs Berger' s remarks, who stated that the internal market is not an old hat one can simply take off, the internal market is and will remain essential to European competitiveness as a forum in the world.
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s second remark highlights a number of inconsistencies.
According to her, sometimes one does not know where one stands.
This would be a serious shortcoming if it were true to this extent.
Needless to say, the Commission attempts to establish internal consistency between rules, but it is, of course, possible for rules to be in conflict with one another in certain areas.
If this were the case, then the Commission would be more than happy to rectify this situation.
I would like to thank Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi and the other Members for their comments regarding specific inconsistencies between rules.
This will enable the Commission to do something about this.
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi' s third remark concerns the change in culture.
This is an important yet very difficult topic, which predominantly refers to the availability of risk capital, as Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has also pointed out.
There happen to be bankers in the risk capital industry who believe that Europe has the money but lacks the entrepreneurs.
In other words, according to these bankers I spoke to recently, the bottleneck is not so much due to the availability of capital as to the availability of entrepreneurs.
This is tied in with the economic culture.
I happen to disagree with these critics.
Responsibility lies with both camps.
The bottleneck is the result of both the availability of risk capital, especially the cost of risk capital, but we are also, of course, lacking the sufficient entrepreneurship.
This is down to Europe' s economic culture which still instils in us the belief that bankruptcy will stay with a young entrepreneur for a long time, while in the United States, as everyone knows, bankruptcy is taken far more lightly.
I hence agree with Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi that something needs to be done to breathe new life into Europe' s entrepreneurial culture.
Moreover, I suspect that in the light of developments, which are termed the "new economy" , an increasing number of, mainly, young people, young entrepreneurs, will be encouraged to start up a business.
After having expressed my thanks once again to the rapporteur, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, I would now like to move on to remarks made by Mr Berenguer Fuster.
According to him, the Commission should have more political courage, especially in the fiscal domain.
My response to Mr Berenguer Fuster is: should the Commission have yet more political courage?
What the Commission is trying to bring about is already so hard to achieve.
That does not just pertain to the topic that was under discussion earlier this evening, namely the coordination of taxes and tax legislation regarding pension contributions.
It also concerns the taxation package formulated by my predecessor, Mr Monti.
Moreover, during the discussion of the previous topic, Mr Lipietz remarked that he, and probably his group too, is not prepared to further liberalise the provision of financial services if the package, also known as the Monti package, is not adopted.
I would like to oppose such reasoning which has no foundations in the real world.
It would be an example of cutting off your nose to spite your face, if Parliament or the Commission were to say that they refuse to make further attempts to integrate the financial services if no progress were made in terms of the taxation package.
This would not be the right attitude, in my opinion.
Although Mr Berenguer Fuster has not said this in so many words of course, I would still like to take the opportunity to stress this point.
I ask Mr Berenguer Fuster if he would like the Commission to have yet more political courage?
We are already struggling to achieve what we have proposed.
I would like to see the Commission achieve what it has proposed to do first and then take it from there.
Mr Berenguer Fuster has also said that a great deal still needs to be done in the field of financial services.
And he is right, of course.
Mr Berenguer Fuster is undoubtedly familiar with the action plan for financial services which was adopted on 13 May 1999 and which includes 43 objectives.
We are in the process of achieving these, at least we are in the process of achieving those objectives that need to be achieved this year.
I am hoping, on behalf of the Commission, to make certain proposals regarding pensions, for example - we discussed this topic a moment ago - but also regarding the opening up of markets for postal services, regarding the public provision of goods and services, public tendering etc., before the summer recess.
We are truly active in the field which is dear to Mr Berenguer Fuster.
I would now like to comment on a remark made by Mr Medina Ortega.
He said that at present, there is a risk of state monopolies being replaced by private monopolies.
I would like to assure Mr Medina Ortega that this is, of course, by no means the intention.
Replacing a state monopoly by a private monopoly only makes matters worse.
This is certainly not the intention of this Commission.
What the Commission does intend to do, however, is to add substance to the decisions taken by the European Council at Lisbon, namely to free up the markets for gas, electricity, transport and postal services a lot faster.
The Commission is trying to flesh this out and this also means that those state monopolies need to allow for more competition in the fields I mentioned a moment ago.
But, I repeat, the prospect of replacing state monopolies by private monopolies is something which we do not exactly relish.
I would then like to come back to the remarks made by Mr Harbour, who, like Mr Beysen and Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, was absolutely right to highlight the importance of small and medium-sized businesses and the costs related to running these businesses.
The Commission is aware that, for example, the costs involved in establishing a business or a small business over here far outstrip the costs in the United States.
To give you an idea of the cost difference, it takes an average of five days to set up a small or medium-sized business in the United States.
In Europe it takes far longer, even as long as five months, a ratio of 1 in 30.
This is, of course, directly reflected in the cost.
If we then talk about culture, and I am addressing Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi once again, we need to try to do something about these establishment costs of small businesses very quickly, because otherwise we will naturally come off second-best in the competitive battle with North America.
Finally, I would like to turn to Mrs Berger as I have already responded to Mr Beysen' s remarks concerning small and medium-sized businesses.
I have quoted what Mrs Berger said earlier about the hat which you cannot simply take off.
I like this metaphor because it is true that European citizens have the feeling that this internal market is already in place.
They take it for granted and do not give it any further thought.
This could not be further from the truth.
The internal market is far from complete.
We must - and the Commission does, in fact - work on it week in week out and defend it, because the internal market is subject to constant pressure, and the Member States fall back into old, protectionist habits which we need to fight.
Mrs Berger was right to refer to directives which remain in the Council.
We are all familiar with examples of directives which remain in a vacuum for five, ten or even fifteen years because they are not adopted by the Council.
Let us hope that this will change.
If you will allow me to highlight one aspect of it: we all hope, of course, that the difference of opinion which is keeping Spain and the United Kingdom divided over a well-known rock in the Southern half of this continent, will now be resolved.
I read in an article in a Spanish newspaper that the issue is moving in the right direction.
This would actually unblock half a dozen directives.
We are all waiting for this moment.
To sum up, on the subject of Echelon, I can assure Mrs Berger that this is completely unrelated to the internal market and does not form any threat to it whatsoever.
Mr President, this concludes my remarks.
Could I once again express my appreciation to the Members of Parliament and the rapporteur, in particular, for the important vote of confidence which we received from Parliament regarding the new strategy for the internal market?
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
2001: European Year of Languages
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0099/2000) by Mr Graça Moura, on behalf of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision: European Year of Languages 2001 [COM(1999) 485 - C5-0278/1999 - 1999/0208(COD)]
.
(PT) Mr President, Commissioner Reding, ladies and gentlemen, I come from a country whose history over the last six hundred years has been closely linked to a knowledge of the foreign languages that are spoken in the most diverse parts of the world.
The Portuguese have always had to learn the languages of the people with whom they were dealing and, in turn, they brought a European language, Portuguese, to the four corners of the world and it is spoken today by two hundred million people.
The scope of an initiative such as the European Year of Languages 2001 is therefore quite clear to me, at a time when Europe is facing a new stage in its history and when we are all fully aware of the extraordinary wealth that the cultural and linguistic diversity of the European peoples represents.
We also have a huge conceptual project which has been undertaken by the Council of Europe and by Parliament, and which holds the idea of the mother tongue to be one of every human being' s fundamental rights.
It is in this context, in which history and civilisation, cultural processes and the drafting of laws, the primacy of the present and a necessary view of the future all merge, that the importance of the proposal that every citizen of the European Union should learn foreign languages is most clearly seen.
The European Year of Languages is a campaign which contains a bold challenge and takes for granted the essential cultural dimension of our heritage, in both its oral and written forms, which has been expressed since time immemorial in all the languages spoken in Europe.
It considers the knowledge of other languages to be intrinsic to the construction of a European citizenship, since it opens the door to a greater knowledge of other people' s cultures and encourages tolerance and peaceful coexistence.
By doing so, it is also an important factor in combating racism, xenophobia, anti-Semitism and other unacceptable forms of discrimination.
Lastly, looking at the economic aspect, it contributes to the construction of a European citizenship by means of the range of professional qualifications that competence in other languages represents, by means of the access that it provides to scientific and technical knowledge and by means of the weapon it provides in the fight against unemployment.
It was not only these concerns that were highlighted by the various amendments to the original text proposed by honourable Members of this House, but also those regarding a real policy in this area which, without infringing the subsidiarity principle, would ensure the quality and the effectiveness of the campaign to encourage language learning, as well as the diversity of target-groups, paying particular attention to the less favoured sectors of society.
The approach adopted for the purpose of drafting the report for which I was responsible, and on which Parliament will vote tomorrow, was consistently to seek out the boundary between what would be acceptable to the various institutions involved and what would not.
It did so both in a completely informal way and through intensive and varied meetings with the coordinators of the political groups represented within Parliament' s Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sports with representatives of the Portuguese Presidency and with the Commission.
By these means, what we might call a compromise text was agreed, which gives every reason to suppose that a second reading and a conciliation procedure will not be necessary.
In other words, a solution emerged which will enable the procedure to be completed at first reading and preparatory action for the European Year of Languages to be set in motion in the second half of this year, so that the programme will come into force at the beginning of 2001.
I believe that the most serious difficulties will surely be cleared up in the statement which we all hope Commissioner Reding will make.
This does not mean that this is the best of all possible worlds.
We consider the financial means to be quite inadequate and we feel that there are actions resulting from the programme that we will have to gauge and develop.
We also feel that there is another whole range of aspects that have been excluded, because they do not relate to a campaign for learning but to the status of European languages, which for some historical or political reason are less widely spoken or less favoured in some Member States.
These points also require urgent consideration by the Community institutions.
None of this, however, detracts from the fact that the compromise text contains enormous potential for positive results, and responds to a concern and a real need felt by the citizens of the European Union.
It already covers, directly or indirectly, many of the general principles that must be enshrined in this area.
For these reasons, and with my thanks for all the cooperation given to me by fellow Members, by the Portuguese Presidency and by the Commission, I am honoured to propose that we vote in favour of the joint proposal for a decision on the European Year of Languages, in the version contained in the compromise text, the main features of which I have just outlined.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, rarely has there been so much insight and common sense in evidence on all sides of this House, as is proving to be the case during this debate today.
That is no doubt due to the issue we are dealing with, the urgent nature and significance of which everyone deems equally important.
We want to prepare ourselves well for the European Year of Languages.
Indeed that is why all three institutions have been making overtures to each other and sparing themselves long-winded negotiations.
I would expressly like to thank Mr Graça Moura for the work he has done.
It has been such an outstanding effort that all the coordinators in the committee simply had to give him their backing.
I have to admit that his charm must have had a lot to do with this, as well as his expertise of course!
What are we aiming to achieve with this action, which we are supporting so vigorously?
We want to make our fellow citizens receptive to the advantages that mastering several languages brings.
The different languages are part of cultural diversity, and understanding other languages is a particularly effective way of tapping into the riches of our cultural heritage.
It is simply wonderful to be able to read and understand a poem by Verlaine in French, or one by Heine in German, or by Vasco Graça Moura in Portuguese.
But even at a mundane everyday level, one cannot get far without a knowledge of other languages.
Indeed, only those who speak several languages can gain full access to the internal market.
As the Socrates rapporteur, I am very much in favour of placing special emphasis on the importance of learning the language spoken by one' s European neighbours, and of launching pilot projects on this very issue, in the course of the Year of Languages.
Of course we all hope that the measures planned for this Year of Languages are not one-day wonders, rather they should extend well beyond the year itself.
I hope the Year of Languages will bring the success we all need.
Mr President, Commissioner, the European Year of Languages 2000 is intended to achieve several goals, one being to promote awareness of the fact that linguistic diversity within the European Union is part of our cultural heritage.
In addition, we intend to open the eyes of as many people as possible to the benefits of knowing several languages, as a crucial aspect of personal development, career development and improved communication.
It is also important to me personally not just to target schoolchildren and students, but also to redouble our efforts to reach the socially disadvantaged, and immigrants, and to offer them prospects and opportunities for the future.
The exchange of information, the collation and processing of experiences, as well as the development of new, modern methods of improving access to languages and making it more efficient, is also one of this project' s key areas of concern.
Unfortunately, it will not be possible, given the available budget of EUR 8 million, to do as many of you have urged and place special emphasis on, and promote, the minority languages, which must of course be taken into account in the regions concerned - I know this from my own experience, coming as I do from a region in which there are three minority languages.
The main aim of this Year of Languages is, as has already been said, to urge the people of Europe to learn several languages, both for their own benefit as the basis for improved understanding and integration within the European Union.
The report has been prepared and agreement reached on more than 100 proposed amendments within a very short space of time.
The flexibility and readiness to compromise displayed by all those involved was most impressive.
The rapporteur, Mr Graça Moura, was a particularly judicious and committed negotiator working in the interests of this project.
I would like to extend my heartfelt thanks and congratulations to him.
Notwithstanding all the positive aspects, I would also, however, like to take this opportunity to voice my criticism of the Council, which Parliament has been unable to rely on as it needed to.
Two weeks ago, we reached agreement with the representatives of the Council, the Commission and Parliament, but I am sorry to say that this was called into question on Monday of this week.
We cannot accept this kind of behaviour, and we expect the Council to give its representatives a mandate for negotiations, or to confirm to us that further talks will be necessary.
In this way, we will be able to avoid wasting time in the future.
I believe it is important for people to come together and with that aim in view culture is an important mainstay and language an indispensable one.
Mr President, I should like to thank Mr Graça Moura for a splendid piece of work and for the energy he has put into drawing up this report.
I should also like to thank the Council for being so accommodating and the Commission for the role it has played as mediator, especially just recently.
The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party is very happy to support initiatives which may create greater awareness of the value of linguistic diversity in the European Union.
It is important that the EU' s citizens should be encouraged to learn foreign languages early on in school and also throughout their lives.
A knowledge of languages is important, for European languages are of great significance to European culture and civilisation, and people need good language skills in order to be able to find employment in EU countries other than their own.
The programme for the European Year of Languages offers a splendid basis for providing information about the many different opportunities there are for learning foreign languages, and it is important.
Mr Graça Moura' s proposal includes the 11 official EU languages, together with a number of other languages recognised by the Member States, including Irish and Luxembourgish.
The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party also thinks that the programme should include other languages which are actually used in the various Member States, for instance Catalan in Spain and Frisian in the Netherlands.
Finally, in the programme for the European Year of Languages, consideration is also given to the forthcoming enlargement of the Union, something which we in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party consider to be crucial to all EU programmes.
On behalf of the Group, I can recommend supporting this programme.
Mr President, needless to say, I too would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent and exquisite work.
I would like to make a few minor observations regarding a European campaign which intends to teach Europeans languages from other communities.
We are all convinced of the usefulness of this exercise, of course.
But the thing that often goes wrong with European campaigns - and fortunately I have not been around long enough as a politician to be unaware how the ordinary citizen reacts to this - is that, very often, they are nothing but an attractive front, pretty to look at but insubstantial.
I would therefore like to think that this campaign will offer something different, and that, more importantly, consideration will be given to why it is so hard for people in Europe to learn languages, and at what stages in their lives they are able to learn languages.
I come from a bilingual country myself and I have met some people in that country who never learn the other language, despite the fact that they attend language classes, sometimes for twelve years, and are still unable to speak another language.
This is a terrible observation to have to make.
I therefore hope that in the course of this year of European languages, research will be carried out into the best language teaching methods and, more than anything, how Europeans can be encouraged to learn the language of the other Europeans using a modern and appealing method.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the diversity of languages is a source of cultural wealth.
I thank the rapporteur, Mr Graça Moura, for having reinstated this aspect which was sorely lacking at the beginning, for having established from the outset that we are not simply facing a technical information and communication problem and for reminding us that the diversity of languages is the product of a civilisation which has both written and oral traditions.
We must be wary of adopting a functional and utilitarian approach to languages, for this approach ignores the fact that language facilitates thought and that thought facilitates citizenship.
I feel, therefore, that learning at least two languages is the minimum needed to keep up with the dynamic evolution of European democracy, as well as to ensure the mobility of students and workers.
I just wonder what means are available to us now, apart from a few fine words and a tiny amount of money, to see this policy through.
We must be able to think with our mother tongue and also with, or in, other languages.
As a Frenchwoman I am convinced that being a French speaker goes hand in hand with using foreign languages.
That is why we must convince parents, teachers and politicians that language learning must begin at primary school level, or even at pre-school level.
That is also why interpreting and translating should not be relegated as they still are, to the status of ancillary skills.
We must do more than simply argue in favour of the diversity of languages and call for differences to be respected.
It is a question of whether Europe takes on an identity based on a range of identities, rather than just accepting a common ground of differences.
This leads on to the debate on the official languages of the Community and the recognised languages, be they national or regional, of all of today' s countries and those of tomorrow, particularly in the context of enlargement, which, as we all know, is a cause for concern for us in terms of languages.
Europeans also have a heritage, beginning with ancient Greek and Latin; we have all stressed this in committee and we must not lose these languages.
Europeans must not neglect any language, nor must they forget the languages of the immigrants present in considerable numbers in our countries, or sign language which is the minority language par excellence.
I feel that a successful awareness campaign must, of course, present languages as subjects to be studied and as a mechanism for exchang but it must also remind people that languages are also a source of fun and a pleasure.
Mr President, after I too have congratulated the rapporteur, Mr Graça Moura, who has done such a good job that it won the unanimous support of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, I would like to focus my attention on just one point, namely that in addition to the human, cultural and political advantages, the need to learn more than one language is also of considerable economic benefit.
The report also highlights the findings of all the experts: having a good command of one' s mother tongue and learning classical languages, especially Latin and classical Greek, makes it easier to learn other languages.
I would also add our own mother tongue to the equation.
This great truth emerges from a fact rather unknown to most, that in the English language, for example, there are at least 75 000 words of Greek origin.
I repeat, 75 000 English words derive from classical Greek.
There are a similar number of words in the French language that derive from Greek, and the same is true of most other modern European languages.
It is also certain that Latin is just as important for most European languages.
The English sage, Francis Bacon, said that knowledge is power, so knowledge of the basic languages from which our modern European languages derive improves our general knowledge and reinforces European civilisation, which, besides its humanitarian value, is also a weapon for our survival and prosperity as Europeans in a globalised economy.
Besides, the contemporary German professors, August and Werner-Karl Heisenberg, have characterised both classical and modern Greek as the mother and nurturer of human civilisation.
I believe that revival of the teaching of Latin and classical Greek in middle education will also provide a cultural shield for the younger generations against the onslaught of the generally levelling effect of the American cultural message, so that only its positive elements are preserved.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank the rapporteur.
The European Year of Languages is important and worthwhile.
All the languages of Europe are equally valuable and worthy of respect in terms of culture.
It could be said that the people who speak the same language share the same mentality.
The mother tongue is not merely a tool of communication, it is in fact more than anything else, it is thought itself.
Language is the most peaceful way of communicating.
Independence is language and language is independence.
The Kurds are a nation with no land or borders of their own, kept together only by language.
Language is a powerful force.
It is the most important bond for a nation.
Large countries, and many smaller ones too, often tyrannise others through language.
It is a means of occupation.
The legislation regarding language in my country is among the most liberal in the world.
We have seen how two different foreign languages have twice been proclaimed the official language; only at the beginning of last century did our language, Finnish, become the official one.
That is why we have guaranteed the important status of minority languages.
The multilingual nature of the European Union is thus a source of wealth.
At the same time it is also the right of each citizen in each Member State.
The multilingual nature of Europe must be preserved after enlargement too; there are no obstacles to this.
It is wrong to think that a multilingual environment is costly and ineffective.
Translation is not costly; it is the most effective practical instrument of peace.
Mr President, in addition to congratulating the rapporteur, I would like to highlight in this debate that the idea for this celebration originates from the Council of Europe, an institution with a particular sensitivity towards the cultural and social aspects of the old continent, which, with its initiative of increasing the knowledge and use of more languages by Europeans, hopes to promote understanding and tolerance and bring citizens closer together.
When we speak of European languages, let us not forget that this does not only mean the official languages of the Member States.
In Europe, many other languages are spoken, some of them thousands of years old such as Euskera in the Basque Country or Gaelic, whose origins have been lost in the mists of time, and others such as Catalan, Galician and Alsatian, which is spoken right here in Strasbourg.
This initiative should also benefit all these other regional and minority languages, and the bodies created by the Member States to organise participation in the European Year of Languages must also include representatives of these other languages, which are also European, and which are the essence and lifeblood of the wealth of our unity in diversity.
Furthermore, the learning of languages leads to an awareness of our cultural diversity and contributes to the eradication of xenophobia, racism and intolerance, which forms part of our Community objectives.
Mr President, I would like to thank the Commission and, at the same time, the rapporteur, Mr Graça Moura, for having permitted so many amendments, many of them open to broadening the scope of the Year and extending it to rural areas and the least favoured areas.
However, I would also like to express certain concerns with regard to the economic restrictions.
I would recommend that many projects be allowed since it is clear that cultural projects attract a lot of investment from Autonomous Regions and private initiatives which we cannot afford to lose.
I would also ask, in this era when emotions often take precedence over good sense, that we do not support projects which are aimed at exclusion and the use of language to support positions which often seek to cause divisions between people, when the objective of this programme is to unite people.
I would also like to see the European Union begin to take great care of languages which have no country, maternal languages which often have no school and no teachers; languages which are spoken throughout Europe, which no state accepts and which will never become official.
I am referring, for example, to Ladino and Yiddish.
These languages furthermore do not have any media of their own.
Of the 150 languages which are spoken in Europe, we should make a list of those which are only transmitted from mothers to their children, which are only spoken in a domestic setting and which, currently, with the invasion of the media and with the official use of languages in schools, will have very few years to live.
I would like this European Year of Languages to be opened up to them as well and that a space be made for them so that they may be considered in any other future programmes which may take place.
Mr President, I should like to address my remarks on languages to my fellow Members, of course, but also to our interpreters, who enable this Parliament to function, to the rapporteur, of course, not for his work as rapporteur but because he is also a poet in this Parliament and, moreover, as I have discovered, one who speaks my mother tongue perfectly.
What better rapporteur could there be?
When one is a new Member of the European Parliament, as I am, one finds oneself dealing with all sorts of things: chocolate, end-of-life vehicles, the qualified majority, dried beans, Spanish lentils, anything and everything.
Then, suddenly, one finds that one is going to have to deal with something that gives Europe its historic and cultural depth, namely its languages.
And when one looks back at the great periods in history, and I am thinking here of the Renaissance, that great age of trade and commerce, what remains of that era today are the cultural achievements, the artefacts of our heritage, and thus will it ever be.
In terms of languages, Europe has known times when a single language predominated: Latin, and also French.
Now it tends to be English.
So what are we to tell our fellow citizens for this year 2001.
Let me just briefly mention a few points.
Firstly, that European unity may not mean linguistic unity.
Next, that every language is deserving of respect and deserves to be promoted and defended.
This is applicable to any amount of things: monuments, objects, you name it.
Why should it not be the case for mankind' s best and most lasting achievement, i.e. his method of communicating with his neighbour?
And then, all languages are learnt within the family first of all.
This is why we call them "mother tongues" , and no State, whatever it may be, may have the direct, indirect, explicit or implicit goal of destroying one of its mother tongues, or of allowing it to disappear.
Furthermore, finally, without linguistic diversity, there is no Europe, because this is also one of the few, and perhaps the only, parliament in the world which operates in eleven languages, to the extent that occasionally we speak in this House for the purpose of being interpreted and not to be heard in the original.
It is up to us to construct this dialectic of European unity and its linguistic diversity.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is a sound report, that much I can say.
I too would first like to thank Mr Graça Moura, but I would also like to highlight the excellent cooperation there has been between the Council, the Commission and Parliament on this issue, all in an effort to be able to take a speedy vote on this report.
This illustrates that everyone has recognised that there is an urgent need to develop EU citizens' knowledge of languages, and also to encourage them to learn new languages.
Languages reflect the diversity of the European Union.
Being able to speak to each other enables us to understand one another, and also makes it easier to build social structures.
However, for all its diversity, our culture in Europe derives from common, historical origins, which is why our languages are based on the classical languages of Latin and Greek.
Mastering these languages generally helps one to learn the others.
I come from the region of Trier - it borders Luxembourg and Belgium and France is not far away either - and it is in fact essential for us to speak the language spoken by our neighbours.
Many people work in Luxembourg, or do business with Belgium and France.
Knowledge of languages should not just be viewed as an aspect of interpersonal relations, for it has quite considerable economic potential, particularly in the context of the internal market and globalisation.
If I want to gain access to a particular market then I have to speak and understand the language of the market participants.
In some parts of our region, for example, children learn the languages of our neighbours as early as the kindergarten stage through play.
Children are fast learners and I believe we ought to be able to put this to good use.
In addition to a comprehensive information campaign, we must also propose concrete actions.
Educational measures must be improved, teachers must be given the right training and coaching, and it must not just be a matter of personal preference as to whether they take this step or not.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to be able to be here this evening to talk to you and particularly to have been able to hear your views.
Firstly, because the subject of languages is very close to my heart.
As somebody from Luxembourg, I come from a part of Europe where trilingualism is actively practised.
It is to some extent a laboratory which could serve as a basis for others who would like to do what we all wish to do during this European Year of Languages, which is to promote the study of one' s mother tongue and of two additional languages.
On the other hand, we are at a crucial stage, as there is the prospect of achieving agreement at first reading between the Parliament and the Council.
An agreement at first reading is essential as we are working to a very tight schedule.
2001 is no longer far off and preparations for implementing the programme are becoming urgent.
What are the aims we wish to achieve by organising the European Year of Languages?
First of all, it is important to make Europeans aware of linguistic diversity and of the wealth that this diversity represents.
We know full well that cultural diversity is perhaps Europe' s greatest asset and we must support this cultural diversity, which is based on linguistic diversity.
The various languages of the European Union will never be replaced by a single language, I am quite sure of that.
And even if one particular language of communication spreads further and further, this does not in any way detract from the need to learn languages to be able to function in the European Union.
You have all said so and I fully support you in this.
This leads me to the second great aim of the European Year of Languages: we must encourage the public to learn languages and to do so throughout their lives, starting at a very early age, in nursery school.
Indeed, language learning is important both for personal development and for intercultural understanding, as some of you have pointed out.
It is one of the best weapons for combating xenophobia.
It is also, as some of you have said, essential to finding a job and to everyone' s career prospects.
Furthermore, it will not be possible to anticipate the needs of everyone individually, and so schools must, therefore, in addition to a basic training, prepare people for lifelong learning and in this context, the principle of one' s mother tongue and two other languages should be emphasised.
Learning one language is not an adequate basis for multilingualism.
The European Year of Languages is also a framework, which will enable information to be disseminated on how to learn languages.
Methods have moved on from the traditional ones and much work has been done in this area.
I believe that this Year of Languages should give us ideas of best practice and how we can move from quite theoretical language learning to learning a language for practical purposes.
The European Year of Languages will also complement existing initiatives.
It is designed for the general public and constitutes a huge information campaign.
In order for it to succeed, however, on the one hand it must create an image, develop logos, slogans and information material.
On the other hand, it is envisaged that projects presented by regional and local authorities or organisations will be cofinanced, and I would like to say categorically to those of you who come from border areas that learning one' s neighbour' s language must be one of the major key points emphasised during this Year of Languages.
The year will be organised in close cooperation with the Council of Europe, which is extremely significant.
The Council of Europe has considerable experience in the field of language teaching and we are therefore fortunate to be able to join forces with them.
Many fruitful meetings have already taken place and the ongoing exchange of information between our respective departments is vital to the implementation of this Year of Languages.
I would now like to discuss tonight' s debate.
First of all, I would like to congratulate our rapporteur, Mr Graça Moura, for his excellent work and also to express my delight at the constructive approach and the useful cooperation built up between the rapporteurs and the Members of this Parliament, between Members and my departments and also between the two institutions and the Council.
I hope with all my heart that this will enable us to successfully see this initiative through and to reach agreement at first reading so that we can start the European Year of Languages.
There were a great many amendments which have, in the meantime, been merged into a smaller number.
It is important to emphasise the fact that the amendments voted for by the European Parliament must be acceptable to the Council if agreement is to be reached at first reading.
I have noted the desire of some Members to include regional and minority languages, and you know how strongly I personally feel about these languages.
You also know, however, how sensitive this issue is for certain Member States.
I think that the definition of target languages as stated in article 1, Amendment No 15, provides sufficient scope, whilst enabling everyone to agree on it.
And I am relying a great deal, believe me, on the debates that will take place during 2001, the European Year of Languages, because these debates will enable us to overcome the problems and fears which still exist with regard to minority languages.
I also hope that at the end of this Year of Languages, their will be no more resistance to languages, because, as has been very clearly stated, there are no small languages, there are only mother tongues, which are all great languages.
I am therefore relying on the debates to help me prepare future activities in this area, and I would also draw your attention to the additional recitals which address this concern: Amendments Nos 2, 3 and 4.
The recitals also enable us to take account of other specific concerns, as many of you have pointed out, such as classical languages and cultures, which will not be forgotten during the European Year of Languages.
I shall not dwell on the amendments on which we agree.
I am prepared to accept Amendments Nos 1 to 34, and I shall start from Amendment No 35.
The Commission' s draft text proposed a limited number of studies with a direct bearing on the organisation of the European Year of Languages.
The Members of the European Parliament have proposed a great many additional studies.
It goes without saying that the field of language learning is in constant development, which is why these studies are necessary.
The Commission could therefore accept these suggestions insofar as they cover subjects that can be addressed.
Indeed, the European Year of Languages is by definition a short-term initiative, with a limited, in fact a too limited budget.
You have raised the issue and we cannot do everything in this context, but there are also other possibilities, and I shall come back to them.
On the other hand, the Council is not prepared to accept a long list of studies which could not all be carried out under the European Year of Languages.
My feeling is that we all agree that this point should not become a reason for agreement not to be reached at first reading.
This is why I shall make the following formal commitment to you, the European Parliament.
The Commission has duly noted the possible subjects for studies on languages adopted in the amendments introduced by Parliament when the motion on the European Year of Languages 2001 was studied.
Given its awareness of the importance of languages in the process of European integration, the Commission has committed itself to developing these issues when implementing its programme of studies, which will be carried out in the framework of, and in accordance with the procedures of, the various programmes and activities which can be enlisted for this purpose in the spirit of article 8 of the proposed decision.
In particular, as the Commissioner responsible for the Socrates programme, which specifically covers Comenius, Lingua and Eurydice, as well as Leonardo and Culture 2000, I would like to stress the fact that this programme provides an appropriate framework to undertake the following studies, which will enable us to look at best practice in the field of language teaching and learning and at the reasons why language learning so often fails.
The studies on improving the quality of language teaching within the European Union that are provided for in the second part of Amendment No 35 and Amendment No 39; those on linguistic contacts based on studies of migrant communities stipulated in Amendment No 37; those on the opportunities to speed up access to understanding using methods for simultaneously teaching related languages, laid down in Amendment No 38.
The promotion of bilingual publishing, mentioned in Amendment No 41, is covered by the Culture 2000 programme, and I shall see to it that projects undertaken in this area are given the priority that they deserve.
Finally, it is true that enlargement of the European Union and the growth in the number of official languages will have certain implications, as Amendment No 36 suggests.
Nevertheless, this issue is beyond the remit of the European Year of Languages and, furthermore, is a matter for all three political institutions.
I am therefore committing myself to doing everything in my power to encourage discussion on this point in the appropriate setting, whist hoping that I can count on the necessary support of the European Parliament.
Lastly, I would like to say a few words about the amendments presented in plenary.
Amendments Nos 43 and 12 have the same content, but the wording of Amendment No 43 is better.
Amendments Nos 44, 45 and 46 which are technical amendments seeking to adapt the text to comitology, do not, therefore, present any problems.
Nevertheless, we know that the Council will not accept Amendments Nos 47, 48, 49, 50 and 51, which relate in particular to regional and minority languages, since we have already discussed this in the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport.
As these amendments would jeopardise the chances of agreement being reached at first reading, I cannot accept them.
To sum up, Mr President, it is important that we quickly reach agreement so that we can launch the European Year of Languages.
I can assure you that I have listened to your concerns with great interest and that I share them.
I am sure that they will be incorporated into the text, as far as possible, and I shall also take them into consideration in other programmes and activities where we have the opportunity to encourage the promotion and learning of languages, not only in 2001, but well beyond that, because the year 2001 will be only the starting point in the campaign we are fighting for all mother tongues to be recognised at European level.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Youth
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0100/2000) by Mrs Gröner, on behalf of the Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing the Community action programme for youth [C5-0116/2000 - 1998/0197(COD)]
Mr President, I would like to thank all of you for holding out for so long.
I welcome the compromise we have reached on the Community action programme "Youth" and the outcome of the conciliation procedure.
Although some prayers remained unanswered, the parliamentary delegation could be satisfied with EUR 520 million for the seven year term, with a review clause on the accession of the candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe.
I would like to thank all those who took part for their cooperation, particularly Commissioner Reding and her offices, the Portuguese President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Fontes, who certainly did not have an easy time of it at the hands of the Finance Ministers, and I would also like to thank the youth forum for its input.
The negotiations for the Youth programme have dragged on for around one and three quarter years.
We have drastically amended the original proposal by the Commission, which envisaged combining the existing programmes "Youth for Europe" and the European Voluntary Service in one five year programme.
The Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport tabled 61 amendments at first reading, aimed at achieving a balanced weighting of the various parts of the programme and using the distinctly larger budget to enable more young people than the 500 000 or so that had already benefited hitherto, to enjoy the experience of an exchange programme.
We wanted to simplify administrative structures and do more to develop disadvantaged young people.
The Commission adopted a raft of amendments put forward by Parliament, however the Council was unable to reach agreement on a common position concerning EUR 350 million for a five-year programme.
At second reading, the European Parliament concentrated on 13 Amendments, focusing largely on the Budget, on a seven-year term following the example of Socrates and Leonardo, and on a flexible age limit and social protection in matters of comitology.
Immediately after second reading, I entered into informal negotiations with the Finnish Presidency, so as not to lose any time and so as to ensure the programme makes a seamless transition at the beginning of the new millennium.
We have the Council to thank for the fact that the conciliation procedure was not opened until the Portuguese Presidency took office.
The Council accepted neither our budget proposal of EUR 980 million nor the well-founded compromise from the Commission of EUR 765 million.
At the second meeting of the conciliation committee we were able, following difficult negotiations, to reach agreement on all issues.
The seven-year term with a budget of EUR 520 million and the review clause following the accession of central and eastern European countries was a coup on the part of the European Parliament delegation.
The fact that we secured social protection for the young participants from their home country, and sickness insurance cover in the host country was another coup, likewise the fact that age limits are to be kept flexible and not rigid.
But, as rapporteur, I welcome the fact that the Youth programme is enabling us to send out a signal that the programme really is open to all young people.
Both boys and girls are participating in the programme, and we have opened it to students, the unemployed, young people from the Member States, candidate countries or third countries.
We have made it possible to hear more about young people' s needs and ideas over the Internet, and to engage in active dialogue with them.
Who could imagine a better opportunity and better advertisement for the European core values?
Provided we make intelligent use of it, the Youth Programme could help to overcome Europe fatigue, and optimist that I am, I believe it could generate enthusiasm for Europe.
Therefore my advice to you all is to make use of the opportunities that the new youth programme has to offer.
I would recommend that you vote in favour of the joint text on the introduction of the Community action programme "Youth" .
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in one month' s time, on the 9 May 2000, Parliament will be celebrating the 50th Anniversary of Robert Schumann' s declaration.
In view of this historic event, we should focus our gaze on the fifty years that lie ahead for the European Community.
When the next major anniversary is celebrated though, we will no longer be there to continue building our joint European edifice.
This is something our descendants are going to have to do.
Now is the time to take steps to smooth the way for them.
The new "Youth" action programme is the way to further European integration.
Young people are Europe' s future.
We should do everything we can to make sure that the young people of today feel completely at home in the European Community, better still that they develop close ties with it.
Therefore it was, and still is, absolutely essential to create a programme that offers all young people - as Mrs Gröner has already said - irrespective of their origins, educational background, knowledge of languages, study or training, the opportunity to make contact with Europe.
This is a major innovation on the part of the Youth Programme i.e. that it is open to all young people, unlike the existing programmes, each of which covers a specific area.
The new programme closes the gap, as it were, between the youth and educational programmes that are already running.
Parliament, as well as the Commission and the Council, saw that there was a need for this programme, even if, as the rapporteur has just said, considerable hurdles had to be overcome in relation to the financial framework.
We have the personal commitment of all the participating parliamentarians to thank for the fact that a compromise of EUR 520 million could be reached.
I would like once again to take the opportunity to thank all those who haggled over every euro in the course of the conciliation procedure.
As Mrs Gröner said, even if the financial framework fell a long way short of our aspirations, still a large number of amendments were adopted.
The new programme is more comprehensible and more citizen-friendly.
The level of social protection for the participants has been improved.
The programme has been heavily decentralised so as to enable young people in our home regions to take part in actions
Our Group endorses the programme, so as to spare young people having to wait any longer for their programme.
Mr President, I am very pleased to add my support and my group' s support to this report.
This report had a long gestation period.
But the fact that we are still here so early in the morning is a tribute to the rapporteur' s work on this programme and, indeed, that of the Commissioner and the Portuguese presidency - which has shown itself to be committed to youth, to the voluntary service and to education in its broadest sense.
The report we have ended up with now is more closely targeted, with an emphasis on social protection and, as the rapporteur has said, a more flexible approach than in earlier reports.
We also have more money in the programme in recognition of its importance.
We will always ask for more money.
The budget is not enough.
It is perhaps Parliament' s role to ask for more.
But we can be pleased with the outcome.
We can be sure that whatever money we have in this programme will be directed at youth and will, in the long-term, be money well spent.
I agree with the rapporteur that this money and this programme will ensure that the efforts are targeted not just at some small sections of society but, as the Commissioner said in a previous report, at all sections of society.
We must look to those who will benefit most and those who are in greatest need and who might otherwise be socially excluded.
We are delighted that some candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe will benefit as well.
We can be pleased with our efforts and pleased with this report.
In seven years' time we will look back at the youth of today who will have benefited from this report and be pleased that this was the beginning of real progress.
Mr President, I should like to thank Mrs Gröner for her splendid work and for the personal, almost passionate commitment she has shown in preparing the present report.
I should also like to thank the Council and the Commission for contributing to our at long last achieving a good result.
The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party is very happy to support those initiatives which give young people in Europe opportunities to acquire knowledge, skills and qualifications which will help form the basis of their future development.
The strength of the programme is, of course, that, by means of cross-national exchanges, it encourages young people to contribute actively to further European integration.
It will also lead to understanding of the cultural and linguistic diversity within the European Union.
I also think that the programme will ensure that the fundamental values upon which the European Union is founded will continue to be propagated.
Through increased communication between young people in Europe, the programme will indirectly help combat xenophobia and increase respect for human rights.
Finally, the Community' s action programme for youth also gives consideration to the forthcoming enlargement of the Union, something which we in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party believe to be of crucial importance to all EU programmes.
I would recommend that we support this programme.
Mr President, I also commend the report and thank Mrs Gröner for the excellent effort she has made.
It is a very good report.
Youth is the sector in our Community that is so often ignored.
Indeed in the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport it is the "Cinderella" sector of funding, as with sport.
We hope that imbalance will be redressed.
The insufficient commitment to youth affairs from the Council, when the European Parliament was calling for EUR 980 million, shows, in my view, this grave disparity and the lack of commitment on the part of the Council to a very important sector.
The danger, in this regard, with the changes that are proposed, of combining two programmes - Youth for Europe and the European Voluntary Service - is that several good parts of both those programmes might be lost.
I hope that does not happen.
We should include the best parts of those excellent initiatives in whatever programme we formulate in future.
The new Youth Programme emphasises the developing links with the youth of entrant countries.
That is an excellent initiative.
The bridges built between youth will be the bridges that eventually unite Europe.
The agreement to constantly review the situation is an initiative that I welcome.
When more funds are needed, budgets should not be cast in stone but be flexible so that they can be amended in the best interests of the deserving needs of youth.
What more deserving cause could there be than supporting youth in the European Union.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I bid you good morning!
It is in fact the case that all politicians ought to feel a sense of responsibility for this programme and take it particularly seriously, for if we do not succeed in convincing young Europeans, who could pass these convictions further down the line, the European edifice is on shaky ground.
We must therefore do everything we can to create the conditions that will enable girls and boys to feel at home in the Europe we have created, and to respect and appreciate the differences between people.
This youth programme is an important instrument for teaching people to show mutual understanding and display tolerance.
Voluntary activities in the environmental and cultural spheres help people to learn what Europe is really all about and also to learn other languages.
Interpersonal contact alone facilitates the acquisition of democratic values and promotes understanding on the part of European citizens.
That is what this programme is intended to achieve.
I feel now is also the time to say that it is not on for Austrian young people to be excluded from taking part in these programmes as a consequence of so-called bilateral sanctions.
This is misguided and should be contested by everyone, and particularly by this Parliament and the Commission.
This new programme has enabled us to consolidate and improve on previous youth activities.
Thanks to our proposed amendments we have also improved the level of social protection for participants.
Of course the total amount that has now been made available does not suffice, although concerted action on our part enabled us to get more out of the Council than they wanted to give.
But the total amount gives the lie to the Ministers who get up on their soapboxes to speak!
I am certain, however, that we will make the best of it, and many young people will benefit as a result
I would also very much like to thank Mrs Gröner for taking on this mammoth task and still being able in the end to reach a satisfactory outcome with the Council and the Commission.
Thank you very much and the best of luck!
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, As someone who has become involved in politics through student, youth and educational work, I am delighted that the "Youth" action programme is making an important contribution to fostering a knowledge-based culture within Europe.
We welcome the exchange programme because it reinforces mutual trust between the young people of different countries and encourages mutual tolerance, and a willingness to cooperate and show solidarity.
What goes on in the heads of young people of today has a special resonance for the future development and functioning of the European Union and European consciousness.
I would like to concentrate on two Articles in particular: firstly Article 4 (2), because it refers to the fact that our overriding concern must be to ensure that when young people apply to the programmes they do not encounter any form of discrimination.
Then there is Article 2(1), because it states that participation in cross-border exchange programmes within the Community will further young people' s understanding of Europe' s common core values, thereby increasing respect for human rights and stepping up the fight against racism.
I am emphasising these two aspects because, as Mrs Pack has already said, the sanctions against Austria are having most impact on cultural organisations, and the educational and scientific spheres, as well as on scientific cooperation.
This contradiction illustrates how un-European and discriminatory these sanctions are, and how much they conflict with the Community of law and values.
We endorse the "Youth" action programme and reject the uncalled-for sanctions against Austria!
Mr President, I would like to join all those who have congratulated the rapporteur, Mrs Gröner, who has produced an excellent report, full of commitment, on behalf of young people.
In her task she has enjoyed the very strong support of the members of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport.
I offer them my thanks for their work.
The Youth programme is crucial to the European Union, as you have all already said, because it is a unique programme, in which all young people, without distinction, can participate.
I would like to reassure all Members who have spoken about possible sanctions.
In the Youth programme and in the way it is implemented, there will be no sanctions against anyone, and that includes young Austrians, who will not be discriminated against.
The programme has ambitious objectives, which are essential to the development of the idea of European citizenship.
This programme will encourage and consolidate the continuation and development of innovative actions at Community level and will help to improve the quality of the action undertaken on behalf of young people.
It therefore represents a useful instrument in assisting a policy of cooperation and will contribute to the process of European integration.
In addition to ensuring that the programme is effectively implemented, I wish to make a commitment before this House that I will encourage a process of structured and regular cooperation with Member States, in order to work towards drawing up action plans that are up to the task of the challenges, and without which the programme would be less effective.
Mr President, I wish to take this opportunity to talk about the youth policy of the future.
In fact, I stood before you for the first time last September.
I spoke of the White Paper on the European Union' s youth policy, which is a priority.
I would now like to clarify the role of this White Paper and the role of political catalyst that youth policy must play in the future.
I hope to prepare the White Paper on the basis of broad consultation with the different parties concerned and when I say the parties involved I mean above all young people.
That is why, at the Youth Council on 23 November last year, I proposed to the Member States' Ministers for Youth that they hold national meetings of young people during the first half of 2000.
This proposal was very warmly received by all the Member States and these meetings are being organised at the moment.
Most Member States have already set dates for them and most of them have also assured me that these meetings will be open, with the participation of all possible parties including, of course, Members of the European Parliament.
These meetings must allow young people to play an active role and to assert their aspirations, their expectations and their opinions, but also their recommendations for political action in the areas that affect them.
The various national meetings will culminate in a huge European meeting which will be held at the beginning of October, under the French Presidency.
At the same time as consulting young people, the Commission hopes to consult those responsible for youth policy at national level.
The Commission hopes that these national authorities will be able to incorporate into their contributions the opinions and expectations of local administrations, which play a considerable role, I believe, in youth policy.
In order to achieve this, the Commission will be holding bilateral meetings with Member States, followed by a discussion seminar with youth leaders.
We will also rely on the various studies on young people, which will be financed under the Youth programme, and the study, already underway, on the status of young people and the situation of youth policy in Europe.
Lastly, I would like to include the European Parliament in this exercise.
The cooperation methods still have to be worked out, but I can assure you as of now that you will be invited to take part in the European meeting of young people and that I will keep you informed on a regular basis on progress in this matter.
To conclude, I would like to emphasise the fact that the consultation process, particularly with regard to young people, will not be a one-off exercise, because the publication of the White Paper will constitute the second stage of this dialogue with the parties involved, and this is a dialogue that I would like to see established on a more permanent basis.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is a considerable amount of work to be done, but it is exciting.
As many of you have pointed out, we are not working for politics here, but for the future of our Union, and I hope that the debate launched by the publication of the White Paper will enable us to strengthen our capacity for joint action in order to implement a genuine strategy for developing the talents of these 80 million young citizens in the European Union, towards whom we have a great responsibility.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Before the sitting is closed, I would like to thank the interpreters for their generous cooperation this evening, since we have exceeded the time allotted.
(The sitting was closed at 12.45 a.m.)