# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
Sixtieth session
Item 152 of the provisional agenda*
Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
Budget for the United Nations Mission in the Sudan for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2006
Report of the Secretary-General
Contents
Mandate and planned results
The mandate of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1590 (2005) of 24 March 2005.
The Mission is mandated to help the Council achieve an overall objective, namely, national reconciliation, lasting peace and stability, and a prosperous and united Sudan in which human rights are respected and the protection of all citizens is assured.
Within this overall objective, the Mission will, during the budget period 2005/06, contribute to a number of expected accomplishments by delivering related key outputs, shown in the frameworks below.
These frameworks are grouped by components in line with the main tasks set forth by the Secretary-General in his report on the Sudan (S/2005/57, para.
28): peace process; security; governance; humanitarian assistance; recovery and reintegration; and support.
The expected accomplishments would lead to the fulfilment of the Security Council's objective within the lifetime of the Mission, and the indicators of achievement show a measurement of progress towards such accomplishments during the budget period 2005/06.
UNMIS is headed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General at the Under-Secretary-General level, assisted by one Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General and one Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, both at the Assistant Secretary-General level.
Military operations are headed by a Force Commander at the D-2 level.
The Mission will have a unified, area-based and decentralized organizational structure comprising two headquarters locations, a Mission headquarters in Khartoum and a field headquarters in southern Sudan in Juba.
Offices reporting directly to Mission headquarters in Khartoum include a regional office for Darfur located in El Fasher, with three sub-offices in Nyala, El Geneina and Zalingei; a regional office in Kassala; a regional office in Ed Damazin; a regional office in Abyei; and a regional office in Kadugli.
Offices directly reporting to UNMIS field headquarters in Juba include three sub-offices in Malakal, Wau and Rumbek.
While Mission headquarters in Khartoum will serve as the principal interface with the Government of National Unity, the field headquarters in Juba will serve as the primary interface with the Government of Southern Sudan, as called for under the terms of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
The regional office in El Fasher will serve as the planning, logistical and operational hub for the entirety of Darfur.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General will lead the Mission and coordinate other United Nations agencies, funds, programmes and offices in the Sudan in a unified and comprehensive approach in order to face the challenges of the peace process, in line with paragraph 3 of Security Council resolution 1590 (2005).
This will avoid duplication of effort by mutually augmenting and pooling existing and planned resources towards the implementation of the mandate.
In addition, UNMIS will coordinate activities with national and international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and bilateral donors.
The outputs outlined in the present budget document reflect the contribution of UNMIS within the United Nations system in the Sudan.
Many of the tasks outlined in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and its protocols, and reflected in the Secretary-General's report on the establishment of a peace support operation in the Sudan (S/2005/57), will eventually be addressed through extrabudgetary resources of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, augmenting the efforts of the Mission.
In programmatic priority areas that are both vital to the peace process and the overall success of the United Nations system in the Sudan, UNMIS will provide critical leadership, coordination and facilitation to the parties to the Peace Agreement and to the United Nations agencies, funds, programmes and offices that will have operational responsibility for implementing activities in these critical areas, based on their respective areas of expertise and internationally recognized mandates.
This division of labour is reflected in the annual workplans and appeal documents of the United Nations in the Sudan.
Component 1: Peace process
Component 2: Security
Component 3: governance
Component 4: humanitarian assistance, recovery and reintegration
Component 5: support
Resource requirements
Financial resources
Overall
(Thousands of United States dollars.
Budget years are from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006.
a Cost estimates for 2004/05 are based on actual incumbency and for 2005/06 are inclusive of a 25 per cent delayed recruitment factor.
b Cost estimates for 2004/05 are based on actual incumbency and for 2005/06 are inclusive of a 20 per cent delayed recruitment factor.
Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment
Requirements for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 are based on standard reimbursement rates for major equipment (wet lease) and self-sustainment in the total amount of $3,480,400 and $80,366,300, respectively, with details as follows:
(Thousands of United States dollars.
Budget years are from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006.
Training
The estimated requirements for training for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 are as follows:
(Thousands of United States dollars.
Budget years are from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006.
The resource requirements will be used for internal and external training of Mission staff mainly in the areas of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration policy and guidelines, human rights awareness, HIV/AIDS, gender awareness, disciplinary measures, people management, negotiation and conflict resolution, ground transportation, air operations, movement control, communications and information technology, security, engineering, financial management, supply and contracts management, general services, personnel management and public information.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
The estimated operational requirements for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 are as follows:
(Thousands of United States dollars.
Budget years are from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006.
The estimates for 2005/06 include $300,000 for consultants to carry out immediate surveys for the profiling of the target groups, including women, associated with armed forces and groups and the disabled ex-combatants, surveys on small arms proliferation and security, and socio-economic surveys regarding opportunities and services mapping for initial rapid reinsertion of these target groups.
These surveys are critical in obtaining an accurate picture of numbers for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, in identifying specific needs and developing appropriate plans, including reinsertion and reintegration opportunities in rural and urban areas.
The estimates of $12,000,000 proposed under Other services in 2005/06 include provision for services such as feeding, clothing, civic education, medical, profiling and counselling, training and employment referral, and the transitional safety allowance at $800 per person to disarm and demobilize 5,000 members of special groups and 10,000 allied militia forces.
Of the proposed $12 million, $4 million is for the disarmament, demobilization and reinsertion of 5,000 members of special groups; the balance of $8 million is to prepare for the possible contingency of 10,000 members of the other armed groups, allied to the north and the south but not signatories to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, who would need to be disarmed, demobilized and reinserted.
Dealing with this category of combatants is consistent with article 19 of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, where it states that both parties will allow for the voluntary demobilization of the militia forces and the special groups during the first year of the interim period.
The amount of $400,000 for quick-impact projects is to implement 40 community-based projects at an estimated average of $10,000 per project to facilitate community acceptance of returning combatants and reconciliation at the local level and to establish the economic conditions, such as critical community infrastructure, roads, bridges and schools, for the reintegration.
Human resources
Military and police personnel
a Represents the highest level of authorized/proposed strength.
Civilian personnel
a Includes national officers.
b Includes both international and national United Nations Volunteers.
c Includes Security Section.
The proposed staffing and structure is based on the mandate of the Mission and is dictated by a number of factors, including the size, collaboration and coordination with national Sudanese interlocutors, in accordance with the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and the need to pool and divide resources between the two major focus areas of the Mission, namely Darfur and Juba.
UNMIS headquarters at Khartoum will host the senior Mission management team, including the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the Force Commander.
All four senior managers will, on a rotating basis, be present at field headquarters in Juba to ensure policy coherence and underline the unified approach of the Mission throughout the country.
The Head of Office of the field headquarters in Juba will report directly to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and will ensure the day-to-day management of the different substantive components of field headquarters in Juba as well as the three sub-offices in Malakal, Wau and Rumbek, in close cooperation with the Mission's senior management team.
While all substantive functions of the Mission will be replicated at field headquarters in Juba, reporting to the Head of Office, the two Deputy Special Representatives of the Secretary-General and the heads of divisions/sections will continue to provide overall policy guidance to field headquarters in Juba and its components to ensure a coherent and a unified approach.
All regional offices and sub-offices will enjoy a high degree of devolved day-to-day management responsibility within the policy framework developed jointly with Mission's senior management team.
This includes a high and meaningful degree of delegated authority to heads of regional offices and sub-offices in administrative and financial matters in order to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the Mission in a decentralized organizational structure.
It is therefore necessary to employ experienced senior staff to head each of the regional offices and sub-offices.
This requirement is compounded in regional offices where there is a significant military and civilian police presence.
As a result, it is proposed to create a two-level structure, with the heads of the regional offices in Kadugli, Ed Damazin, Abyei, El Fasher and Kassala at the D-1 level and the heads of the sub-offices in Malakal, Wau, Rumbek, Nyala, El Geneina and Zalingei at the P-5 level.
The heads of all regional offices will report directly to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, while the heads of the sub-offices in Malakal, Wau and Rumbek will report to the head of field headquarters in Juba and the head of the sub-offices in Nyala, El Geneina and Zalingei will report to the head of the regional office in El Fasher.
The heads of regional offices and sub-offices will have overall supervisory responsibility for civilian staff in their respective offices.
In addition, personnel in these regional offices and sub-offices will have a functional reporting line to their respective substantive areas at UNMIS headquarters.
The proposed civilian personnel staffing of 3,951 includes 2,690 (68 per cent) national staff and 208 United Nations Volunteers, of which 264 and 57 are national Professional officers and national United Nations Volunteers, respectively.
The organizational structure of the Mission is shown in the annex to the present report and detailed in paragraphs 17 to 64 below.
(a) Executive direction and management
Overall mission direction and management is provided by the immediate Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
The Special Representative of the Secretary General at the Under-Secretary-General level assists the Secretary-General in the implementation of the UNMIS mandate and is responsible for the overall management of the Mission and coordination of all activities of the United Nations in the Sudan.
The Special Representative also serves as the designated official of security in the Mission.
Reporting directly to the Special Representative are: the Principal Deputy Special Representative and a Deputy Special Representative, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, both at the Assistant Secretary-General level; the Force Commander; the Director of Administration; the Senior Resident Auditor; the Senior Legal Adviser; the Chief of the Joint Mission Analysis Centre; the Spokesperson; and the Chief Security Adviser.
Also reporting directly to the Special Representative are the heads of the field headquarters in Juba and the regional offices in Kadugli, Ed Damazin, Abyei, El Fasher and Kassala.
Mission headquarters
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Khartoum is assisted by a Principal Economic Adviser (D-1) who will advise the Special Representative on the macroeconomic dimensions of the conflicts in the Sudan and on the transition to peace at the domestic and international levels.
Two Special Assistants (P-3) will assist the Special Representative in the drafting of correspondence, one Liaison Officer (P-3) will assist the Special Representative in his relations with the ministers and senior officials of the Government of the Sudan and two Interpreters (P-3) will provide translation and interpretation services.
A Personal Assistant (Field Service), three Administrative Assistants (Field Service and two national General Service staff) along with one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and six Drivers (national General Service staff) will assist in the day-to-day operations of the Office.
Field offices
The field headquarters in Juba will be directly responsible for programme implementation in the states of Eastern Equatoria, Bahr Al Jebel and Western Equatoria, and in the other states and locales through three sub-offices located in Malakal, Wau and Rumbek.
The Head of Office (D-2) will be assisted by one Senior Political Affairs Officer (P-5), two Legal Officers (P-4 and national Professional Officer), one Reporting Officer (P-3), three Field Coordination Officers (P-2 and two national Professional Officers), one Protocol Officer (national Professional Officer) and support staff consisting of two Administrative Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
The sub-office in Malakal extends the capacity of the field headquarters in Juba to implement the UNMIS mandate in Unity, Upper Nile and Jongli states.
The sub-office is headed by a Head of Office (P-5) and supported by one Reporting Officer (P-3), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
The sub-office in Wau extends the capacity of the field headquarters in Juba to implement the UNMIS mandate in Western Bahr Al Ghazal, Northern Bahr Al Ghazal and Warab states.
The sub-office is headed by a Head of Office (P-5) and supported by one Reporting Officer (P-3), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
The sub-office in Rumbek extends the capacity of the field headquarters in Juba to implement the UNMIS mandate in Buheyrat (Lakes) state.
The sub-office is headed by a Senior Political Affairs Officer (P-5) and supported by one Reporting Officer (P-2), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), four Language Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
The regional office in Kadugli extends the capacity of the headquarters in Khartoum to implement the UNMIS mandate in the Nuba Mountains area.
The regional office is headed by a Head of Office (D-1) and supported by one Reporting Officer (P-3), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
The regional office in Ed Damazin extends the capacity of the headquarters in Khartoum to implement the UNMIS mandate in Blue Nile state.
The regional office is headed by a Head of Office (D-1) and supported by one Reporting Officer (P-3), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
The regional office in Abyei extends the capacity of the headquarters in Khartoum to implement the UNMIS mandate in the region.
The regional office is headed by a Head of Office (D-1) and supported by one Reporting Officer (P-2), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
The regional office in El Fasher implements the mandate of the Mission throughout Darfur.
The Head of the regional office (D-1) in El Fasher reports directly to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and is his primary representative in Darfur.
The Head of Office is supported by one Reporting Officer (P-3), one Field Coordination Officer (national Professional Officer), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Language Assistants (national General Service staff).
The Head of Office (P-5) in the sub-office in Nyala reports directly to the El Fasher regional office and is supported by one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Language Assistants (national General Service staff).
The Head of Office (P-5) in the sub-office in El Geneina reports directly to the El Fasher regional office and is supported by one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), two Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Head of Office (P-5) in the sub-office in Zalingei reports directly to the El Fasher regional office and is supported by one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), two Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff).
As the regional office in Kassala is geographically remote from the two other major regional offices, it is necessary for it to act independently.
The Head of Office (D-1) in Kassala reports directly to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and is supported by one Reporting Officer (P-2), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
Office of Chief of Staff
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General will be supported by a Chief of Staff (D-2) who would ensure integration of the overall management of the Mission by coordinating activities at the level of the Mission senior management team.
Given the size and complexity of the Mission's activities, the effective integrated management of substantive and support elements will be critical.
The Chief of Staff will also coordinate and oversee the preparation and monitoring of the delivery of the Mission implementation plan and the strategic results-based frameworks.
The Chief of Staff would be supported by: one Reporting Officer (P-4) to maintain the flow of communications with United Nations Headquarters on all matters for the attention of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and respond to requests for information; one Administrative Management Officer (P-3) to assist in coordination; one Protocol Officer (national Professional Officer) to ensure the observance of protocol; and one Liaison Officer (national Professional Officer) who would liaise with other parts of the Mission.
The office of the Chief of Staff will be supported by one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
Two Records Maintenance Assistants (international United Nations Volunteer and national General Service staff) will undertake records maintenance, filing and archiving of all documents received and sent from the immediate office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Office of Legal Affairs
Legal Affairs is headed by a Senior Legal Adviser (P-5) who would act as the Principal Legal Adviser to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on all legal matters related to the implementation of the Mission's mandate.
The Office also provides legal review and advice on administrative, personnel and contractual matters related to the Mission's operations, liaises on legal matters with the Government authorities and provides support in the area of international law.
The Section comprises four Legal Officers (one P-4, one P-3 and two national Professional Officers) and two Administrative Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff).
Joint Mission Analysis Centre
The Joint Mission Analysis Centre is responsible for the collection, coordination, analysis and dissemination of information from civilian and military sources, analysis of risk and development of risk management advice.
Based on this analysis, the Centre will also produce reports and policy documents to improve the ability of the Mission to adapt to and manage current and emerging problems, threats or obstacles in its implementation of the mandate.
The Centre is headed by the Chief, Joint Mission Analysis Centre (P-5), who reports directly to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General through the Chief of Staff and will lead strategic policy development for the Mission as well as supervise the work of the multidisciplinary Centre.
The Joint Mission Analysis Centre will include: a Senior Analyst (P-4) and three Information Analysts (P-3, P-2 and a national Professional Officer) with specialization in economics, electronic media and youth issues, who will analyse diverse and complex issues and identify emerging problems, threats or obstacles; one Reporting Officer (P-2), who will assist in the dissemination of information from the Centre to other components of the Mission; one Programme Officer (P-4), who will undertake analysis of the Mission's activities and report on lessons learned and best practices; one Land and Property Analyst (P-3), who will advise on the strategic implications of land and water titles, traditional and war-related land allocation, as well as traditional conflict resolution mechanisms; and one Reporting Officer (P-3) and two Programme Officers (national Professional Officers), who will draft policy documents and reports required according to the UNMIS mandate.
Office of the Spokesperson
The Office of the Spokesperson will advise the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on matters related to media, present regular press briefings providing a coherent image of the Mission to the outside world and liaise with the Office of the Spokesman at United Nations Headquarters.
The Office will be headed by the Spokesperson (P-5) and supported by one Public Information Officer (P-4) and one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff).
Office of Resident Auditor
The Office of Resident Auditor is headed by a Senior Resident Auditor (P-5) and comprises seven Resident Auditors (three P-4 and four P-3) and three Auditing Assistants (two Field Service and one national General Service staff).
The proposed staffing of the Office and grade levels are commensurate with the scope of the Mission's operational activities and the range of administrative, logistical and technical support provided by Administration to the Mission's substantive staff, military personnel and civilian police officers.
Owing to the finalization of the proposed budget for the peacekeeping support account prior to the establishment of UNMIS, staffing requirements for the Office are included in the present budget on an interim basis and will be shifted to the support account requirements for the 2006/07 period.
Security and Safety Section
a Excludes staff funded by the Department of Safety and Security.
The Security and Safety Section is headed by a Chief Security Adviser, who is the principal security adviser of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General/Designated Official for the whole United Nations system in the Sudan, responsible for establishing and maintaining the security management system, the United Nations Sudan Security Plan, liasing with the Government of National Unity, the Government of Southern Sudan and local authorities on all security matters and conducting threat assessments and risk analysis.
In addition to his/her responsibilities for countrywide security within the unified Mission, the Chief Security Adviser has overall responsibility for the management of security and safety of UNMIS personnel and property, provides emergency response 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, directs the security guard forces, conducts security investigations, provides personal protection services to senior Mission officials and high-level delegations and provides security clearances for travel into and within the Mission area.
The Chief Security Adviser is also responsible for monitoring compliance with the Minimum Operational Security Standards (MOSS) and Minimum Operational Residential Security Standards (MORSS) established by the Designated Official.
The Security and Safety Section in UNMIS includes 1 P-5, 2 P-4, 9 P-3 and 13 national General Service staff who are funded by the Department of Safety and Security in United Nations Headquarters and therefore not included in the staffing table.
All staff in the Security and Safety Section, including those funded by the Department of Safety and Security in United Nations Headquarters, will report to and are responsible to the Chief Security Adviser in the Mission.
Mission headquarters
The Chief Security Adviser (D-1) is supported by one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Chief Security Adviser is also supported by a Deputy Chief Security Adviser (P-5), one Field Security Coordination Officer (P-4) and two Security Assistants (national General Service staff), posts which are funded by the Department of Safety and Security and therefore not included in the staffing table.
The Security and Safety Section comprises a Security Support Unit, a Security Information and Operations Centre, a Security Operations Unit, a Security Plans and Liaison Unit, a Personal Protection Unit, a Special Investigations Unit and a Training Unit.
The Security Support Unit provides logistical and administrative support to the Section and maintains the security pass and identification database.
The Unit is headed by a Security Officer (P-2) with assistance from two Administrative Officers (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Security Assistants (national General Service staff).
Pass and identification operations are carried out by two Pass and Identification Officers (Field Service) and one Pass and Identification Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Unit is also supported by one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), funded by the Department of Safety and Security and therefore not included in the staffing table.
The Security Information and Operations Centre is a unique response to satisfy security and safety-related information and operational needs resulting from the Mission's organizational character and plans for the future.
The Centre will establish information links with all relevant organizations both internal and external to the Mission; participate in inter-organizational security; and based upon information collected, as its fundamental task, assess the security situation, determine security issues, develop and disseminate security warnings and security situation information to staff, and provide security recommendations for use by the Field Security Coordination Officer, the Security Management Team, the Strategic Security Group and, ultimately, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General/Designated Official.
The Centre is headed by a Security Officer (P-4) who is supported by one Security Information Analyst (P-2).
The Centre will also maintain an incident database that is used to provide information to identify negative or positive security trends in the Mission area.
This database will be maintained by one Security Officer (Field Service) and an Incident Database Technician (national General Service staff).
The Centre is also supported by one Security Information Analyst (P-3) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), posts which are funded by Department of Safety and Security and therefore not included in the staffing table.
The Security Operations Unit provides physical security for all UNMIS buildings in Khartoum and monitors the movement of Mission staff and assets around the Sudan, provides security clearance of personnel for travel into and within the Sudan and acts as a central communications network.
The Unit comprises a Duty Office, a Mission Tracking Cell, a Communications Cell and a Guard Force Management Cell.
The Duty Office is the operational arm of the Security Operations Unit and will coordinate the response to emergencies 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
It will provide and coordinate proactive and reactive support to Mission field-based operations in the form of security risk assessments of routes, areas of operations and regions, and assist and advise on implementation of the security plan, MOSS and MORSS.
The Duty Office comprises of one Security Officer (P-3) and two Office Assistants (national General Service staff).
In addition, the Duty Office is supported by three Security Officers (P-3), posts which are funded by the Department of Safety and Security and therefore not included in the staffing table.
The Mission Tracking Cell processes all security clearance requests, including international clearances; maintains relevant records; assists in the coordination/synchronization of multi-agency Mission activities within common geographical locations; maintains a personnel-tracking database; monitors the movements of all staff into and within the Sudan 24 hours a day, 7 days a week; assists in the development and maintenance of a Mission statistics database which records activity and location; and provides initial security planning guidance for the conduct of road movement.
The Mission Tracking Cell comprises two Security Assistants (national General Service staff), posts which are funded by the Department of Safety and Security and therefore not included in the staffing table.
The Communications Cell maintains and operates the UNMIS Emergency Communications System 24 hours a day, 7 days a week and conducts daily communication checks.
It acts as an interface for the passage of all security-related alerts and advisories to ensure Mission-wide situational awareness; monitors the progress of road missions and other activities; maintains working and emergency communications with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations/United Nations Department of Safety and Security throughout the Mission area 24 hours a day, 7 days a week; acts as the coordinating communications centre for the conduct of evacuation, medical evacuation and other contingency plans; and provides technical advice and, where appropriate, training on communications issues.
The Communications Cell comprises five Radio Operators (national General Service staff).
The Guard Force Management Cell provides access control and perimeter security 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to all Mission sites, compounds and buildings.
The Cell comprises six Security Officers (Field Service) who supervise four Security Assistants (national General Service staff) and 50 Security Guards (national General Service staff) at UNMIS offices and facilities in Khartoum 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
The Security Plans and Liaison Unit maintains the Mission security plan for the whole of the Sudan, including specific evacuation and medevac/casevac plans for 20 static sites where United Nations staff members are stationed.
Additionally, the Unit works in close cooperation with the local authorities throughout the country to ensure their compliance with any planning mechanism engendered.
The Unit comprises two Security Officers (Field Service).
It is also supported by one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), is funded by the Department of Safety and Security and therefore not included in the staffing table.
The Personal Protection Unit provides close protection 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and is made up of 12 Personal Protection Officers (Field Service).
The Special Investigations Unit is responsible for conducting investigations of theft, vehicle accident or any other malfeasance committed by civilian staff members.
The Unit is made up of a Supervisor (Field Service), one Investigator (Field Service) and two Investigations Assistants (national General Service staff).
The Security Training Unit supervises the training of all newly arrived civilian staff.
It will also be responsible for the training of all grades of United Nations Security staff throughout the Mission, including firearms training.
It is envisioned that there will be a static training venue and a mobile unit to cover the regional offices and sub-offices.
The Security Training Unit will comprise six Security Training Officers (Field Service) and four Security Training Assistants (national General Service staff).
Field offices
Security services will be coordinated across southern Sudan through the field headquarters in Juba.
The Juba Security and Safety Section would be led by a Field Security Coordination Officer (P-4), who would be supported by one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), posts which are funded by the Department of Safety and Security and therefore not part of the staffing table.
Included in the staffing table is one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) who supports the Office of the Field Security Coordination Officer in the field headquarters in Juba.
The Security and Safety Section comprises: (a) a Security Support Unit (one Security Officer (P-2), one Administration Officer (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), two Pass and Identification Officers (Field Service) and one Pass and Identification Assistant (national General Service staff)); (b) a Security Information and Operations Centre (one Security Information Analyst (P-2), one Security Officer — Incident Database (Field Service) and one Incident Database Technician (national General Service staff)); (c) a Security Operations Unit (two Security Operations Duty Officers (P-3), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), eight Security Officers (Field Service), 36 Security Guards (national General Service staff) and five Security Radio Operators (national General Service staff)); (d) a Security Plans and Liaison Unit (one Security Officer (Field Service) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff)); (e) a Special Investigations Unit (one Security Investigator (Field Service)); and (f) a Training Unit (one Security Trainer (Field Service)).
In addition to the foregoing, the Security Office in Juba includes one Deputy Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3), one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), one Security Operations Duty Officer (P-3), and one Mission Tracking Assistant (national General Service staff), posts which are funded by the Department of Safety and Security and therefore not included in the staffing table.
The Security Office in the field headquarters in Juba will also oversee security at the staging post in Lokichoggio, where seven Security Officers (one P-3, one P-2 and five Field Service) will supervise 16 Security Guards (national General Service staff).
The Security and Safety Section in the sub-office in Malakal is supported by one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Section comprises: (a) a Security Information and Operations Centre (one Security Officer (P-2), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff)); and (b) a Security Operations Unit (three Duty Officers (one P-2 and two Field Service), one Mission Tracking Assistant (national General Service staff), five Security Radio Operators (national General Service staff), four Security Officers (Field Service), 28 Security Guards (national General Service staff), one Security Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff)).
In addition to the foregoing, the Security and Safety Section in the sub-office in Malakal includes one Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), posts which are funded by the Department of Safety and Security and therefore not included in the staffing table.
The Security and Safety Section in the sub-office in Wau is coordinated by a Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3) supported by one Security Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Section comprises: (a) a Security Information and Operations Centre (one Security Officer (P-2), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff)); and (b) a Security Operations Unit (three Duty Officers (one P-2 and two Field Service), one Mission Tracking Assistant (national General Service staff), five Security Radio Operators (national General Service staff), four Security Officers (Field Service), 28 Security Guards (national General Service staff), one Security Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff)).
The Security and Safety Section in the sub-office in Rumbek comprises: (a) a Security Information and Operations Centre (one Security Officer (P-2), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff)); and (b) a Security Operations Unit (three Duty Officers (one P-2 and two Field Service), one Mission Tracking Assistant (national General Service staff), five Security Radio Operators (national General Service staff), four Security Officers (Field Service), nine Security Guards (national General Service staff) and two Office Assistants (national General Service staff)).
In addition, the Security and Safety Section in the sub-office in Rumbek includes one Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), posts which are funded by the Department of Safety and Security and therefore not included in the staffing table.
The Security and Safety Section in the regional office in Kadugli comprises: (a) a Security Information and Operations Centre (one Security Officer (P-2), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff)); and (b) a Security Operations Unit (three Duty Officers (one P-2 and two Field Service), one Mission Tracking Assistant (national General Service staff), five Security Radio Operators (national General Service staff), four Security Officers (Field Service), 28 Security Assistants (national General Service staff), one Security Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Office Assistants (national General Service staff)).
In addition, the Security Section in the regional office in Kadugli includes one Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), posts which are funded by the Department of Safety and Security and therefore not included in the staffing table.
The Security and Safety Section in the regional office in Ed Damazin is coordinated by a Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3) supported by one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Section comprises: (a) a Security Information and Operations Centre (one Security Officer (P-2), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff)); and (b) a Security Operations Unit (three Duty Officers (one P-2 and two Field Service), one Mission Tracking Assistant (national General Service staff), five Security Radio Operators (national General Service staff), three Security Officers (Field Service), 28 Security Guards (national General Service staff), one Security Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff)).
The Security and Safety Section in the regional office in Abyei is coordinated by a Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3) supported by one Security Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Section comprises: (a) a Security Information and Operations Centre (one Security Officer (P-2), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff)); and (b) a Security Operations Unit (three Duty Officers (one P-2 and two Field Service), one Mission Tracking Assistant (national General Service staff), five Security Radio Operators (national General Service staff), four Security Officers (Field Service), 18 Security Guards (national General Service staff), one Security Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff)).
The security management systems for Darfur will be coordinated through the regional office in El Fasher.
The Security and Safety Section in El Fasher would be led by a Field Security Coordination Officer (P-4), who would be supported by one Security Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Security and Safety Section in the regional office in El Fasher comprises: (a) a Security Support Unit (one Security Officer (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), one Pass and Identification officer (Field Service) and two Pass and Identification Assistants (national General Service staff)); (b) one Security Information and Operations Centre (Deputy Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3), one Security Assistant (national General Service staff), one Security Information Analyst (Field Service), one Security Officer — Incident Database (Field Service) and an Incident Database Technician (national General Service staff)); (c) a Security Operations Unit (two Security Operations Duty Officers (P-3), one Security Operations Duty Assistant (national General Service staff), two Security Assistants (national General Service staff), one Mission Tracking Assistant (national General Service staff), two Security Officers (Field Service), 26 Security Guards (national General Service staff) and five Security Radio Operators (national General Service staff)); and (d) a Special Investigations Unit (one Security Investigator (Field Service)).
The Security and Safety Section in the sub-office in Nyala is coordinated by a Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3) supported by a Security Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Security and Safety Section comprises: (a) a Security Information and Operations Centre (one Security Analyst (Field Service), one Security Officer — Incident Database (Field Service) and one Incident Database Technician (national General Service staff)); and (b) a Security Operations Unit (three Duty Officers (one P-3 and two Field Service), one Mission Tracking Assistant (national General Service staff), five Security Radio Operators (national General Service staff), four Security Officers (Field Service) and 22 Security Guards (national General Service staff)).
The Security and Safety Section in the sub-office in El Geneina is coordinated by a Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3) supported by one Security Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Security and Safety Section comprises: (a) the Security Information and Operations Centre (one Security Analyst (Field Service), one Security Officer — Incident Database (Field Service) and one Incident Database Technician (national General Service staff)); and (b) a Security Operations Unit (three Duty Officers (one P-3 and two Field Service), one Mission Tracking Assistant (national General Service staff), five Security Radio Operators (national General Service staff), four Security Officers (Field Service) and 24 Security Guards (national General Service staff)).
The Security and Safety Section in the sub-office in Zalingei will be coordinated by one Security Officer (Field Service) who will supervise 15 Security Guards (national General Service staff).
One Security Officer (P-3) and one Security Assistant (national General Service staff) each will coordinate security offices in the regional office in Kassala and Port Sudan, respectively.
In addition, four Security Officers (Field Service) and 30 Security Guards (national General Service staff), and two Security Officers (Field Service) and 30 Security Guards (national General Service staff) will provide security in the regional office in Kassala and Port Sudan, respectively.
The Security and Safety Section in the El Obeid logistics base will be managed by one Field Security Coordination Officer (P-3), assisted by one Associate Field Security Coordination Officer (P-2), six Security Officers (Field Service) and 50 Security Guards (national General Service staff).
(b) Substantive offices
Requirements with respect to the proposed staffing establishment for substantive offices would deliver the outputs that contribute to the expected accomplishments of framework components 1 through 4 of the present report.
Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
The proposed staffing establishment for offices reporting to the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General is as follows:
Immediate Office
The Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, at the Assistant Secretary-General level, will work closely with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to address the matters directly associated with the components of the peace process and governance.
The Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General will direct the programmatic activities in the functional areas of civil affairs, political affairs, civilian police, rule of law, judicial system and prison advisory, human rights, electoral assistance, and communication and public information.
The Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General will provide policy advice to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Mission's mandate, lead high-level negotiations with officials of the Government of National Unity and the Government of Southern Sudan, leaders of political parties and civil society, as well as relevant officials of regional countries and organizations, and act as the Head of Mission in the absence of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The Office of the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General comprises the Special Assistant (P-4), assisted by one Reporting Officer (P-3), three Administrative Assistants (two Field Service and one national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
Civil Affairs Division
The Civil Affairs Division, under the supervision of the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, contributes specifically to expected accomplishments 3.1 and 3.3 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 3.
The Division would assist and facilitate the reconciliation process at the grass-roots level and support the establishment of a culture of peace in the country and support post-settlement peacebuilding in conflict areas.
The Division's programmes will focus on local bodies, universities and faith-based organizations in promoting the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
It will organize workshops on governance and the responsibilities of the civil administration, implement quick-impact projects and work with international partners and United Nations agencies in identifying areas for assistance.
Civil Affairs Officers would monitor and support civilian activities arising from the peace agreement and work closely with military colleagues and will concentrate on conflict analysis and reconciliation, providing operational and other regular reporting from the field.
One of the Civil Affairs Division outputs is the training of 23 Sudanese in civil administration functions to create a pool of candidates for civil service assignments through the deployment of 23 national United Nations Volunteers to Sudanese civil service assignments under Mission headquarters, field headquarters, regional offices and sub-offices.
Mission headquarters
The Division will be headed by a Director (D-2) who, under the guidance of the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, will be responsible for establishing priorities and formulating policies for civil affairs-related activities in the Sudan.
The Director will be assisted by one Senior Civil Affairs Officer (P-5), six Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, two international United Nations Volunteers and three national Professional Officers), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff), two Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, two Civil Affairs Officers (national United Nations Volunteers) will be deployed in Sudanese civil service assignments.
Field offices
In the field headquarters in Juba, a Principal Civil Affairs Officer (D-1) under the supervision of the Head of field headquarters, will coordinate the activities in the south and will ensure effective coordination with the Khartoum and Darfur offices.
He/she will be assisted by one Senior Civil Affairs Officer (P-5), seven Civil Affairs Officers (two P-4, two international United Nations Volunteers and three national Professional Officers), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, two Civil Affairs Officers (national United Nations Volunteers) will be deployed in Sudanese civil service assignments.
Programme delivery will be enhanced by the deployment of a mobile team consisting of six Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, one international United Nations Volunteer, two national United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
Civil affairs activities in the sub-office in Malakal are carried out by four Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and a mobile team consisting of four Civil Affairs Officers (two P-3 and two national United Nations Volunteers) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, two Civil Affairs Officers (national United Nations Volunteers) will be deployed in Sudanese civil service assignments.
Civil affairs activities in the sub-office in Wau are carried out by five Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, one P-2, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers) and a mobile team consisting of six Civil Affairs Officers (two P-3, two national Professional Officers and two national United Nations Volunteers) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, three Civil Affairs Officers (national United Nations Volunteers) will be deployed in Sudanese civil service assignments.
Civil affairs activities in the sub-office in Rumbek are carried out by three Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, one international United Nations Volunteer and one national Professional Officer), one Driver (national General Service staff), plus a mobile team consisting of six Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, one P-3, two national Professional Officers and two national United Nations Volunteers) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, two Civil Affairs Officers (national United Nations Volunteers) will be deployed in Sudanese civil service assignments.
Civil affairs activities in the regional office in Kadugli are carried out by six Civil Affairs Officers (two P-4, one P-2, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
In addition, three Civil Affairs Officers (national United Nations Volunteers) will be deployed in Sudanese civil service assignments.
Civil affairs activities in the regional office in Ed Damazin are carried out by five Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, one P-3, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers).
In addition, three Civil Affairs Officers (national United Nations Volunteers) will be deployed in Sudanese civil service assignments.
Civil affairs activities in the regional office in Abyei are carried out by four Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers) and a mobile team consisting of six Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, one P-3, two national Professional Officers and two national United Nations Volunteers) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, three Civil Affairs Officers (national United Nations Volunteers) will be deployed in Sudanese civil service assignments.
Civil affairs in the regional office in El Fasher is headed by a Senior Civil Affairs Officer (P-5) and supported by four Civil Affairs Officers (one P-3, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers).
In each of the sub-offices in Nyala and El Geneina, civil affairs is staffed by four Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers).
The Civil Affairs Office in the sub-office in Zalingei is represented by four Civil Affairs Officers (one P-3, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers).
In the regional office in Kassala, the Civil Affairs Office will cover both Kassala and the Hamesh/Koreb area.
This office will be staffed by five Civil Affairs Officers (one P-4, one P-3, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, three Civil Affairs Officers (national United Nations Volunteers) will be deployed in Sudanese civil service assignments.
Political Affairs Division
The Political Affairs Division contributes specifically to expected accomplishments 1.1 and 3.3 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 3.
The Division is responsible for providing assistance for effective implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, including monitoring, collating, integrating, interpreting as well reporting information on political, civil, social, economic and other developments throughout the Sudan which will have an impact on the implementation of the Mission's mandate; assisting the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General in regular consultations with the Government of the Sudan, supporting their participation in the Assessment and Evaluation Commission and in the Political Ceasefire Commission meetings; providing advice on the political process in six sectors and on implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement; participating in meetings with international donors and agencies to discuss an effective response to the needs of the Sudanese people; and working closely with electoral assistance experts in building a framework for elections that would be in tune with political realities in the Sudan.
The Division will also continually provide advice and updated assessments of political trends in the Sudan and the region, analysing their potential impact on long-term peace and stability, conduct monthly consultations with the African Union, establish close working relationships with political parties and contribute to daily reports to United Nations Headquarters and other reports to the Security Council.
The Political Affairs Division will be headed by the Director of Political Affairs (D-1) and assisted by two Senior Political Affairs Officers (P-5).
One Senior Political Affairs Officer (P-5) will lead the team dealing with negotiations related to Darfur.
This officer will be responsible for conducting high-level negotiations in different parts of Africa and engaging with the Government and armed movements on the ground.
The second Senior Political Affairs Officer (P-5) will head the team dealing with Comprehensive Peace Agreement implementation, negotiation, mediation between the parties relating to issues regarding government in the south, and good offices.
The Division will be supported by seven Political Affairs Officers (four P-4 and three P-3), one associate Political Affairs Officer (P-2), two Political Affairs Officers (national Professional Officer), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
Civilian Police Division
The Civilian Police Division contributes to expected accomplishment 3.5 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 3.
The Division is headed by a Civilian Police Commissioner (D-1) who, under the guidance of the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, manages the civilian police aspects of the Mission; assists and supports the Government of National Unity and the Government of Southern Sudan in the development of a transparent police service, as described in the Machakos Protocol and other agreements; coordinates support initiatives of other bilateral and international donors; advises Government and SPLM/A police forces; monitors the delivery of service by local police and community expectations; and directs involvement in capacity-building areas, such as training and other programmes.
The civilian police officers will conduct patrols and assessment meetings with civil society representatives, monitor operational activities of the local police, assess adherence to internationally acceptable standards and advise senior command-level and ministry-level staff on the long-term demilitarization of police.
Each of the team sites in the Mission consists of around 25 police officers with a ratio of one Language Assistant and one Office Assistant for every five and 25 police officers, respectively.
Mission headquarters
The Civilian Police Commissioner (D-1) in Mission headquarters in Khartoum is assisted by one Planning Coordinator (P-5), who will assist the development of the police aspects in the Mission implementation plan; review benchmarks and evaluate the overall achievements of the police activities; interact on behalf of the Police Commissioner with the respective local police leaderships in developing all the police development plans and policies; and ensure that the national commitment to the overall police development initiatives for the south is properly coordinated.
The Division will be supported by one Training Coordinator (P-4), one Reporting Officer (P-3), two Administrative Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff), six Office Assistants (national General Service staff), seven Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and four Drivers (national General Service staff).
Field offices
In the field headquarters in Juba, the Police Monitoring and Support Office will be headed by a Senior Police Affairs Officer (P-5) who will exercise delegated authority from the Police Commissioner to coordinate police activities in the region.
The Senior Police Affairs Officer will be supported by a Reform and Restructuring Coordinator (P-4), four Language Assistants (national General Service Staff), five Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, the Office has 12 Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Office Assistants (national General Service staff) in three team sites.
The Civilian Police Office in: (a) the sub-office in Malakal will include four Language Assistants (national General Service staff), three Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, the sub-office will include 20 Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and four Office Assistants (national General Service staff) in four team sites; (b) the sub-office in Wau will include four Language Assistants (national General Service staff), three Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, the sub-office will include eight Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) in two team sites; (c) the sub-office in Rumbek will include four Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) in one team site; (d) the regional office in Kadugli will include four Language Assistants (national General Service staff), three Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, the regional office will include 12 Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Office Assistants (national General Service staff) in three team sites; (e) the regional office in Ed Damazin will include three Language Assistants (national General Service staff), three Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, the regional office will include 12 Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Office Assistants (national General Service staff) in three team sites; (f) the regional office in Abyei will include two Language Assistants (national General Service staff), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
In addition, the regional office will include four Language Offices (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) in one team site; and (g) the regional office in Kassala will include four Language Assistants and one Office Assistant (all national General Service staff) in one team site.
Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section
The Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section contributes to expected accomplishment 3.2 and would deliver the related outputs in framework component 3.
The Section will provide support and advice to the Government of National Unity and the Government of Southern Sudan in developing the constitution and strengthening legislative, judicial and correctional institutions and systems; support the independence and impartiality of judicial institutions, keeping in view Sudan's legal traditions, cultures and international norms; and provide essential training in the areas of prison systems and management.
Mission headquarters
The judicial component is headed by the Chief, Rule of Law (D-1) and supported by one Senior Rule of Law Officer (P-5), a Sharia Law Officer (P-4), a Common Law Officer (P-4), seven Rule of Law Officers (one P-3, one P-2, five national Professional Officers), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), three Language Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
In addition, the prison advisory and training role will be undertaken by a Corrections Adviser (P-4) who will be supported by three Corrections Officers (one P-3 and two national Professional Officers) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
Field offices
In the field headquarters in Juba, rule of law activities will be coordinated by a Senior Rule of Law Officer (P-5) who will be assisted by six Rule of Law Officers (two P-4, one P-3, one P-2 and two national Professional Officers), three Language Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
In addition, corrections activities in the south will be carried out by two Corrections Advisers (P-3) who will be supported by two Administrative Officers (international United Nations Volunteers), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
Two Training Coordinators (P-3) and two Training Officers (national Professional Officers) will design the training programmes for national staff on international standards for correction facilities.
In the regional office in El Fasher, rule of law activities will be coordinated by one Rule of Law Officer (P-4).
The proposed Rule of Law Officer will have two main areas of responsibility.
The first is related to the judicial and legal aspects of the current crisis.
The efforts by the international community to maintain a minimally acceptable level of respect for human rights and the rule of law in Darfur during the conflict comprise numerous legal and judicial tasks.
These include working with the local authorities to ensure that the judiciary is administering justice in a non-discriminatory manner and consistent with international standards; providing guidance and assistance to the judiciary authorities on ways to enhance their ability to administer justice and reduce violations; as well as providing the United Nations presence in Darfur with advice on its dealings with the law authorities.
The second area of responsibility of the Rule of Law Officer in Darfur will be to contribute to the efforts aimed at reaching a comprehensive political settlement and, eventually, restoring the rule of law in Darfur.
The negotiation of a comprehensive settlement will include a number of issues of concern for the rule of law, including reconciliation and compensation efforts, the adjudication of claims by victims of violence and the mechanisms designed to rebuild the rule of law in Darfur.
Human Rights Section
The Human Rights Section contributes to expected accomplishment 3.4 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 3.
The Section will monitor, verify and report on the human rights situation in the Sudan, with a particular emphasis on the situation in Darfur; advocate and intervene with local and national authorities to protect civilians and vulnerable groups; engage in dialogue with the Government of National Unity, the Government of Southern Sudan, the state governors (Wali) and other entities to increase respect for human rights; provide advice on the creation and strengthening of structures for the protection and promotion of human rights in Darfur and throughout the Sudan and on the establishment of human rights structures where they do not exist; work with United Nations agencies, NGOs and other representatives of civil society in developing specific mechanisms for the protection of vulnerable groups, including women, children, internally displaced persons and disabled and elderly people; promote the rights of women, children, internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups; provide advice on the establishment and operation of the national human rights commission; provide advice on capacity-building and training to the Government, national entities, the judicial and legislative bodies, and organizations of civil society; provide advice on the ratification of key international human rights instruments; provide advice on the development of a national plan of human rights education; and integrate gender perspective into its human rights work and ensure a focus on specific women's/girl's rights.
Mission headquarters
The Section, headed by the Chief of the Human Rights Section (D-1), will be assisted by two Senior Human Rights Officers (P-5).
One Senior Human Rights Officer (P-5) will focus on institution and capacity-building activities and will be responsible for the design and supervision of strategic human rights institutional and capacity-building activities, including advice on the development of a national plan of action for human rights education, support to the establishment and functioning of a national human rights institution and other activities aimed at supporting the establishment and development of a national system to promote and protect human rights.
The other Senior Human Rights Officer (P-5) will focus on legal issues, including the provision of legal advice to Mission headquarters, field headquarters and regional office and sub-office teams on issues related to international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law, as well as on legal questions pertaining to the mandate and activities of UNMIS.
The Section will be supported by one Specialist on national human rights institutions (P-4), one Specialist on human rights training (P-4), one Specialist on issues relating to transitional justice (P-4), eight Human Rights Officers (three P-3 and five national Professional Officers), two Associate Human Rights Officers (P-2), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and three Drivers (national General Service staff).
Field offices
The Human Rights Section in the field headquarters in Juba will be headed by a Senior Human Rights Officer (P-5) assisted by four Human Rights Officers (one P-3, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers), one Human Rights Assistant (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), two Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Drivers (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Malakal, human rights activities are carried out by seven Human Rights Officers (one P-4, one P-3, one P-2, two national Professional Officers and two international United Nations Volunteers) supported by two Language Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Wau, human rights activities are carried out by six Human Rights Officers (one P-4, one P-2, two national Professional Officers, one international United Nations Volunteer and one national United Nations Volunteer) supported by two Language Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Rumbek, human rights activities are carried out by three Human Rights Officers (one P-3, one national Professional Officer and one international United Nations Volunteer) supported by one Language Assistant (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
Human Rights Offices in each of the regional offices in Kadugli, Ed Damazin and Abyei are staffed by five Human Rights Officers (one P-4, one P-2, two national Professional Officers and one international United Nations Volunteer) supported by two Language Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
Human Rights Offices in the El Fasher regional office, the sub-office in Nyala and the sub-office in Geneina are each staffed by a Senior Human Rights Officer (P-5) who directs 17 Human Rights Officers (two P-4, four P-3, four P-2, five international United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers), three Language Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and three Drivers (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Zalingei, human rights activities are carried out by 11 Human Rights Officers (one P-4, three P-3, three P-2, three international United Nations Volunteers and one national Professional Officer) supported by two Language Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and three Drivers (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Kassala, human rights activities are carried out by seven Human Rights Officers (one P-4, one P-3, two international United Nations Volunteers, one national United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers), two Language Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
Electoral Assistance Unit
The Electoral Assistance Unit contributes to expected accomplishment 1.1 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 1.
The Unit carries out preparatory work for the future referendum in the south of the Sudan, including demographic surveys, discussions with the Government of Southern Sudan and local authorities, and liaises with national and international NGOs about the elections.
Although the electoral calendar of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement places elections at the third year of implementation, preparation for the elections, including adopting an electoral law, conducting censuses, establishing election commissions and training personnel, requires advance planning.
These issues will be particularly challenging in the Sudanese context given the lack of a reliable electoral infrastructure, including statistics, information on the population and residences.
The staff of the Unit will be required to start working with the Government of National Unity on these issues as well as preparing UNMIS future involvement in the elections.
The electoral assistance staff will also coordinate intervention by the country team and ensure it fits in the overall mandate of the United Nations in the Sudan.
The Unit comprises one Senior Electoral Officer (P-5), two Electoral Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer) and one Electoral Assistant (national General Service staff).
Communications and Public Information Office
The Communications and Public Information Office contributes to expected accomplishments 1.1, 2.1, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4, and would deliver related outputs in components 1, 2, 3 and 4.
The Office will be responsible for producing and disseminating print, broadcast, photo/video and electronic media information on the UNMIS mandate and the role of UNMIS in the peace and political process, providing support to national media and training national journalists; conducting community outreach programmes; producing and broadcasting radio programmes in Arabic, English and regional languages from the Mission headquarters in Khartoum and five other locations throughout the Sudan; issuing press releases and periodic publications in national languages; issuing and distributing pamphlets and leaflets; and supporting and guiding public information activities of the Mission's substantive offices.
The distinct role of the Public Information Offices in the various regions and sub-offices will be twofold.
Firstly, as Arabic speakers, they will be able to promote dialogue between the United Nations and the local communities and obtain and send information back to their regional and Khartoum headquarters on the mood in the regions, as well as comments from local press and community leaders.
The national staff will use their public information expertise to recommend course(s) of action from a public information perspective to respond to those issues.
In return they will receive guidance and advice from the Mission headquarters, field headquarters and regional offices on how they should respond to specific issues.
On local public information issues, the staff will be a primary point of contact between the United Nations and the local community.
National public information staff will also be responsible for organizing and contributing to the whole range of national and local public information products.
In some locations UN Radio, producers and journalists will prepare local programming and contribute to network programming and manage public outreach centres, where members of the public can learn about the United Nations and its activities and see displays on mines awareness or HIV/AIDS awareness.
Mission headquarters
The Communications and Public Information Office in Mission headquarters in Khartoum will comprise the Radio Unit and the Video Unit/Multimedia Unit.
The Office is headed by a Chief Public Information Officer (D-1) and assisted by one Special Campaigns Task Force leader (P-3) who will oversee the design, production and implementation of specially targeted public information campaigns.
An Outreach Coordinator (international United Nations Volunteer) will be responsible for managing the public outreach centres planned for the main urban areas in the Sudan.
An Outreach Centre Manager (national Professional Officer) will manage the Outreach Centre in Khartoum, assisted by two Public Information Officers (national Professional Officers) and one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Office will be supported by one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
The Radio Unit will undertake radio broadcasting in the Sudan providing radio coverage 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
The Unit is headed by the Chief of Unit (P-5) who will provide strategic guidance; supervise day-to-day implementation of the United Nations radio operation in the Sudan; work with international partners, United Nations agencies and NGOs; oversee programme content; and undertake training of local radio journalists.
The Chief would be supported by six Radio Producers (two P-4, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers), one Radio Editor (P-4), one Technical Director (P-4), one Training Officer (P-3), five Studio Technicians (one Field Service and four national General Service staff), one Broadcast Engineer (Field Service), one Transmitter Technician (national General Service staff), one Radio Network Administrator (Field Service), 14 Radio Journalists (two national Professional Officers and 12 national General Service staff), three Radio Presenters (national General Service staff), three Radio Translators (national General Service staff), one Radio Management Assistant (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and four Drivers (national General Service staff).
The Video/Multimedia Unit will produce films for use in local and international news reports about UNMIS in the Sudan; provide regular updates to broadcast networks of the troop-contributing countries; develop short video productions about the Mission for public viewing in the Outreach Centres and elsewhere; and issue newsletters, calendars, brochures and handouts for campaigns, including those supporting UNMIS programmes, such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and child protection.
The Unit is headed by a Video Producer (P-3) and assisted by one Print Writer (international United Nations Volunteer), one Print Editor (international United Nations Volunteer), one Webmaster (Field Service), one Camera Person (Field Service), one Photographer (Field Service), two Translators (national General Service staff), two Interpreters (national General Service staff), one Transcriber (national General Service staff) and one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff).
Field offices
The Communications and Public Information Office in field headquarters in Juba will be headed by a Deputy Chief Public Information Officer (P-4) who will be responsible for the day-to-day running of the Communications and Public Information Office in the south of the Sudan.
The Deputy Chief Public Information Officer will be assisted by one Special Campaigns Officer (P-3), one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Office comprises: (a) an Outreach Centre (one Outreach Centre Manager (National Professional Officer and one Outreach Centre Assistant (national General Service staff)); (b) a Media Relations Unit (one Public Information Officer (P-4) and one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff)); (c) a Radio Unit (one Deputy Chief of Radio (P-4) one Radio Editor (P-4), six Radio Producers (two P-4, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers), one Training Officer (P-3), one Broadcast Engineer (Field Service), 14 Radio Journalists (two national Professional Officers and 12 national General Service staff), five Studio Technicians (one international United Nations Volunteer and four national General Service staff), three Radio Presenters (national General Service staff), three Radio Translators (national General Service staff), one Transmitter Technician (national General Service staff), one Radio Management Assistant (national General Service staff) and four Drivers (national General Service staff)); (d) a Video/Multimedia Unit (one Print Writer (international United Nations Volunteer), one Video Producer/Cameraperson (Field Service), one Photographer (Field Service), one Production Assistant (national General Service staff), one Translator (national General Service staff), one Interpreter (national General Service staff) and one Transcriber (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Malakal, communications and public information programme objectives are pursued by one Public Information Officer (international United Nations Volunteer) and one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff), supported by three Radio Producers (two international United Nations Volunteers and one national Professional Officer), eight Radio Journalists (national General Service staff), three Radio Presenters (national General Service staff), one Radio Translator (national General Service staff), one Studio Technician (national General Service staff) and four Drivers (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Wau, communications and public information programme objectives are pursued by two Public Information Officers (one international United Nations Volunteer and one national Professional Officer), one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Administrative Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Kadugli, communications and public information programme objectives are pursued by one Public Information Officer (international United Nations Volunteer) and one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Communications and Public Information Office in the regional office in El Fasher is headed by a Deputy Chief Public Information Officer (P-4) who will supervise communications and public information activities throughout Darfur.
The Chief will be assisted by one Public Information Officer (international United Nations Volunteer) and supported by three Radio Producers (two international United Nations Volunteers and one national Professional Officer), eight Radio Journalists (one national Professional Officer and seven national General Service staff), three Radio Presenters (national General Service staff), one Translator (national General Service staff), one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff), four Studio Technicians (national General Service staff) and two Office Assistants (national General Service staff).
The sub-office in Nyala is supported by one Public Information Officer (international United Nations Volunteer) and one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff).
The sub-office in El Geneina is supported by one Public Information Officer (national Professional Officer).
The communications and public information programme in the regional office in Kassala is headed by one Public Information Officer (international United Nations Volunteer), assisted by one Public Information Assistant (national General Service staff) and supported by three Radio Producers (two international United Nations Volunteers and one national Professional Officer), five Radio Journalists (national General Service staff), three Radio Presenters (national General Service staff), two Radio Translators (national General Service staff), one Studio Technician (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
The proposed staffing establishment for offices reporting to the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General is as follows:
Immediate Office
The Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, an Assistant Secretary-General, will be responsible for developing and implementing strategies, policies and programmes in support of humanitarian assistance; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; return, recovery and reintegration; development coordination; protection; HIV/AIDS; and gender.
The Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in his/her capacity as United Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator, will head the United Nations country team and ensure that the respective arms of the United Nations presence in the Sudan work in a complementary manner; assist the Mission in developing close working relations with other partners involved in the peacebuilding and reconciliation process, such as donors, civil society organizations, NGOs and community groups; and within the Mission take the lead on resource mobilization.
The Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General will be assisted by two Deputy Resident Coordinators/Humanitarian Coordinators, one for northern Sudan, based in Khartoum, focusing on Darfur crises, and one in southern Sudan, based in Juba.
The two deputies will assist the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General in coordinating a unified United Nations programme in the Sudan that in 2005 is projected to be valued at $1.5 billion from extrabudgetary resources.
This coordination responsibility spans humanitarian assistance, post-conflict recovery and the first steps to development.
The two deputies will coordinate the return of up to 1.2 million internally displaced persons and refugees to their homes in the south and a further 100,000 to 200,000 internally displaced persons and refugees to their homes in Darfur.
Mission headquarters
The Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General will be assisted by a Deputy Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator (D-2) for northern Sudan, who will be responsible for the day-to-day management of the humanitarian and protection response to the Darfur crisis and will take the lead in conflict prevention and recovery efforts in the east of the Sudan.
The Office will be supported by one Special Assistant (P-4), one Reporting Officer (P-2), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
Field offices
The Deputy Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator (D-2) for the south at the field headquarters in Juba, will focus primarily on support to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and facilitating the return, recovery and reintegration of refugees and internally displaced persons.
The Office will be supported by one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
Humanitarian Assistance Liaison Unit
The Humanitarian Assistance Liaison Unit will contribute to expected accomplishment 4.1 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 4.
The Unit is responsible for supporting the international response to the humanitarian crisis in the Sudan, both in Darfur and in the rest of the country.
It will act in a complementary manner with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, advising the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General on humanitarian issues, and serve as liaison channel for civil-military coordination activities with United Nations military forces and with the African Union in Darfur.
Mission headquarters
The Unit is headed by a Senior Humanitarian Adviser (P-5), who is assisted by two Humanitarian Affairs Liaison Officers (P-4), four Humanitarian Officers (two P-3 and two national Professional Officers), one associate Humanitarian Officer (P-2), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
Field Offices
In the field headquarters in Juba, humanitarian, relief and recovery activities are headed by a Senior Humanitarian Affairs Liaison Officer (P-5) and supported by three Humanitarian Affairs Liaison Officers (P-3, national Professional Officer and international United Nations Volunteer) and one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Malakal, humanitarian, relief and recovery activities are carried out by five Humanitarian Affairs Liaison Officers (two P-3, two national Professional Officers and one international United Nations Volunteer).
Humanitarian, relief and recovery activities are carried out by two Humanitarian Affairs Liaison Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer) each, at the regional offices in Abyei and El Fasher and the sub-offices in Wau, El Geneina and Zalingei, respectively.
Humanitarian relief and recovery activities in the sub-office in Rumbek are carried out by four Humanitarian Affairs Liaison Officers (P-4, P-3, international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer), as even after the capital of the Government of Southern Sudan moves to Juba, Rumbek will continue to be a hub for humanitarian agencies requiring liaison with the assistance community and authorities.
Humanitarian, relief and recovery activities are carried out by one Humanitarian Affairs Liaison Officer (P-3) each, at the regional offices in Kadugli and Ed Damazin, respectively.
In the sub-office in Nyala, humanitarian relief and recovery activities are carried out by three Humanitarian Affairs Liaison Officers (P-4, P-3 and national Professional Officer).
In the regional office in Kassala, humanitarian relief and recovery programme activities are carried out by two Humanitarian Affairs Liaison Officers (P-2 and international United Nations Volunteer).
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section
The Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section contributes to expected accomplishment 4.2 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 4.
Under the guidance of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration component will offer technical support to assist the Sudanese to design, implement and monitor a national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme; demobilize combatants and associated armed groups as well as their dependants and effect their reintegration into a demilitarized society in close collaboration with relevant international partners, international development agents, the donor community and NGOs; and provide support to the Government of National Unity and the Government of Southern Sudan to develop projects to control possession, use and trafficking in armaments in the ceasefire zone.
Mission headquarters
The Head of the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section (D-1) will coordinate the overall management of the United Nations disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme for the Sudan and will specifically liaise with the Government of Southern Sudan and the Government of National Unity on policy issues at the ministerial level, as well as provide direct support to the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General in coordination with the Mission's sections.
The Section Head will be supported by one Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Planning Officer (P-5), one Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Information Officer (P-4), two Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers (national Professional Officers), one Reintegration Officer (P-3), one Small Arms Officer (P-3), one Community Sensitization Officer (P-3), two Programme Officers (national Professional Officer) and one Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Programme Assistant (national General Service staff).
One Gender/HIV-AIDS Officer (P-2) will develop a gender and HIV/AIDS programme for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities in close consultation with respective advisers who will be assisted by a Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officer (international United Nations Volunteer).
The Section will be supported by one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and three Drivers (national General Service staff).
Field offices
In the field headquarters in Juba, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities will be carried out by 12 Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers (one P-5, four P-4, four P-3, one P-2 and two national Professional Officers) supported by one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Malakal, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities will be coordinated by 12 Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers (one P-3, two P-2, three national Professional Officers, three international United Nations Volunteers and three national United Nations Volunteers) and three Programme Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Wau, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities will be carried out by nine Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers (one P-3, one P-2, three national Professional Officers, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national United Nations Volunteers) and three Programme Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Rumbek, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities will be carried out by 12 Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers (two P-3, two P-2, two national Professional Officers, four international United Nations Volunteers and two national United Nations Volunteers) and two Programme Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Kadugli, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities are going to be substantially more complex owing to the complicated political situation in Southern Kordofan, which includes the impending merger of Western and Southern Kordofan and the return of a large number of internally displaced persons.
This will lead to significant demographic changes with serious political implications.
Given the increased complexity of the task, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme activities at Kadugli will be coordinated by 11 Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers (one P-4, one P-3, two P-2, three national Professional Officers, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national United Nations Volunteers) and three Programme Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Ed Damazin, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities will be carried out by eight Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers (one P-3, one P-2, two national Professional Officers, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national United Nations Volunteers) and two Programme Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Aybei, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities will be carried out by eight Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers (one P-3, one P-2, two national Professional Officers, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national United Nations Volunteers) and three Programme Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the El Fasher regional office, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities will be carried out by one Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officer (P-4).
In the regional office in Kassala, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities will be carried out by 11 Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers (two P-3, two P-2, three national Professional Officers, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national United Nations Volunteers) and three Programme Assistants (national General Service staff).
Return, Recovery and Reintegration Section
The Return, Recovery and Reintegration Section contributes to expected accomplishments 4.1, 4.3 and 4.4 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 4.
The Section will coordinate with United Nations agencies and NGOs on issues pertaining to the planning and implementation of programmes supporting the return of displaced populations and ex-combatants to their communities, their reinsertion and the recovery of basic social services and livelihoods; work closely with protection, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, human rights and humanitarian assistance components to ensure a comprehensive and integrated approach; ensure that the development of sectoral and geographical policies is based on the empowerment of local communities and their local representative authorities; develop a methodology for area-based planning that is consistent with long-term capacity-building efforts and the development of sustainable mechanisms; and identify and implement durable solutions that can be translated into operational programmes.
The task facing the United Nations and the international community of coordinating and implementing a national return programme, involving up to some 4 million persons (not including Darfur), is immense.
The importance of the returns and reintegration process to the peace process, as referred to in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, cannot be understated.
Failure in the area of returns and reintegration would undermine the chances of peace in the Sudan.
As a result, the Mission must take a strong coordination and leadership role that mobilizes all United Nations and NGO agencies and donors, strongly advocates with the parties on protection and returnee rights and mobilizes the extrabudgetary resources necessary to sustain returnees on their way home and to support their communities of return.
It will not be involved in the delivery of return, recovery and reintegration services or operations, which are normally funded through extrabudgetary resources.
Mission headquarters
The Section has an External Relations Monitoring Unit and a Planning Unit.
The External Relations Monitoring Unit would produce regular reports for the Mission's Public Information Office, United Nations Headquarters and donors, whereas the Planning Unit would contribute to the development of policy and documentation on methodology, implementation and monitoring mechanisms.
The Planning Unit would also provide guidance on area-based planning, liaison with United Nations agencies and NGOs on consistency of planning across the country and formulate capacity-building measures.
The Section is headed by a Chief (D-1) and supported by one Liaison Officer (P-3), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
The External Relations Monitoring Unit will be headed by an External Relations Officer (P-3) and supported by two Liaison Officers (national Professional Officers) and one Programme Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Planning Unit will be staffed by two Planning Officers (P-4 and P-3), four Field Officers (two international United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers) and two Programme Officers (national Professional Officers).
Field offices
In the field headquarters in Juba, return, recovery and reintegration programme activities likewise will be coordinated by the Senior Return, Recovery and Reintegration Officer (P-5) and supported by two Planning Officers (P-4 and P-3), one Liaison Officer (P-3), four Field Officers (two international United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers), one Return, Recovery and Reintegration Information Officer (national Professional Officer), two Programme Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
In each of the sub-offices in Malakal and Wau, and the regional offices in Kadugli, Ed Damazin and Abyei, four Return, Recovery and Reintegration Officers (P-3, international United Nations Volunteer, national Professional Officer and national United Nations Volunteer) and one Programme Assistant (national General Service staff) will coordinate return in the area.
In the sub-office in Rumbek, six Return, Recovery and Reintegration Officers (one P-3, one P-2, one international United Nations Volunteer, two national Professional Officers and one national United Nations Volunteer) and one Programme Assistant (national General Service staff) will coordinate return in the area.
In the regional office in El Fasher, one Return, Recovery and Reintegration Officer (P-4) will coordinate return in Darfur.
In the regional office in Kassala, three Return, Recovery and Reintegration Officers (P-3, national Professional Officer and one national United Nations Volunteer), supported by one Programme Assistant (national General Service staff), will coordinate return in the area.
Development Coordination Unit
The Development Coordination Unit contributes to expected accomplishment 4.3 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 4.
The Unit will provide policy advice and strategic direction to stakeholders of the Multi-donor Trust Fund, including United Nations agencies and programmes, the Government of National Unity and the Government of Southern Sudan, to ensure its consistency with the United Nations workplan for 2005 and its successors, and the Joint Assessment Mission process.
The Unit will include three Development Liaison Officers (P-4, P-3 and national Professional Officer) who will be supported by one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
Protection Section
The Protection Section will contribute to expected accomplishment 4.4 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 4.
The Section will provide overall coordination and support to the protection response in the two main regions of concern — Darfur and southern Sudan — and will monitor and facilitate an appropriate response to protection concerns in other areas of the Sudan.
To this end, the Protection Section will be responsible for ensuring a coherent, comprehensive response by the key protection actors, including United Nations agencies (and, through the Protection Working Groups, the broader humanitarian community), the African Union, relevant Sudanese authorities and other parts of the Mission.
Specific activities include liaising and coordinating with the African Union, the humanitarian community and other key actors on protection matters; ensuring consolidated information structures/flows; providing strategic guidance, analysis and reporting on protection matters to the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General; liaising and advocating with the Government on protection concerns; liaising with and training other components of the Mission on the protection of civilians, focusing specifically on the special needs of women and children; and elaborating a national protection strategy involving all key actors.
In addition, the Child Protection Subsection will be responsible for investigating serious abuses of children's rights.
Mission headquarters
The Protection Section will be headed by a Head of Protection (D-1), who will be based at UNMIS headquarters in Khartoum.
The Chief will be supported by 13 Protection Officers (two P-4, four P-3, two P-2, two international United Nations Volunteers and three national Professional Officers).
The Child Protection Subsection will be headed by a Chief of Child Protection and Deputy Chief of Protection (P-5), who will provide overall management and administration of UNMIS child protection programmes (Darfur, southern Sudan, other areas) at headquarters and field levels; liaise with other agencies and Mission sections on child protection and on components of the peace process that require special measures for children; manages training; manages the child protection focal points system; investigates serious abuses of children's human rights; and advocates to end impunity for violations.
The Chief will be assisted by seven Child Protection Officers (one P-4, two P-3, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers).
The Protection Section will be supported by one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
Field offices
In the field headquarters in Juba, protection activities will be overseen by a Senior Protection Officer (P-5) supported by four Protection Officers (one P-3, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers), five Child Protection Officers (one P-4, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
In each of the sub-offices in Malakal and Wau, three Protection Officers (P-3, national Professional Officer and international United Nations Volunteer) will monitor protection issues in the area.
In the sub-office in Rumbek, three Protection Officers (P-4, national Professional Officer and international United Nations Volunteer) and one Child Protection Officer (P-3) will monitor protection issues in the area.
In each of the regional offices in Kadugli and Ed Damazin, two Protection Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer) will monitor protection issues in the area.
Protection issues in the regional office in Abyei will be monitored by three Protection Officers (one P-3 and two national Professional Officers).
Protection issues in the regional office in El Fasher will be monitored by four Protection Officers (P-5, P-3, national Professional Officer and international United Nations Volunteer).
Protection issues in the sub-office in Nyala will be monitored by three Protection Officers (P-4, national Professional Officer and international United Nations Volunteer).
Protection issues in each of the sub-offices in El Geneina and Zalingei will be monitored by two Protection Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer).
In the regional office in Kassala, protection issues will be monitored by two Protection Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer) and one Child Protection Officer (international United Nations Volunteer).
HIV/AIDS Unit
Mission headquarters
The HIV/AIDS Unit contributes to expected accomplishment 5.1 and would deliver related outputs in framework component 5.
The Unit is headed by an HIV/AIDS Adviser (P-4) who will primarily exercise an advisory role to the significant number of civilian and military United Nations staff within UNMIS.
The HIV/AIDS Adviser develops HIV/AIDS sensitization and awareness programmes and a comprehensive Mission-wide HIV prevention programme for the Mission's personnel and conducts education and training seminars focusing on vulnerable groups.
The Unit will include one HIV/AIDS Officer (P-2) and two HIV/AIDS Training Officers (international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer), supported by one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
Field offices
Field headquarters in Juba will include two HIV/AIDS Training Officers (international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer) and one HIV/AIDS Training Assistant (national General Service staff).
Gender Advisory Unit
The Gender Advisory Unit contributes to expected accomplishments 1.1, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.5, 4.2 and 4.4 and would deliver related outputs in framework components 1, 3 and 4.
The Unit advises the Government of National Unity, the Government of Southern Sudan and civil society on the integration of a gender perspective into the peace process; conducts workshops on gender issues; integrates gender perspective in all aspects of the Mission's activities and conducts regular orientation programmes on gender sensitization and mainstreaming for the Mission's military and civilian police personnel; and collects information, provides analysis and maintains a database on sexual violence against women in the Sudan.
The Unit will in particular, address gender-based violence, women in power decision-making, women and armed conflict, human rights of women and implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
Mission headquarters
The Gender Advisory Unit is headed by a Senior Gender Adviser (P-5) who will be supported by five Gender Affairs Officers (one P-3, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
Field offices
In the field headquarters in Juba, gender mainstreaming activities will be promoted by four Gender Affairs Officers (one P-4, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers) and supported by one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
In each of the sub-offices in Malakal and Wau, gender mainstreaming activities will be promoted by two Gender Affairs Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer).
In the regional office in Kadugli, gender mainstreaming activities will be promoted by one Gender Affairs Officer (P-3) and supported by one Gender Affairs Assistant (national General Service staff).
In each of the regional offices in Ed Damazin, Abyei and Kassala, and in the sub-office in Rumbek, gender mainstreaming activities are pursued by one Gender Affairs Officer (international United Nations Volunteer).
In the El Fasher regional office, gender mainstreaming activities are promoted by two Gender Affairs Officers (P-4 and national Professional Officer).
Force Commander
The Office of the Force Commander contributes to expected accomplishments 1.1, 1.2, and 2.1 and would deliver related outputs in framework components 1 and 2.
The primary task of the military component will be to monitor and verify lines of disengagement; assemble areas and redeploy forces north and south of the 1-1-56 boundary; form joint units; assist in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process; provide protection to civilians under imminent threat; and participate actively in the Ceasefire Joint Military Committee, the Area Joint Monitoring Committee, and the Joint Military Teams, monitoring the terms of the ceasefire agreement, including human rights violations, facilitating humanitarian relief efforts and establishing the conditions for the safe and sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
The Mission will also establish the United Nations Assistance Cell at African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa to serve as the channel of communication between the Mission and the African Union and thereby maximize the ability of the United Nations to help improve the effectiveness of the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS).
The Assistance Cell will maintain active contacts with senior African Union Commission officials and members of the Darfur Integrated Task Force regarding the status, support requirements and management of AMIS and the Technical Assistance Group of partners, which has been established in Addis Ababa to facilitate African Union Commission efforts to secure required resources and other support for AMIS, and will oversee the preparation of daily updates and ad hoc analytical reports on AMIS and on African Union Commission activities related to AMIS.
Each of the team sites in the Mission will comprise around 25 military observers, with a ratio of one Language Assistant and one Office Assistant for every 4 and 20 military observers, respectively.
Mission headquarters
The Office is headed by a Force Commander (D-2) and supported by two Administrative Assistants (Field Service), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
The United Nations Assistance Cell in Addis Ababa is staffed by one Principal Liaison Officer (D-1), one Logistics Officer (P-4), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
Field offices
The military headquarters at the field headquarters in Juba is supported by 14 national General Service staff (six Language Assistants, five Office Assistants and three Drivers).
In addition, support is provided to the Ceasefire Joint Military Committee by four Language Assistants (national General Service staff), four Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Drivers (national General Service staff).
Moreover, three team sites are situated in the area surrounding Juba, which are supported by 20 Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Office Assistants (national General Service staff).
The military headquarters in the sub-office in Malakal is supported by seven Language Assistants (national General Service staff), six Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, four team sites are situated in the area, which are supported by 25 Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and five Office Assistants (national General Service staff).
The military headquarters in the sub-office in Wau is supported by six Language Assistants (national General Service staff), five Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, two team sites are situated in the area which are supported by 14 Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Office Assistants (national General Service staff).
The military headquarters in the sub-office in Rumbek is supported by two Language Assistants (national General Service staff), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
The military headquarters in the regional office in Kadugli is supported by three Language Assistants (national General Service staff), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
In addition, three team sites are situated in the area, which are supported by eight Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Office Assistants (national General Service staff).
The military headquarters in the regional office in Ed Damazin is supported by six Language Assistants (national General Service staff), five Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and three Drivers (national General Service staff).
In addition, three team sites are situated in the area, which are supported by six Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and four Office Assistants (national General Service staff).
The military headquarters in the regional office in Abyei is supported by two Language Assistants (national General Service staff), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
In addition, one team site is situated in the area, which is supported by six Language Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Office Assistants (national General Service staff).
The military headquarters in the regional office in Kassala is supported by two Language Assistants (national General Service staff), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
In addition, one team site is situated in the area, which is supported by two Language Assistants (national General Service staff), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
(c) Mission support
In order to support one Mission headquarters in Khartoum; one field headquarters in Juba; five regional offices in Kadugli, Ed Damazin, Abyei, El Fasher and Kassala; and six sub-offices in Malakal, Wau, Rumbek, Nyala, El Geneina and Zalingei, composite Mission support offices will be established at each of the above locations.
In addition, a logistics base will be established at El Obeid to provide logistics support to offices in the Darfur region and southern Sudan.
All offices will operate within a framework of delegated authority for finance, personnel, procurement, imprest and petty cash, as well as certifying and approving authorities to operate as fully functional/independent offices within United Nations rules, procedures and policies, as specified by the Director of Administration.
The Chief, Administrative Services, and Chief, Integrated Support Services, will report directly to the Director of Administration along with other components of the Office of the Director of Administration, and the Chief, El Obeid logistics base, will report directly to the Deputy Director of Administration.
Although all Mission support offices will report administratively to the heads of the respective regional and sub-offices for day-to-day tasking, Regional Administrative Officers will have functional reporting to the Deputy Director, while Mission support in the sub-offices in Malakal, Wau and Rumbek will have functional reporting to the Regional Administrative Officer in the field headquarters in Juba and the sub-offices in Nyala, El Geneina and Zalingei will have functional reporting to the Regional Administrative Officer in El Fasher.
Office of the Director of Administration
The Office of the Director of Administration provides administrative, logistical and technical support to the military, civilian police and other civilian substantive offices of UNMIS in the implementation of the Mission's mandate, as reflected in the frameworks of the four operational components and their related outputs.
The lack of basic surface, river and air transportation, communications, supply and re-supply, medical and financial industry infrastructure as well as limited or non-existent accommodation facilities in the Sudan, especially in the southern part of the country, has contributed to the level of staffing being requested.
Mission headquarters
The Office is headed by a Director of Administration (D-2), who will be supported by a Deputy Director (D-1), one Senior Administrative Officer (P-5), one Administrative Officer (P-4), two Liaison Officers (national Professional Officer), three Administrative Assistants (Field Service), four Office Assistants (national General Service staff), three Drivers (national General Service staff) and one Board of Inquiry Officer (P-4).
Offices reporting directly to the Director of Administration include: (a) the Budget Section (Chief Budget Officer (P-5), three Budget Officers (one P-4 and two P-3), one Trust Fund Officer (P-4), four Budget Assistants (three Field Service and one national General Service staff), one Trust Fund Assistant (Field Service) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff)); and (b) the Safety Unit (Safety Officer (P-4), three Aviation Safety Officers (one P-3 and two national Professional Officers), two Aviation Safety Assistants (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), three Occupational Safety Officers (one P-3 and two national Professional Officers) and two Safety Assistants (national General Service staff)).
The Deputy Director of Administration (D-1), in addition to deputizing for the Director of Administration, will manage the complete supply chain functions and coordinate with the Chief, Administrative Services, the Chief, Integrated Support Services, and Regional Administrative Officers to synchronize the Mission's planning and resource allocation processes.
He/she will constantly monitor the level and quality of the support delivered to Mission headquarters, field headquarters, regional offices and sub-offices and recommend changes in resource allocation as the Mission evolves; and supervise the Integrated Training Unit, responsible for developing, delivering and assessing a complex programme of organizational and institutional professional development of both international and national staff, military staff officers and contingent personnel, military observers and police officers.
The Deputy Director of Administration will also directly supervise the logistics base at El Obeid, which is the main reception and transit centre for incoming and rotating military contingents.
Given the size and magnitude of the logistical and administrative support requirements in the Mission, there is need for a dedicated planning and coordination function to ensure that all support elements are effectively pulled together to deliver the level and quality of support necessary for the Mission to fulfil its mandate and to ensure that cross-cutting issues are appropriately addressed.
The Deputy Director of Administration will therefore be assisted by two Operations Support Officers (P-4 and national Professional Officer) and two Planning Assistants (Field Service) who will oversee the delivery of services and support to external clients.
The Office of the Deputy Director of Administration will be supported by two Office Assistants (national General Service staff).
Reporting directly to the Deputy Director will be the Chief, Training Unit (P-4), who is supported by six Training Officers (two P-3, two international United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers) and three Training Assistants (national General Service staff).
Field offices
In the field headquarters in Juba, the Immediate Office of Mission Support will be headed by a Regional Administrative Officer (P-5) and supported by one Liaison Officer (national Professional Officer), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), two Drivers (national General Service staff), four Training Officers (one P-3, one international United Nations Volunteer and two national Professional Officers) and one Training Assistant (national General Service staff).
In addition, support for three team sites would be provided by three Administrative Officers (Field Service) and three Camp Management Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Malakal, administrative and technical support is provided to the sub-office and its four observer team sites.
The Mission Support Section is supervised by one Administrative Officer (P-4), assisted by one Training Officer (national Professional Officer), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
In addition, support for four team sites would be provided by four Administrative Officers (Field Service) and four Camp Management Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Wau, administrative and technical support is provided to the sub-office and its two observer team sites.
The Mission Support Section is supervised by one Administrative Officer (P-4) who is assisted by one Training Officer (national Professional Officer), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
In addition, support for two team sites would be provided by two Administrative Officers (Field Service) and two Camp Management Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Rumbek, Mission support is managed by one Administrative Officer (P-3).
In addition, support for one team site would be provided by one Administrative Officer (Field Service) and one Camp Management Assistant (national General Service staff).
In each of the regional offices in Kadugli and Ed Damazin, administrative and technical support to the respective regional offices and their dependencies is provided by a Mission Support Section supervised by one Administrative Officer (P-4) and supported by one Training Officer (national Professional Officer), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and a Driver (national General Service staff).
In addition, support for three team sites at each of the regional offices in Kadugli and Ed Damazin would be provided by three Administrative Officers (Field Service) and three Camp Management Assistants (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Abyei, administrative and technical support is provided by a Mission Support Section managed by one Administrative Officer (P-3).
In addition, support for one team site would be provided by one Administrative Officer (Field Service) and one Camp Management Assistant (national General Service staff).
In the El Fasher regional office, administrative and technical support is provided by a Mission Support Section supervised by a Regional Administration Officer (P-5) and supported by one Liaison Officer (national Professional Officer), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), one Training Officer (national Professional Officer) and one Training Assistant (national General Service staff).
In each of the sub-offices in Nyala and El Geneina, the Mission Support Section is managed by one Administrative Officer (Field Service) and one Administrative Assistant (Field Service).
In the sub-office in Zalingei, the Mission Support Section is managed by one Administrative Officer (Field Service).
In the regional office in Kassala, the Mission Support Section is headed by an Administrative Officer (P-3) and supported by one Training Officer (national Professional Officer) and three Logistics Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff).
In addition, support for one team site would be provided by one Administrative Officer (Field Service) and one Camp Management Assistant (national General Service staff).
The troops and majority of civilian staff deployed in the south and west of the Sudan will be supported from the logistics base at El Obeid.
This town is the centre of commercial activity in south and central Sudan and is situated on a major highway.
It is near a river port, has a railhead and an airport capable of handling heavy lift aircraft.
The establishment at the logistics base will include a level-II workshop, a transit camp, warehouses, fuel and rations reserves.
The Logistics Base will also act as a distribution point for all troops and civilian deployment in Darfur and southern Sudan.
It will be headed by a Chief Logistics Officer (P-5) who will be supported by two Logistics Officers (P-4 and Field Service), one Training Officer (national Professional Officer), one Administrative Officer (Field Service), two Administrative Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Language Assistant (national General Service staff).
Administrative Services
The Administrative Services will be headed by a Chief of Administrative Services (D-1) who is responsible for planning, coordinating and providing administrative services in support of the substantive civilian, military and civilian police resources of the Mission.
The Administrative Services comprises financial services, human resources administration and management, travel services, acquisition of goods and services for the Mission, general services and health services.
The Chief of Administrative Services will also be responsible, through the Sections, for the delivery of services in the logistics base and the regional, liaison and sub-offices in the Mission area.
The personnel at these locations will report functionally to their respective Administrative Services Sections and execute their responsibilities as per guidelines established by the Director of Administration and the Chief of Administrative Services.
The Immediate Office of the Chief of Administrative Services would comprise one Administrative Officer (P-3), two Administrative Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff) and one Driver (national General Service staff).
The Finance Section, headed by a Chief Finance Officer (P-5), is responsible for establishing and maintaining financial controls, maintaining and administering Mission accounts, disbursement of funds in settlement of vendors'/suppliers' invoices and staff travel claims, administration of the national staff payroll and subsistence allowance payments, and administration of the Mission bank accounts.
The Section includes Accounts, Payroll, Vendors, Travel Claims and the Cashier's Offices.
The Chief Finance Officer is assisted by one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), one System Administrator (Field Service), one Database Administrator (Field Service) and one Database Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Section also includes four Finance Officers (P-4) responsible for Accounts, Payroll, Payments and the Cashier's Office.
The Finance Section is further supported by 38 Finance Assistants (11 Field Service, one national Professional Officer and 26 national General Service staff) and one Archiving Assistant (Field Service).
The Human Resources Section provides integrated and strategic human resources management services to the Mission in staff requirement planning, staff administration and recruitment.
In addition, the Section prepares and reviews job descriptions for the various functions in the Mission; establishes and administers the work of local permanent and ad hoc panels; administers all official travel and visa requirements for the Mission; oversees the monitoring of military observers and civilian police entitlements and advises United Nations personnel on entitlements/benefits in line with the status of their appointments, guidelines and procedures to be followed in matters concerning their service with UNMIS; and undertakes an advisory role in planning, resource allocation, identification and matching of skills gaps, and the retention of best performers plus development of staff.
The Section will oversee the human resources-related operations in the logistics base and the regional, liaison, and sub-offices in the Mission area and will be headed by a Chief of Human Resources (P-5).
The Chief of Human Resources will be assisted by one Associate Human Resources Officer (P-2), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Human Resources Section will comprise the International Staff Unit, the National Staff Unit, the Recruitment Unit and the United Nations Military Observers/Civilian Police Monitoring Unit.
These units will be staffed by seven Human Resources Officers (two P-4, three P-3, one P-2 and one national Professional Officer) and assisted by 29 Human Resources Assistants (14 Field Service and 15 national General Service staff).
The Human Resources Section also includes a Travel Unit, which is headed by a Chief Travel Officer (P-3) and assisted by one Travel Officer (Field Service), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), four Travel Assistants (two Field Service and two national General Service staff), four Protocol Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Procurement Section is headed by a Chief Procurement Officer (P-5) who is responsible for the local and international procurement of goods and services for the Mission, develops procurement sources and maintains a roster of vendors, conducts market surveys and contract negotiations, and monitors contracts implementation.
The Section comprises the Contracts Management Unit and the Purchasing, Processing and Field Procurement Liaison Units.
The Chief Procurement Officer is supported by eight Procurement Officers (three P-4 and five P-3), 28 Procurement/Contract Assistants (eight Field Service and 20 national General Service staff), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The General Services Section is responsible for the processing of claims and property survey cases, mail/pouch operations, documents reproduction services, registry and electronic archives, conference/translation and interpretation services, and facilities and transit camp management services.
The Section is headed by a Chief General Services Officer (P-5) and supported by one Associate General Services Officer (P-2), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The General Services Section comprises: (a) the Facilities Management Unit, responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of up to eight locations in Khartoum, including janitorial and waste management services (two Facilities Management Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer), five Facilities Management Assistants (two Field Service and three national General Service staff)); (b) the Receiving and Inspection Unit, responsible for receiving and inspecting all commodities at all locations in Khartoum (Chief, Receipt and Inspection (P-3), Receipt and Inspection Officer (Field Service) and five Receipt and Inspection Assistants (two Field Service and three national General Service staff)); (c) the Property Control and Inventory Unit (PCIU), responsible for the control and maintenance of the Mission assets inventory and field assets control system (one Property Control Officer (P-4), one Associate Officer (P-2) and eight PCIU Assistants (three Field Service and five national General Service staff)); (d) the Registry, Archives and Mail Unit, responsible for archives/records management, documents imaging and documents reproduction and managing the Mission's electronic archives (one Information Management Officer (P-4), eight Registry Assistants (three Field Service and five national General Service staff) and three Messengers (national General Service staff)); (e) the Language Unit, responsible for providing interpretation and translations of documents in Arabic and other local languages (a Chief (P-4), one Translator (P-3), two Interpreters (national Professional Officers), two Translators (national Professional Officers) and four Language Assistants (national General Service staff)); and (f) the Claims and Property Survey Unit, responsible for processing third-party claims against the United Nations, claims for loss or damage to personal effects of the Mission personnel and contingent-owned property (three Claims Officers (P-4, P-3 and national Professional Officer), four Claims Assistants (three Field Service and one national General Service staff), one Property Survey Board Officer (P-3) and two Property Survey Board Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff)).
The Health Services Section comprises two separate units — the Medical Services Unit and the Counselling Unit.
The Section is headed by a Chief Medical Officer (P-5), who also supervises the Medical Services Unit.
The Medical Services Unit coordinates and delivers integrated civilian-military medical services, organizes medical care, health maintenance and preventive medical treatment of all UNMIS personnel, coordinates medical and casualty evacuations within and outside the Mission area, plans for medical contingencies and provides for inspection of contingent-owned and operated medical facilities.
This Unit is supported by four Medical Officers (one P-4, one P-3 and two national Professional Officers), one Pharmacist (P-2), one Head Nurse (P-2), four Nurses (national General Service staff), one Medical Equipment Technician (international United Nations Volunteer), two Laboratory Technicians (national General Service staff), four Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff) and two Administrative Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff).
The Counselling Unit works with the staff for stress management and counselling and deals with any personal problems owing to the harsh living conditions in the Mission area.
The Counselling Unit includes four Staff Counsellors (one P-4, one P-3 and two national Professional Officers), one Counselling Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
Field offices
In the field headquarters in Juba, Administrative Services will include finance, human resources management, procurement, contract administration, pouch and mail, interpretation and translation offices.
In addition, medical services will be provided by a Level-I clinic, which will be co-located with the military Level-II hospital to constitute a United Nations Medical Centre that will provide support to all United Nations system staff in the states of Western Equatoria, Bahr Al Jebel and Eastern Equatoria.
Administrative services in the field headquarters in Juba will be provided through the following offices: (a) Finance (one Finance Assistant (Field Service)); (b) Personnel (three Human Resources Officers (P-3, Field Service and national Professional Officer) and two Human Resources Assistants (national General Service staff)); (c) Procurement (one Procurement Assistant (national General Service staff)); (d) General Services (one General Services Officer (Field Service), three Camp Management Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), two Property Control Assistants (one Field Service and one national General Service staff), three General Services Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Messengers (national General Service staff)); (e) Language Services (one Interpreter/Translator (national Professional Officer) and 10 Language Assistants (national General Service staff)); and (f) Medical Services (two Medical Officers (P-4 and national Professional Officer), one Medical Technician (national General Service staff), two Nurses (national General Service staff), two Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff) and one Medical Records Assistant (national General Service staff)).
In the sub-office in Malakal, administrative services are provided by one General Services Officer (Field Service), two General Services Assistants (national General Service staff), one PCIU Assistant (national General Service staff), three Camp Management Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), one Interpreter/Translator (national Professional Officer) and six Language Assistants (national General Service staff).
Medical services are provided by a Level-I clinic, which will be co-located with the military Level II hospital to create a United Nations Medical Centre that will provide support to all United Nations system staff in Unity, Upper Nile and Jongli states.
The civilian staff at the clinic will include two Medical Officers (international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer), one Medical Technician (national General Service staff), two Nurses (national General Service staff) and one Ambulance Driver (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Wau, administrative services are provided by one General Services Officer (Field Service), two General Services Assistants (national General Service staff), one PCIU Assistant (national General Service staff), three Camp Management Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), one Interpreter/Translator (national Professional Officer) and six Language Assistants (national General Service staff).
Medical services are provided by a Level-I Clinic, which will be co-located with the military Level-II hospital to provide support to all United Nations system staff in the three states.
The civilian staff of the medical clinic will include two Medical Officers (international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer), one Medical Technician (national General Service staff), one Ambulance Driver (national General Service staff) and two Nurses (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Rumbek, administrative services are provided by one General Services Assistant (Field Service) and one Camp Management Assistant (national General Service staff).
Medical Services are provided by a Level-I medical clinic which will be staffed by two Medical Officers (international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer), one Medical Technician (national General Service staff), two Nurses (national General Service staff), two Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff) and one Medical Records Clerk (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Kadugli, administrative services are provided by one General Services Officer (Field Service), two General Services Assistants (national General Service staff), one PCIU Assistant (national General Service staff), two Camp Management Assistants (national General Service staff), one Interpreter/Translator (national Professional Officer) and six Language Assistants (national General Service staff).
Medical services are provided by a Level-I Clinic, which will be co-located with the military Level-III hospital to provide support to all United Nations system staff.
The civilian staff of the medical clinic at the headquarters will include two Medical Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer), two Nurses (national General Service staff) and two Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Ed Damazin, administrative services are provided by one General Services Officer (Field Service), two General Services Assistants (national General Service staff), one PCIU Assistant (national General Service staff), two Camp Management Assistants (national General Service staff), one Interpreter/Translator (national Professional Officer) and five Language Assistants (national General Service staff).
Medical services are provided by a Level-I Clinic, which will be co-located with the military Level-II hospital to provide support to all United Nations system staff in the three states.
The civilian staff of the medical clinic at the headquarters will include two Medical Officers (international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer), one Medical Technician (national General Service staff), two Nurses (national General Service staff) and one Ambulance Driver (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Abyei, administrative services are provided by three General Services Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), one PCIU Assistant (national General Service staff), two Camp Management Assistants (national General Service staff), one Interpreter/Translator (national Professional Officer) and four Language Assistants (national General Service staff).
Medical services are provided by a Level-I Clinic that includes two Medical Officers (international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer), two Nurses (international United Nations Volunteer and national General Service staff), one Medical Technician (national General Service staff) and two Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff).
In the El Fasher regional office, administrative services will be provided through the following offices: (a) Finance (one Finance Assistant (Field Service)); (b) Human Resources (two Human Resources Officers (Field Service and national Professional Officer) and one Human Resources Assistant (national General Service staff)); (c) Procurement (one Procurement Assistant (national General Service staff)); and (d) General Services (one Associate General Services Officer (P-2), one Facilities Management Assistant (national General Service staff), one PCIU Assistant (national General Service staff) and two General Services Assistants (national General Service staff)).
One Interpreter/Translator (national Professional Officer) and six Language Assistants (national General Service staff) will provide language services on a pooled basis for the whole office in El Fasher.
Medical services will be provided by a Level-I clinic, which will include two Medical Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer), two Medical Technicians (national General Service staff), two Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff), two Nurses (national General Service staff) and one Medical Records Assistant (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Nyala, medical services will be provided by two Medical Officers (international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer), two Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff) and two Nurses (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Geneina, medical services will be provided by two Medical Officers (international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer), one Medical Technician (national General Service staff), two Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff) and two Nurses (national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Zalingei, medical services will be provided by two Nurses (international United Nations Volunteer and national General Service staff) and two Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Kassala, administrative services include three General Services Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), one PCIU Assistant (national General Service staff), two Camp Management Assistants (national General Service staff), one Interpreter/Translator (national Professional Officer), four Language Assistants (national General Service staff), two Medical Officers (international United Nations Volunteer and national Professional Officer), one Medical Technician (national General Service staff), two Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff), two Nurses (international United Nations Volunteer and national General Service staff) and a Medical Records Clerk (national General Service staff).
In the El Obeid logistics base, administrative services include: (a) Procurement (two Procurement Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff)); (b) General Services (one Administrative Officer (P-3), one General Services Officer (national Professional Officer), three Asset Disposal Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Facilities Management Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Property Control and Inventory Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), four Receipt and Inspection Assistants (one Field Service and three national General Service staff) and two Language Assistants (national General Service staff)); and (c) Medical (two Medical Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer), one Medical Technician (national General Service staff), two Ambulance Drivers (national General Service staff) and two Nurses (national General Service staff)).
Integrated Support Services
Integrated Support Services would be headed by a Chief of Integrated Support Services who plans, coordinates and delivers the technical and logistical support to the Mission's substantive, military and civilian police resources, including the integrated civilian-military logistics support planning; implements engineering projects and the maintenance of buildings; and manages air and transport operations, communications and information technology services, the provision of general supplies and the movement of equipment, goods and supplies throughout the Mission area.
Integrated Support Services is also responsible for the management of the memorandum of understanding with the troop-contributing countries for arrival and periodic verification of the contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment of the contingents.
The Chief of Integrated Support Services, through the respective sections, will also be responsible for the delivery of services at the logistics base and the regional, liaison and sub-offices in the Mission area.
Mission headquarters
Integrated Support Services comprises the Office of the Chief, the Joint Logistics Operations Centre, the Movement Control Section, the Contingent-owned Equipment Section, the Geographic Information Systems Section, the Communications and Information Technology Section, the Transport Section, the Air Operations Section, the Supply and Contracts Management Section and the Engineering Section.
The functions of the Chief of Integrated Support Services include planning and coordination of the logistical and technical support activities of the Mission and follow-up operational matters with the Integrated Support Services sections.
The Chief maintains close contact with the Office of the Chief of Administrative Services, the Chief of Staff of the force headquarters, the Chief of the civilian police, the Chief Military Observer and other section chiefs of the Administrative Services in matters related to the coordinated implementation of Mission support plans.
The Office also coordinates Integrated Support Services inputs in the Mission's budget proposals.
The Chief of Integrated Support Services (D-1), in the Mission headquarters in Khartoum, is supported by a Deputy Chief (P-5), one Administrative Officer (P-3), one Administrative Assistant (Field Service), one Budget Assistant (Field Service), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
The Joint Logistics Operation Centre, headed by a Chief Joint Logistics Operation Centre Officer (P-5), is responsible, through integrated military-civilian structures, for the provision of support to the deployment, redeployment and sustainment of military contingents and civilian personnel deployed in the Mission area, and serves as a focal point for coordinating logistics operations between UNMIS and the humanitarian development community in the Sudan.
The Chief is assisted by five Logistics Officers (two P-4 and three P-3), seven Logistics Assistants (five Field Service and two national General Service staff), two Office Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Drivers (national General Service staff).
The Movement Control Section is headed by a Chief Movement Control Officer (P-4) who is responsible for the effective management and physical transportation of personnel, distribution of material and utilization of resources to facilitate movement across the Mission.
The Chief Movement Control Officer is responsible for the planning and execution of all movements of personnel and cargo by air, sea, rail and road within, to and from the Mission area; deployment, rotation and repatriation of military contingents, contingent-owned and United Nations-owned equipment; customs clearance and freight forwarding, including dangerous goods; movement of civilian and military personnel in the Mission area; passenger and cargo handling; and warehousing operations at the airport and the Logistics Base.
A Movement Control Officer (P-3) is attached to the Office of the Chief Movement Control Officer, who is responsible for the overall detailed advance planning, budgeting and coordination of all major, non-routine movements and the deployment, rotation and repatriation of military contingents as well as the redeployment in theatre of formed military units.
The Officer will coordinate and liaise with the military units, to plan requirements and ensure that the troops and their equipment are rotated safely and to raise and manage movement control aspects of contingency plans.
The Chief Movement Control Officer is supported by two Administrative Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff).
The Movement Control Section consists of: (a) the Passengers Unit (two Movement Control Assistants (Field Service) and six Movement Control Assistants (national General Service staff)); (b) the Container Management Unit (four Movement Control Assistants (two Field Service and two national General Service staff)); (c) the Rotation Unit (two Movement Control Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff)); (d) the Khartoum Detachment (four Movement Control Assistants (two Field Service and two national General Service staff)); (e) the Customs Clearance Unit (two Movement Control Officers (national Professional Officers) and six Movement Control Assistants (two Field Service and four national General Service staff)); (f) the Operations Unit (one Movement Control Officer (P-3) and three Movement Control Assistants (two Field Service and one national General Service staff)); and (g) the Freight Unit (12 Movement Control Assistants (two Field Service and 10 national General Service staff)).
The Contingent-owned Equipment Section would be responsible for the management of memorandums of understanding for troops and equipment deployed in UNMIS for mandated deployment of 9,250 contingent personnel with a variety of complex military hardware.
The Section would be responsible for the conduct of the arrival of contingent-owned equipment, periodical and repatriation inspections and verifications, preparation of inspection, verification and contingent self-sustainment reports and maintenance of databases, as well as arranging for the training of contingent personnel in the United Nations contingent-owned equipment policies and procedures.
The Section Chief (P-4) is assisted by four Contingent-owned Equipment Officers (P-3), four Contingent-owned Equipment Assistants (Field Service), one Database Administrator (Field Service), two Database Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Geographic Information Services Section is responsible for the collection, verification, management and storage, and the manipulation of the geospatial data and analysis of such data so as to derive products to be utilized in planning, briefing, security and operations.
The Section will also undertake both hardcopy map production and distribution and electronic output in the form of digital files and Intranet mapping services; and coordinate all mapping and Geographic Information Services efforts through the Sudan Inter-agency Mapping Working Group.
This group comprises all United Nations agencies, many NGOs and representatives of both the Government of the Sudan and SPLM.
The Section is headed by the Chief, Geographic Information Services and Mapping (P-4), and assisted by 16 Geographic Information Services Officers (one P-3, 13 international United Nations Volunteers and two national Professional Officers) and five Geographic Information Services Assistants (one Field Service and four national General Service staff).
The Communications and Information Technology Section, headed by a Chief Communications and Information Technology Officer (P-5), is responsible for the planning, installation and maintenance of all communications and information infrastructure and systems in the Mission area for all Mission components.
The Mission headquarters has a rear communications link with New York and the United Nations Logistics Base and the domestic system within the Sudan, including eight locations dispersed over Khartoum, the El Obeid logistics base, the Port Sudan logistics component, the El Fasher regional office, Mission offices in southern Sudan and military units dispersed over south Sudan.
Considering that the Section manages a large number of staff and an inventory in excess of 15,500 items and is responsible for budgetary and financial matters, including tracking and accounting for cost of commercial communications which include official as well as private communication, it is essential that the Section have an organizational unit which deals with all these administrative and financial matters.
The Section is therefore supported by a Budget Assistant (Field Service), one Asset Manager (Field Service), four Asset Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Administrative Assistants (national General Service staff).
The Communications and Information Technology Section has two units, a Communications Unit and an Information Technology Unit.
The Communications Unit is headed by a Chief Communications Officer (P-4) and assisted by one Communications Officer (Field Service) with responsibility for the installation, operation and maintenance of the communications infrastructure and systems throughout the Mission area, inclusive of very small aperture terminal (VSAT) systems, telephone exchanges, repeaters and transmitters, microwave links and radio studios and relays.
The Unit comprises four Communication Operators (Field Service), three Satellite Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), four Telephone Technicians (two Field Service and two national General Service staff), a Telephone Billing Supervisor (Field Service), three Telephone Billing Assistants (national General Service staff), four VHF-UHF Technicians (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), four Microwave Link Technicians (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), four Special Equipment Technicians (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), four Rigger Technicians (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), eight Switchboard Operators (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Information Technology Unit, headed by a Chief Information Technology Officer (P-4), is responsible for the installation, operation, maintenance and repair of the Mission's information technology networks and infrastructure, application development, network security, access control and data integrity, applications and database systems administration, user support and computer application training.
The Unit is staffed by an Information Technology Officer (P-3), four Systems Developers (two Field Service and two national General Service staff), six User Support Assistants (two Field Service and four national General Service staff), six Help Desk Assistants (one Field Service and five national General Service staff), six LAN/Network Assistants (two Field Service and four national General Service staff), four Field Systems/Applications Assistants (two Field Service and two national General Service staff) and six Information Technology Assistants (national General Service staff).
The Transport Section is headed by a Chief Transport Officer (P-5) who plans, organizes and controls the Mission's vehicular transportation services, arranges for the maintenance and repair of the Mission's vehicle fleet and operation of vehicle workshops, allocates and distributes vehicles, formulates and implements road safety standards and procedures and maintenance guidelines, manages spare parts stores and supplies, and provides dispatch services.
The vehicle fleet, inclusive of specialized vehicles, airport vehicles and engineering vehicles, is proposed at 2,189 vehicles.
The Chief Transport Officer is assisted by one Transport Officer (P-4) who looks after the day-to-day activities of the Section.
The Section also includes one Budget Assistant (Field Service) and one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff), who assist the Chief Transport Officer in the preparation of the budget and monitoring of the financial transactions of the Section.
The Transport Office in Khartoum consists of four units, the Fleet Operations Unit, the Assets Management Unit, the Supplies/Stores Management Unit and the Fleet Maintenance Unit.
The Fleet Operations Unit is responsible for all matters relating to the movement of personnel and cargo and the conduct of driving test assessments; the briefing of all incoming Mission personnel on transport procedures; the testing, training and the issuance of driving permits; the tasking and utilization of heavy and light vehicle fleets, including the movement of cargo; the arrangement of transportation for approximately 1,000 personnel per day; the monitoring and recording of all mileage and fuel consumed by vehicle trip ticket/Carlog; and the provision of drivers to all passenger vehicles and utility vehicles.
The Chief, Fleet Operations Unit (Field Service), is supported by three Dispatch Assistants (national General Service staff), two Driving Test Instructors (Field Service and national General Service staff) and 30 Drivers (national General Service staff).
The Assets Management Unit is responsible for assigning and monitoring a fleet of over 2,189 vehicles and trailers, throughout the Mission area, liaising with transport assistants in Mission offices and the Contingent-owned Equipment Unit, and addressing all matters pertaining to the vehicle establishment.
The Unit, supported by field staff, is responsible for verifying and monitoring United Nations and Contingent-owned Equipment vehicles that are deployed in the sectors and team sites.
The Unit is headed by an Assets Manager (Field Service) supported by one Transport Assistant (Field Service).
The Transport Assistant supports the Unit in all tasks assigned by the Chief, updates and extracts all data in the database concerning the vehicle fleet and receives vehicles arriving in the Mission.
The Supplies/Stores Management Unit is responsible for the management of spare parts, tools and equipment for headquarters and its onward supply to the regions.
The Unit is supervised by a Transport Stores Supervisor (Field Service) and supported by three Store Assistants (national General Service staff).
The Fleet Maintenance Unit monitors and takes actions to prevent accidents, carries out technical evaluations of accident vehicles, maintains the Carlog system and extracts data for analysis purposes.
The Unit is headed by a Transport Officer (Field Service) and nine Vehicle Technicians (four Field Service and five national General Service staff).
The Aviation Section is headed by a Chief Aviation Officer (P-5) who plans and coordinates the utilization of the Mission's air assets including commercial aircraft and aircraft provided under the letter of assist arrangements; implements a coordinated air support system throughout the Mission area; develops and implements aviation standard operating procedures; is responsible for the operational control of the air charter contracts, airfield services and airfield rehabilitation projects; manages air terminal operations; arranges for surveys and assessment of the remote sites airfields and helicopter landing zones; provides threat assessment, aeronautical and meteorological information to aircrews; liases with national and international aviation authorities; and provides flight clearances and flight following.
The Chief is assisted by an Administrative Assistant (Field Service) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Aviation Section will have three units, namely, the Air Operations Centre, the Technical Compliance Unit and the Air Terminal Unit.
The Air Operations Centre will be headed by a Chief of Air Operations Centre (P-4).
The Centre will be capable of 24-hour operations and, as such, the tasking desk, responsible for both planning and daily operations, will be manned on a rotational basis by a team of two Air Operations Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer) and four Air Operations Assistants (two Field Service and two national General Service staff).
The Centre will also control the centralized tasking of the Mission-wide Air Dispatch Team (two Field Service and four national General Service staff), responsible for the rigging of under-slung helicopter loads.
Centralized Mission-level flight following will also be conducted within the Mission by three Flight Followers (national General Service staff).
In addition, one Driver (national General Service staff) will be attached to the Centre.
The Technical Compliance Unit will be responsible for the management of all commercial aviation contracts, letters of assist, air surfaces contracts, air charter agreements, processing of usage reports and fuel statistics.
This Unit will also assist the Chief Aviation Officer in monitoring and managing the Section budget and will be supported by a Contracts Administrator (P-3) and assisted by five Contracts Assistants (three Field Service and two national General Service staff).
The Air Terminal Unit is headed by an Air Terminal Officer (P-4) and is responsible for ensuring that all surface movement of aircraft and vehicles is conducted in a safe manner, that rules are adhered to and that the aircraft are parked and manoeuvred on the ground, as required.
He/she will ensure that all repairs on the manoeuvring area are identified and reported to the Chief Air Operations Officer.
In addition, he/she will be in charge of controlling all vehicles accessing and moving on the tarmac.
The Unit will also be responsible for assessing the infrastructure repair needs for sector and other airports and helipads.
Additionally, this Unit will establish the mission search and rescue concept and provide training to United Nations military observers and the civilian police on setting up the night helicopter landing sights.
The Air Terminal Officer will be assisted by one Terminal Officer (Field Service) and three Air Terminal Assistants (two Field Service and one national General Service staff).
The Supply Section is headed by a Chief Supply Officer, who implements the Mission's expendable and non-expendable commodities supply programme and administers and arranges for replenishment of specialized stores and general supplies.
The Supply Section would be responsible for warehousing and distributing supplies throughout the Mission area.
The Chief Supply Officer (P-5) is supported by one Supply Operations Officer (P-3), one Budget Assistant (Field Service), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Supply Section is comprised of: (a) the General Supply Unit (one Supply Officer (P-4), one Asset Manager (Field Service), one Asset Assistant (national General Service staff), one Quality Assurance Assistant (Field Service), one Warehouse Manager (Field Service), three Supply Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), two Inventory Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff), six Warehouse/Forklift Drivers/Material Handling Equipment Operations Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff)); (b) the Fuel Supply Unit (Chief, Fuel Supply Unit (P-4), one Fuel Contracts Administrator (Field Service), four Fuel Supply Assistants (two Field Service and two national General Service staff), two Quality Control Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff)); and (c) the Rations Supply Unit (one Supply Officer (P-4), one Food Inspector (Field Service), one Rations Contract Administrator (Field Service), two Rations Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff), two Logistics Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff)).
The Engineering Section is headed by a Chief Engineer (P-5) who plans engineering work in the Mission area; implements the construction of buildings and facilities refurbishment projects; supervises the implementation of contractual engineering work; arranges for the maintenance of the Mission's office premises and accommodation facilities; administers engineering stores and supplies; provides for the installation and operation of water purification and bottling plants; supervises the rehabilitation, as necessary, of the airfields; supervises installation and maintenance of generators; addresses environmental concerns; ensures that the engineering works take care of the local environment conditions and laws; and keeps a record of the engineering assets of the Mission.
The Chief Engineer is assisted by one Civil Engineer (P-4), one Environmental Engineer (P-4), one Engineering Liaison Officer (national Professional Officer), one Contracts Administrator (P-3), one Budget Assistant (Field Service), one Administrative Assistant (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Section is further divided into four units, namely, the Project Management Unit, the Asset Management and Material Unit, the Buildings Management Unit and the Water and Sanitation Unit.
The Project Management Unit is responsible for the design work of a large number of projects, including Mission headquarters in Khartoum, field headquarters in Juba, the United Nations Air Terminal Complex in Khartoum and permanent camps.
The Unit will also be responsible for monitoring the design work and supervising the various consultants, preparing briefs and determining requirements for facilities, preparation of documentation for the procurement of materials, the rental of construction equipment and the establishment of minor works contracts.
The office will be headed by an Engineer (P-4) and assisted by an Architect (P-3), an Associate Engineer (P-2), three Draftspersons (two Field Service and one national General Service staff) and an Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
The Asset Management and Material Unit is responsible for maintaining the records of engineering assets of the Mission, including assigning bar codes, periodic physical verification and maintaining a FACS database for all assets.
In addition, the Unit will keep track of engineering materials at various locations.
The Unit will be staffed with one Asset Manager (Field Service) and assisted by eight Inventory Assistants (one Field Service and seven General Service staff).
The Buildings Management Unit will be responsible for the maintenance of the buildings, camps and other locations for general repair and maintenance, electrical, generator, heating, ventilation and air conditioning, and civil and other related repairs of structures and appliances installed in Khartoum.
In addition, the Unit will coordinate and provide guidance to building management staff deployed in the field.
The Unit will be headed by a Building Management Services Engineer (P-3) and will be assisted by 11 Generator Mechanics (two Field Service and nine national General Service staff), 11 Electrical Assistants (two Field Service and nine national General Service staff), 11 Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Assistants (two Field Service and nine national General Service staff) and 19 General Maintenance Assistants (two Field Service and 17 national General Service staff).
The Water and Sanitation Unit will oversee the installation and operation of water purification and bottling plants at various locations.
In addition, the Unit will provide water and sanitation services to locations in Khartoum, provide guidance on water and sanitation quality in the field offices and conduct periodic inspections of water and sanitation facilities.
The Unit will be headed by a Water and Sanitation Engineer (P-3) and assisted by five Water and Sanitation Assistants (one Field Service and four national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
Field offices
Integrated Support Services in the field headquarters in Juba will be supervised by a Logistics Officer (P-4) who will be supported by two Logistics Assistants (national General Service staff).
Integrated Support Services will include the following offices: (a) Communications (one Communications Officer (P-3), two Communications Operators (Field Service), four Telephone Technicians (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), four VHF/HF Radio Technicians (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), three Microwave Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Satellite Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), two Communications Technicians (national General Service staff) and four Switchboard Operators (national General Service staff)); (b) Information Technology (eight Information Technology Assistants (two Field Service and six national General Service staff)); (c) Transport (one Motor Transport Officer (P-3), seven Vehicle Technicians (one Field Service and six national General Service staff), two Stores Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff), one Dispatcher (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and 15 drivers (national General Service staff)); (d) Aviation (two Aviation Officers (P-3 and national Professional Officer), four Air Operations Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Ramp Assistants (national General Service staff)); (e) Movement Control (two Movement Control Officers (Field Service and national Professional Officer) and eight Movement Control Assistants (two Field Service and six national General Service staff)); (f) Supply (one Supply Officer (P-3), one Fuel Officer (P-2), two fuel Supply Assistants (national General Service staff), one Quality Assurance Technician (Field Service), one Rations Officer (P-2), three Supply Assistants controlling rations distribution (national General Service staff), one Supply Assistant (national General Service staff), three Stores Assistants (national General Service staff) and two Forklift Drivers (national General Service staff)); (g) Engineering (two Engineers (P-4 and national Professional Officer), seven Building Management Services Assistants (two Field Service and five national General Service staff), four Electricians (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), four Generator Mechanics (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), four Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Technicians (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), four Water and Sanitation Technicians (one Field Service and three national General Service staff) and three Materials Management Services Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff)); and (h) Geographic Information Systems (one Geographic Information Systems Officer (Field Service) and two Geographic Information Systems Assistants (international United Nations Volunteer and national General Service staff).
In the sub-office in Malakal, Integrated Support Services will be planned and supervised by a Logistics Officer (Field Service) and supported by two Logistics Assistants (national General Service staff).
Integrated Support Services will include: (a) Communications (three Telephone Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three VHF/HF Radio Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Microwave Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff) and three Satellite Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff)); (b) Information Technology (two LAN Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff) and three Information Technology Assistants (national General Service staff)); (c) Transport (one Motor Transport Officer (Field Service), six Vehicle Technicians (two Field Service and four national General Service staff), one Stores Assistant (national General Service staff), one Dispatcher (national General Service staff) and 10 Drivers (national General Service staff)); (d) Aviation (two Air Operations Officers (Field Service and national Professional Officer) and one Air Operations Assistant (national General Service staff)); (e) Movement Control (one Movement Control Officer (national Professional Officer), six Movement Control Assistants (two Field Service and four national General Service staff)); (f) Supply (one Supply Officer (Field Service), one Supply Assistant controlling fuel distribution (national General Service staff), two Supply Assistants controlling rations distribution (one Field Service and one national General Service staff), one Supply Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Stores Assistants (national General Service staff)); and (g) Engineering (one Engineer (P-3), three Building Management Services Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), two Electricians (national General Service staff), two Generator Mechanics (national General Service staff), one Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning Technician (national General Service staff), two Water and Sanitation Technicians (one Field Service and one national General Service staff) and one Materials Management Assistant (national General Service staff)).
In the sub-office in Wau, Integrated Support Services within the associated geographic area will be planned and supervised by a Logistics Officer (Field Service) and supported by two Logistics Assistants (national General Service staff).
Integrated Support Services will include: (a) Communications (three Telephone Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff) three VHF/HF Radio Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Microwave Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff) and three Satellite Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff)); (b) Information Technology (two LAN Assistants (one Field Service and one national General Service staff) and three Information Technology Assistants (national General Service staff)); (c) Transport (one Motor Transport Officer (Field Service), six Vehicle Technicians (two Field Service and four national General Service staff), one Stores Assistant (national General Service staff), one Dispatcher (national General Service staff) and 10 Drivers (national General Service staff)); (d) Aviation (two Aviation Officers (Field Service and national Professional Officer) and one Air Operations Assistant (national General Service staff)); (e) Movement Control (one Movement Control Officer (national Professional Officer) and five Movement Control Assistants (one Field Service and four national General Service staff)); (f) Supply (one Supply Officer (Field Service), one Supply Assistant controlling fuel distribution (national General Service staff), two Supply Assistants controlling rations distribution (Field Service and national General Service staff), one Supply Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Stores Assistants (national General Service staff)); and (g) Engineering (one Engineer (P-3), three Building Management Services Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), two Electricians (national General Service staff), two Generator Mechanics (national General Service staff), one Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Technician (national General Service staff), two Water and Sanitation Technicians (Field Service and national General Service staff) and one Materials Management Assistant (national General Service staff)).
In the sub-office in Rumbek, integrated support services are performed by four Logistics Assistants (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), one Communications Assistant (Field Service), one Information Technology Assistant (Field Service), one Movement Control Assistant (Field Service), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff) and eight Drivers (national General Service staff).
In the regional office in Kadugli, Integrated Support Services in the Nuba Mountains will be planned and delivered by a Logistics Officer (Field Service) who will be supported by one Logistics Assistant (national General Service staff).
Integrated Support Services will include: (a) Communications (three Telephone Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three VHF/HF Radio Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Microwave Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Satellite Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff)); (b) Information Technology (two LAN Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff) and three Information Technology Assistants (national General Service staff)); (c) Transport (one Motor Transport Officer (Field Service), six Vehicle Technicians (two Field Service and four national General Service staff), one Stores Assistant (national General Service staff), one Dispatcher (national General Service staff) and 10 Drivers (national General Service staff)); (d) Aviation (three Aviation Officers (P-3, national Professional Officer and Field Service) and three Air Operations Assistants (national General Service staff)); (e) Movement Control (one Movement Control Officer (national Professional Officer) and eight Movement Control Assistants (two Field Service and six national General Service staff)); (f) Supply (one Supply Officer (Field Service), one Supply Assistant controlling fuel distribution (national General Service staff), two Supply Assistants controlling rations distribution (Field Service and national General Service staff), one Supply Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Stores Assistants (national General Service staff)); and (g) Engineering (one Engineer (P-3), three Building Management Services Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), two Electricians (national General Service staff), two Generator Mechanics (national General Service staff), two Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Technicians (national General Service staff), two Water and Sanitation Technicians (Field Service and national General Service staff) and one Materials Management Assistant (national General Service staff)).
Integrated Support Services in the regional office in Ed Damazin will be planned and delivered by a Logistics Officer (Field Service) and one Logistics Assistant (national General Service staff).
Integrated Support Services will include: (a) Communications (three Telephone Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three VHF/HF Radio Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Microwave Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Satellite Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff)); (b) Information Technology (two LAN assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff) and three Information Technology Assistants (national General Service staff)); (c) Transport (one Motor Transport Officer (Field Service), six Vehicle Technicians (two Field Service and four national General Service staff), one Stores Assistant (national General Service staff), one Dispatcher (national General Service staff) and 10 Drivers (national General Service staff)); (d) Aviation (two Aviation Officers (Field Service and national Professional Officer) and one Air Operations Assistant (national General Service staff)); (e) Movement Control (one Movement Control Officer (national Professional Officer) and six Movement Control Assistants (one Field Service and five national General Service staff)); (f) Supply (one Supply Officer (Field Service), one Supply Assistant controlling fuel distribution (national General Service staff), two Supply Assistants controlling rations distribution (Field Service and national General Service staff), one Supply Assistant (national General Service staff) and two Stores Assistants (national General Service staff)); and (g) Engineering (one Engineer (P-3), three Building Management Services Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), two Electricians (national General Service staff), two Generator Mechanics (national General Service staff), two heating, ventilation and air conditioning Technicians (national General Service staff), two Water and Sanitation Technicians (Field Service and national General Service staff) and one Materials Management Assistant (national General Service staff)).
Integrated Support Services in the regional office in Abyei are coordinated by three Logistics Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff).
Integrated Support Services will include: (a) Communications (three Communications Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff) and one Satellite Technician (national General Service staff)); (b) Information Technology (two Information Technology Assistants (national General Service staff)); (c) Transport (one Motor Transport Officer (Field Service), two Vehicle Technicians (national General Service staff), one Stores Assistant (national General Service staff), one Dispatcher (national General Service staff) and six Drivers (national General Service staff)); (d) Movement Control (two Movement Control Assistants (national General Service staff)); (e) Supply (one Supply Assistant (national General Service staff)); and (f) Engineering (two Building Management Services Assistants (national General Service staff)).
Integrated Support Services in the El Fasher regional office will be planned and supervised by two Logistics Officers (P-4 and Field Service) and supported by two Logistics Assistants (national General Service staff).
Integrated Support Services in El Fasher will include: (a) Communications (two Telephone Technicians (Field Service and national General Service staff), two VHF/UHF technicians (Field Service and national General Service staff), one Satellite Technician (Field Service) and four Communication Assistants (national General Service staff)); (b) Information Technology (one Information Technology Assistant (Field Service), two LAN Assistants (Field Service and national General Service staff) and two Information Technology Assistants (national General Service staff)); (c) Transport (one Transport Officer (Field Service), six Vehicle Technicians (two Field Service and four national General Service staff), a Stores Assistant (national General Service staff), a Dispatcher (national General Service staff) and 15 Drivers (national General Service staff)); (d) Aviation (two Air Operations Officers (Field Service and national Professional Officer), three Aviation Assistants (national General Service staff)); (e) Movement Control (one Movement Control Officer (national Professional Officer) and two Movement Control Assistants (national General Service staff)); (f) Supply (one Fuel Supply Officer (Field Service), three General Supply Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff)); (g) Engineering (one Engineer (P-3), five Building Management Assistants (one Field Service and four national General Service staff), two Electricians (Field Service and national General Service staff), two Generator Mechanics (Field Service and national General Service staff), two heating, ventilation and air conditioning Technicians (Field Service and national General Service staff), and two Water and Sanitation Technicians (Field Service and national General Service staff)).
Integrated Support Services in the sub-office in Nyala includes two Logistics Assistants (national General Service staff), two Air Operations Assistants (national General Service staff), eight Drivers (national General Service staff) and two Building Management Assistants (national General Service staff).
Integrated Support Services in the sub-office in El Geneina includes two Logistics Assistants (national General Service staff), two Air Operations Assistants (national General Service staff), eight Drivers (national General Service staff) and two Building Management Assistants (national General Service staff).
Integrated Support Services in the sub-office in Zalingei includes one Logistics Assistant (national General Service staff), six Drivers (national General Service staff) and one Building Management Assistant (national General Service staff).
Integrated Support Services in the regional office in Kassala includes: (a) Communications (one Communication Technician (Field Service), one Satellite Technician (national General Service staff) and two Communication Technicians (national General Service staff)); (b) Information Technology (two Information Technology Assistants (national General Service staff)); (c) Movement Control (two Movement Control Assistants (national General Service staff)); (d) Supply (one Supply Assistant (national General Service staff)); (e) Transport (one Transport Officer (Field Service), two Vehicle Technicians (national General Service staff), a Stores Assistant (national General Service staff), a Dispatcher (national General Service staff and six drivers (national General Service staff)); and (f) Engineering (two Building Management Assistants (national General Service staff)).
Integrated Support Services in the El-Obeid logistics base includes: (a) Communications (one Telephone Technician (Field Service), two Communication Technicians VHF-UHF (Field Service and national General Service staff), one Satellite Technician (Field Service), four Inventory Assistants (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), three Communication Technicians (national General Service staff) and two Switchboard Operators (national General Service staff)); (b) Information Technology (two Information Technology Assistants to maintain the LAN (Field Service and national General Service staff), five Information Technology Assistants for support and help desk operations (two Field Service and three national General Service staff) and two Information Technology Assistants (national General Service staff)); (c) Transport (a Transport Officer (P-3), four Transport Assistants (two Field Service and two national General Service staff), seven Specialized Equipment Drivers (two Field Service and five national General Service staff), one Transport Assistant — Carlog (Field Service), one Maintenance Supervisor (Field Service), 25 Vehicle Technicians (ten Field Service and 15 national General Service staff), four Stores Assistants (one Field Service and three national General Service staff), two Dispatchers (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), eight Heavy Duty Vehicle Drivers (two Field Service and six national General Service staff) and 10 Drivers (national General Service staff)); (d) Aviation (two Aviation Assistants (national General Service staff)); (e) Movement Control (one Movement Control Officer (Field Service) and eight Movement Control Assistants (two Field Service and six national General Service staff)); (f) Supply (as the logistics base will be the primary distribution and warehousing point for south and west Sudan, the Unit will be headed by a Chief Warehousing Officer (P-3) and supported by one Warehouse Manager (Field Service), one Inventory Assistant (Field Service), one Supply Assistant (national General Service staff), one Stores Assistant (national General Service staff), 10 Warehouse Workers (national General Service staff), one Office Assistant (national General Service staff), one Fuel Officer (P-2), three Fuel Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), one Quality Assurance Assistant (Field Service), one Rations Officer (P-2) and three Rations Assistants (one Field Service and two national General Service staff)); and (g) Engineering (an Engineer (P-3), eight Building Management Services Assistants (two Field Service and six national General Service staff), three Electricians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Generator Mechanics (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three heating, ventilation and air conditioning Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), three Water and Sanitation Technicians (one Field Service and two national General Service staff), two Store Assistants (national General Service staff) and one Office Assistant (national General Service staff).
Analysis of resource requirements
(Thousands of United States dollars)
The provision of $870,100 for 2004/05 and $13,204,300 for 2005/06 reflects requirements with respect to the mission subsistence allowance, clothing allowance, travel costs and death and disability compensation.
It takes into account the actual deployment of 141 military observers as of 30 June 2005 and is based on the projected phased deployment of the additional 609 military observers by 30 November 2005, for a total authorized strength of 750 military observers.
It is assumed that all observers will be based outside Khartoum and will be provided accommodation and meals by the United Nations.
A reduced daily mission subsistence allowance rate of $43 and $50 is applied for 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively.
Clothing allowance is based on the standard rate of $200 per person per year.
Deployment of military observers is based on an average one-way cost of $3,000 per person.
Requirements for mission subsistence allowance reflect a 20 per cent delayed deployment factor for 2005/06.
The provision for troop payments, deployment travel of military contingent personnel, recreational leave allowance, daily allowance, death and disability compensation, rations, reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment and freight cost for deployment of contingent-owned equipment is based on the actual deployment of 965 troops, including 99 staff officers, as of 30 June 2005; and phased deployment of a total authorized strength of 9,250 troops, including 178 staff officers, by 30 November 2005.
The estimates are inclusive of $15,702,763 and $96,343,800 for the freight and reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment provided for in 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively.
Deployment travel is calculated at an average one-way cost of $1,000 per person and ration costs are based on $8.89 per person-day for food.
Ration costs for water are based on $5.78 per person-day for the period 1 July 2004 to 30 September 2005 only, as it is estimated that the Mission's water purification and bottling plant will provide water from October 2005 onwards.
The estimate for daily allowances is based on the standard rate of $1.28 per person-day.
While the estimates for 2004/05 are based on actual deployment, the estimates for 2005/06 include a 20 per cent delayed deployment factor.
The cost estimates for civilian police provide for mission subsistence allowance, deployment and rotation travel, clothing allowance and death and disability compensation, and are based on the actual deployment of 43 civilian police as of 30 June 2005 and phased deployment of a total authorized strength of 715 civilian police by January 2006.
The requirements for mission subsistence allowance are calculated at the standard rate of $43 and $50 per day for 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively.
The clothing allowance is based on the standard rate of $200 per person per year.
The deployment travel of police is based on an average one-way cost of $3,000 per person.
The estimates for 2005/06 include a 20 per cent delayed deployment factor.
The cost estimates for international staff are derived from the actual average expenditure by grade over the previous financial period taken for all missions and provides for international staff salaries, staff assessment and common staff costs, including hazardous duty station allowance and mission subsistence allowance, based on the actual deployment of international staff from 6 in July 2004 to 306 in June 2005; and the phased deployment of international staff from 395 in July 2005 to a total proposed strength of 1,053 in June 2006.
It is assumed that 50 per cent of the staff will be provided food and accommodation by the Mission and therefore a reduced mission subsistence allowance of $43 and $50 is applied for 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively.
The cost estimates for 2005/06 include a 25 per cent delayed recruitment factor.
The provision for national staff salaries, staff assessment and common staff costs, including hazardous duty station allowance, is based on the actual deployment of national staff from four (one national Professional Officer and three national General Service staff) in August 2004 to 535 (15 national Professional Officers and 520 national General Service staff) in June 2005 and the phased deployment of national staff from 757 (52 national Professional Officers and 705 national General Service staff) in July 2005 to a total proposed strength of 2,690 (264 national Professional Officers and 2,426 national General Service staff) in June 2006.
The computation of national staff costs is based on the local salary scales for General Service staff (GS-IV/I) and National Officers (NOB-I), respectively, and includes a 20 per cent delayed recruitment factor for 2005/06.
The provision for United Nations Volunteers is based on an actual deployment of United Nations Volunteers from 12 (international United Nations Volunteers) in March 2005 to 32 (international United Nations Volunteers) in June 2005 and the phased deployment of United Nations Volunteers from 130 (90 international and 40 national United Nations Volunteers) in July 2005 to a total proposed strength of 208 (151 international and 57 national United Nations Volunteers) in June 2006.
The computation of international United Nations Volunteers is based on $4,000 per month per staff and the computation of national United Nations Volunteers is based on $1,000 per month per staff.
The cost estimates for 2005/06 include a 20 per cent delayed deployment factor.
The estimates for general temporary assistance include a provision of $26,560 and $279,876 for temporary replacements of staff on sick leave and maternity leave included in the 2004/05 and 2005/06 budgets, respectively; a three-month provision of $217,500 and a 12-month provision of $882,241 for an average of 100 national personnel as a temporary labour force for an intensive period during the establishment of the Mission included in 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively; and a provision of $1,046,300 for seven international staff and three national staff functions in respect of personnel conduct of United Nations personnel in the Mission.
The estimates for consultants include the provision of $40,500 and $311,900 in 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively, for the engagement of international and national consultants to conduct training programmes, including civil affairs orientation, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration policy and guidelines, first aid, aviation safety, people management, competency-based interviewing and performance management, work planning, information technology, cultural awareness, and negotiation and conflict negotiation, as well as for Arabic language training for international staff and English language training for national staff.
The estimates also include the provision of $300,000 in the 2005/06 estimates only for the engagement of consultants to assist in surveys and assessments in support of disarmament, small arms reduction and reinsertion of special needs target groups.
The estimates for official travel include a non-training travel provision of $1,642,300 and $2,388,700 budgeted for in 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively.
These estimates reflect official travel of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General as well as senior staff of the Mission to New York, Geneva and regional countries for meetings and consultations; travel of Headquarters staff to the Mission area to provide support on various aspects of the peace process as well as logistical and administrative support; travel in connection with pre-deployment assessment of contingent-owned equipment and reconnaissance visits by military staff of troop contributors; and the pre-deployment training for military personnel.
The estimates also include training travel of $1,244,700 and $1,954,200, provided for in 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively.
These estimates reflect the training of UNMIS personnel in areas such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration policy and guidelines, human rights awareness, HIV/AIDS, people management, negotiation and conflict resolution, communications and information technology, aviation safety, security, engineering, transport, personnel administration and financial management.
The estimates for facilities and infrastructure provide for: acquisitions valued at $35,447,100 for 2004/05 and $28,974,700 for 2005/06, which include prefabricated facilities, miscellaneous facilities and infrastructure, bridges for infrastructure, refrigeration equipment, generators, water purification equipment, water and septic tanks, accommodation equipment, fuel tank and pumps, office furniture, office equipment, security and safety equipment, and firefighting equipment; rental of premises for $3,297,900 for 2004/05 and $70,010,100 for 2005/06, which includes rental of facilities for Mission headquarters, warehousing, offices and living accommodation at regional and sector offices, offices and living accommodation at the logistics base in El Obeid and office and living accommodation at the liaison office in Addis Ababa, and tented camp accommodation for military, civilian and contractor personnel at 24 locations throughout the south of the Sudan while hard walled accommodation is being constructed; alteration and renovation services for $2,969,000 for 2004/05 and $16,156,600 for 2005/06; construction services for $4,117,900 for 2004/05 and $53,732,500 for 2005/06; petrol, oil and lubricants for $762,300 for 2004/05 and $29,741,000 for 2005/06 for 411 United Nations and 134 contingent-owned generators; and self-sustainment of $382,200 for 2004/05 and $18,994,200 for 2005/06.
Included also in the estimates is a provision for the rental of office equipment, utilities, maintenance services, security services, stationery and office supplies, spare parts and supplies, maintenance supplies, field defence supplies and sanitation and cleaning materials for a total of $2,006,600 for 2004/05 and $12,309,700 for 2005/06.
The estimates for 2004/05 include acquisitions for a total value of $15,994,300 for the replenishment of equipment transferred from strategic deployment stocks.
The estimates for ground transportation provide for: the acquisition of vehicles for $43,859,700 in 2004/05 and $54,953,000 in 2005/06 for the establishment of the UNMIS vehicle fleet of 2,189 vehicles; petrol, oil and lubricants for $1,714,400 in 2004/05 and $11,258,000 in 2005/06; and spare parts for $562,100 in 2004/05 and $9,353,000 in 2005/06.
Included also in the estimates is a provision for the acquisition of vehicle workshop equipment, the rental of vehicles, repair and maintenance, and liability insurance for a total of $2,199,000 in 2004/05 and $1,467,000 in 2005/06.
The estimates for 2004/05 include acquisitions for a total value of $23,426,800 for the replenishment of vehicles transferred from strategic deployment stocks.
The estimates include operating costs, liability insurance and fuel for a fleet of: 12 fixed-wing and 11 rotary-wing aircraft operating a total of 3,380 hours, made up of 2,120 hours of fixed-wing and 1,260 hours of rotary-wing aircraft provided for in 2004/05; and 22 fixed-wing and 29 rotary-wing aircraft operating a total of 33,008 hours, made up of 15,874 hours for fixed-wing and 17,134 hours for rotary-wing aircraft provided for in 2005/06.
Proposed estimates for air transportation provide for: the rental and operation of fixed-wing and rotary aircraft for a total of $16,546,200 in 2004/05 and $119,737,000 in 2005/06; petrol, oil and lubricants for $8,543,600 in 2004/05 and $73,809,700 in 2005/06; airfield services in Kadugli, Malakal, Ed Damazin, Wau and Juba for $739,300 in 2004/05 and $10,368,000 in 2005/06; liability insurance for fixed-wing and rotary aircraft for $1,059,700 in 2004/05 and $8,143,200 in 2005/06.
In addition, estimates for 2004/05 and 2005/06 include a provision for equipment and supplies, landing fees and ground handling charges and aircrew subsistence allowance for a total of $2,716,800 and $1,795,300, respectively.
The estimate of $198,000 for 2005/06 provides for the acquisition and operational support of three boats for patrolling by the civilian police.
The estimates for communications provide for: the acquisition of communications equipment for a total of $23,919,900 in 2004/05 and $21,381,200 in 2005/06, which includes VHF, UHF and HF radio equipment, satellite equipment, telephone equipment and other communications and workshop equipment; commercial communications for $685,100 in 2004/05 and $4,004,500 in 2005/06, which includes INMARSAT charges, charges for Thuraya satellite phones, Internet services, GSM telephone services, the local PTT telephone line, local leased lines, United Nations Logistics Base connectivity and post and pouch charges; communication support services for $82,400 in 2004/05 and $2,637,500 in 2005/06 required during the initial period upon installation of equipment; reimbursement to troop-contributing countries for self-sustainment of $168,200 in 2004/05 and $6,889,100 in 2005/06; and acquisition of public information equipment for $5,952,400 in 2005/06 only.
In addition, estimates for 2004/05 and 2005/06 include a provision for maintenance, spare parts, public information services and the rental of equipment for a total of $752,300 in 2004/05 and $4,670,300 in 2005/06.
The estimates for 2004/05 include acquisitions for a total value of $9,603,986 for the replenishment of communications equipment transferred from strategic deployment stocks.
The estimates for information technology provide for: the acquisition of information technology equipment for a total of $4,522,900 in 2004/05 and $7,765,300 in 2005/06, which includes 1,527 and 967 desktop computers, 665 and 350 laptop computers and 456 and 244 printers for 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively; information technology services for $1,038,300 in 2004/05 and $3,721,700 in 2005/06, required during the initial period upon installation of equipment.
Also included in the estimates is software for network control and for the operation of the aircraft fleet, support services for the establishment of the information technology infrastructure, software licences and spare parts for a total of $538,700 and $1,944,300 in 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively.
The estimates for 2004/05 include acquisitions for a total value of $1,357,300 for the replenishment of information technology equipment transferred from strategic deployment stocks.
The estimates for medical expenditures for the 2004/05 and 2005/06 financial period provide for the acquisition of emergency equipment, blood refrigerators, first aid kits, biological waste incinerators, laboratory modules and X-ray machines.
Included in the provision are: $122,800 and $1,671,600 for the 2004/05 and 2005/06 financial period for medical services, including medical evacuations, external consultations, hospitalizations and other medical services; $227,300 and $1,739,800 for medical consumables, including drugs and medicines at $20,000 per quarter per clinic for six clinics; the acquisition of medical equipment for $404,200 and $283,200 in 2004/05 and 2005/06, respectively; and $147,400 and $6,255,800 for the 2004/05 and 2005/06 financial period, respectively, for the self-sustainment of level-I and level-II medical support undertaken by contingents deployed in the Mission.
The estimates for 2004/05 include acquisitions for a total value of $54,338 for the replenishment of medical equipment transferred from strategic deployment stocks.
The estimates for special equipment for the 2004/05 and 2005/06 financial period reflect requirements for the purchase of binoculars and night-vision observation devices.
In addition, estimates for 2004/05 and 2005/06 include $79,800 and $3,270,800, respectively, for self-sustainment.
The estimates for 2004/05 include acquisitions for a total value of $317,400 for the replenishment of special equipment transferred from strategic deployment stocks.
The estimates for other supplies, services and equipment provide for: the acquisition of equipment for movement control and training purposes; welfare supplies and equipment for military officers; subscriptions to newspapers, magazines and online news media; printing services; uniforms for security and technical staff; protection gear, including fragmentation jackets and helmets; training fees and supplies; official functions; general insurance; bank charges; water for use in United Nations offices; and other services, including advertising and translation services.
The estimates also include provision of: $10,074,300 and $18,428,900 for the 2004/05 and 2005/06 financial period for mine detection and mine-clearance services in the south of the Sudan to ensure the safe transit of United Nations vehicles along main supply routes; $7,425,500 and $9,996,500 for the 2004/05 and 2005/06 financial periods, respectively, for the freight of strategic deployment stocks equipment from the United Nations Logistics Base to the Mission, within Mission transportation of United Nations-owned equipment and customs clearance and demurrage charges; and $12,000,000 for the 2005/06 financial period for disarmament, demobilization and reinsertion activities, as explained in paragraph 12.
The provision of $100,000 for the 2004/05 financial period and $2,000,000 for the 2005/06 financial period reflects requirements for 10 and 200 community-based quick-impact projects, respectively.
These projects are intended to provide a flexible disbursement facility to support, on short notice, local-level, non-recurrent activities in the areas of health, education, public infrastructure and social services that are designed to promote and facilitate the United Nations peace support effort in the Sudan.
The provision for 200 community-based projects budgeted for in 2005/06 includes 40 projects that relate to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities, as explained in paragraph 13.
Actions to be taken by the General Assembly
The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of UNMIS are:
(a) Appropriation of the amount of $222,031,700 for the establishment of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;
(b) Appropriation of the amount of $1,017,602,600 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006, inclusive of the amount of $315,997,200 for the period from 1 July to 31 October 2005 previously authorized by the General Assembly under the terms of its resolution 59/292 of 21 April 2005;
(c) Application of the amount of $57,469,600 representing the balance of the amount of $279,501,300 previously assessed on Member States for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 under the terms of resolution 59/292 and the amount of $222,031,700, indicated in subparagraph (a) above, to the resources required for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;
(d) Assessment of the amount of $644,135,800 for the period from 1 November 2005 to 30 June 2006, at a monthly rate of $80,516,975, taking into account the amount of $315,997,200 already assessed on Member States for the period from 1 July to 31 October 2005 under the terms of resolution 59/292 and the amount of $57,469,600, indicated in subparagraph (c) above, subject to the extension of the Mission's mandate by the Security Council.
Summary of follow-up action taken to implement requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Annex
Organization charts
Substantive and administrative offices
Mission Support Division
C. Military
Map No. 4249 United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations June 2005 Cartographic Section
The present report contains the budget for the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006, which amounts to $222,031,700 and $1,017,602,600 respectively.
The budget provides for the deployment of 141 military observers, 965 military contingents, 43 civilian police, 306 international staff, 535 national staff and 32 United Nations Volunteers for 2004/05, based on actual incumbency, and the proposed deployment of 750 military observers, 9,250 military contingents, 715 civilian police, 1,053 international staff, 2,690 national staff and 208 United Nations Volunteers for 2005/06.
The total resource requirements for UNMIS for the financial period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 have been linked to the Mission's objective through a number of results-based frameworks, grouped by components: peace process, security, governance, humanitarian assistance, recovery and reintegration, and support.
Financial resources (Thousands of United States dollars.
Budget years are from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006.
Human resources
a Represents highest level of authorized/proposed strength.
b The authorized/proposed strength for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 is based on actual incumbency achieved during the period.
c Includes national officers and national General Service staff.
d Includes both international and national United Nations Volunteers.
The actions to be taken by the General Assembly are set out in section IV of the present report.
Ceasefire Joint Military Committee
(Juba)
Well-drilling Unit
India
Petroleum Unit
Bangladesh
Transport Unit
Egypt
Signals Company
India
Military Police Company
Bangladesh
Riverine Platoon
Bangladesh
Headquarters Company
Multinational Standby Force High Readiness Brigade for United Nations Operations
Reserve Infantry Battalion
India
United Nations military observers
Infantry Company
Nepal
Redeployment coordination
headquarters
United Nations military observers
Transport Unit
Zambia
Infantry Company
Kenya
Engineering Company
Zambia
United Nations military observers
Engineering Company
Pakistan
Level-II Hospital
Pakistan
Transport Unit
Pakistan
Infantry Battalion
Pakistan
Aviation Unit
Pakistan
Demining Company
Pakistan
United Nations military observers
Demining Company
Egypt
Engineering Company
Egypt
Aviation Unit
India
Level-III Hospital
Egypt
Transport Unit
Egypt
Infantry Company
Egypt
United Nations military observers
Demining Company
Bangladesh
Engineering Company
India
Aviation Unit
India
Transport Unit
India
Level-II Hospital
India
Infantry Battalion
India
Infantry Battalion
Kenya
Transport Unit
China
Level-II Hospital
China
Aviation Unit
Pakistan
Engineering Company
China
United Nations military observers
Demining Company
Kenya
Infantry Battalion
Bangladesh
Transport Unit
Bangladesh
Level-II Hospital
Bangladesh
Engineering Company
Bangladesh
Aviation Unit
Russia
Demining Company
Bangladesh
United Nations military observers
Sector 1 headquarters
Sector 6 headquarters
Sector 5 headquarters
Sector 2 headquarters
Sector 4 headquarters
Sector 3 headquarters
Joint Monitoring Committee Office
(Juba)
Office of the Force Commander
Budget Section
(11 posts)
1 P-5, 2 P-4, 2 P-3,
4 FS, 2 NS
Safety (12 posts)
1 P-4, 2 P-3,
4 NPO, 5 NS
El Obeid logistics base
(181 posts)
1 P-5, 1 P-4, 5 P-3, 2 P-2,
48 FS, 3 NPO, 121 NS
Training Unit
(10 posts)
1 P-4, 2 P-3,
2 IUNV, 2 NPO, 3 NS
Contingent-owned equipment (13 posts)
1 P-4, 4 P-3,
5 FS, 3 NS
Movement Control (46 posts)
1 P-4, 2 P-3, 14 FS,
2 NPO, 27 NS
Geographic Information Systems (22 posts)
1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 FS,
13 IUNV, 2 NPO, 4 NS
United Nations Volunteer
Support Unit
Staff Counselling (6 posts)
1 P-4, 1 P-3, 2 NPO, 2 NS
Joint Logistics Operations Centre (17 posts)
1 P-5, 2 P-4,
3 P-3, 5 FS, 6 NS
Engineering
Section (84 posts)
1 P-5, 3 P-4, 4 P-3,
1 P-2, 14 FS, 1 NPO,
Transport Section
(56 posts)
1 P-5, 1 P-4, 11 FS,
Supply (39 posts)
1 P-5, 3 P-4, 1 P-3,
13 FS, 21 NS
Aviation Section
(31 posts)
1 P-5, 2 P-4, 2 P-3,
11 FS, 1 NPO, 14 NS
Communication and Information Technology Services (85 posts)
1 P-5, 2 P-4, 1 P-3,
24 FS, 57 NS
Medical Services
Section (20 posts)
1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3, 2 P-2,
1 FS, 1 IUNV, 2 NPO, 11 NS
Procurement Section (39 posts)
1 P-5, 3 P-4, 5 P-3,
9 FS, 21 NS
Finance Section (49 posts)
1 P-5, 4 P-4, 15 FS, 1 NPO,
General Services
Section (60 posts)
1 P-5, 4 P-4, 5 P-3, 2 P-2,
16 FS, 6 NPO, 26 NS
Human
Resources Section (52 posts)
1 P-5, 2 P-4, 4 P-3, 2 P-2,
19 FS, 1 NPO, 23 NS
Regional
Administration Offices (855 posts)
2 P-5, 8 P-4, 17 P-3, 3 P-2,
151 FS, 13 IUNV, 44 NPO,
Integrated Support Services
(9 posts)
1 D-1, 1 P-5, 1 P-3, 2 FS, 4 NS
Administrative Services (5 posts)
1 D-1, 1 P-3, 1 FS, 2 NS
Director of Administration (16 posts)
1 D-2, 1 P-5, 2 P-4,
3 FS, 2 NPO, 7 NS
Deputy Director of Administration (7 posts)
1 D-1, 1 P-4, 2 FS, 1 NPO, 2 NS
Field headquarters/
regional offices/sub-offices
(855 posts)
2 P-5, 8 P-4, 17 P-3, 3 P-2,
151 FS, 13 IUNV, 44 NPO,
Abbreviations: FS (Field Service), IUNV (International United Nations Volunteer), NUNV (National United Nations Volunteer), NPO (National Professional Officer), NS (National General Service), GTA (General Temporary Assistance).
Development Coordination Unit (5 posts) 1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 NPO, 2 NS
Gender Advisory Unit (25 posts) 1 P-5, 2 P-4, 4 P-3, 1 FS, 7 IUNV, 7 NPO, 3 NS
HIV/AIDS Unit (8 posts) 1 P-4, 1P-2, 2 IUNV, 2 NPO, 2 NS
Return, Recovery and Reintegration Section (67 posts) 1 D-1, 1 P-5, 3 P-4, 12 P-3, 1 P-2, 1 FS, 10 IUNV, 7 NUNV, 17 NPO, 14 NS
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section (122 posts) 1 D-1, 2 P-5, 7 P-4, 16 P-3, 13 P-2, 1 FS, 18 IUNV, 15 NUNV, 24 NPO 25 NS
Protection Section (69 posts) 1 D-1, 3 P-5, 6 P-4, 17 P-3, 2 P-2, 1 FS, 13 IUNV, 21 NPO, 5 NS
Humanitarian Assistance Liaison Unit (41 posts) 2 P-5, 4 P-4, 14 P-3, 2 P-2, 4 IUNV, 12 NPO, 3 NS
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Resident Coordinator/ Humanitarian Coordinator (14 posts) 1 ASG, 2 D-2, 1 P-4, 1 P-2, 2 FS, 7 NS
Heads of regional offices
(88 posts)
Field headquarters Juba (1 D-2, 1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 P-2, 1 FS, 4 NPO, 5 NS)
Malakal (1 P-5, 1 P-3, 1 FS, 4 NS) Wau (1 P-5, 1 P-3, 1 FS, 4 NS) Rumbek (1 P-5, 1 P-2, 8 NS)
El Fasher regional office (1 D-1, 1 P-3, 1 NPO, 4 NS)
Nyala (1 P-5, 5 NS) El Geneina (1 P-5, 4 NS) Zalingei (1 P-5, 4 NS)
Kassala regional office (1 D-1, 1 P-2, 4 NS)
Ed Damazin regional office (1 D-1, 1 P-3, 1 FS, 4 NS)
Abyei regional office (1 D-1, 1 P-2, 4 NS)
Kadugli regional office (1 D-1, 1 P-3, 1 FS, 4 NS)
Security and Safety Section (740 posts)
1 D-1, 2 P-4, 17 P-3, 18 P-2, 124 FS, 578 NS
Resident Auditor (11 posts) 1 P-5, 3 P-4, 4 P-3, 2 FS, 1 NS
Special Representative
Of the
Secretary-General
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Chief of Staff
Joint Mission Analysis Centre
Legal Affairs
Conduct and Discipline (GTA)
Spokesperson
(49 posts)
1 USG, 1 D-2, 1 D-1, 3 P-5, 5 P-4, 10 P-3, 2 P-2, 4 FS, 1 IUNV, 7 NPO, 14 NS
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Principal) (8 posts) 1 ASG, 1 P-4, 1 P-3, 2 FS, 3 NS
Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section (45 posts) 1 D-1, 2 P-5, 6 P-4, 7 P-3, 2 P-2, 1 FS, 2 IUNV, 11 NPO, 13 NS
Political Affairs Division (17 posts) 1 D-1, 2 P-5, 4 P-4, 3 P-3, 1 P-2, 1 FS, 2 NPO, 3 NS
Civilian Police Division (171 posts)
1 D-1, 2 P-5, 2 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 FS, 164 NS
Communications and Public Information Office (196 posts) 1 D-1, 1 P-5, 11 P-4, 5 P-3, 10 FS, 21 IUNV, 18 NPO, 129 NS
Human Rights Section (196 posts) 1 D-1, 6 P-5, 16 P-4, 22 P-3, 22 P-2, 2 FS, 28 IUNV, 2 NUNV, 27 NPO, 70 NS
Civil Affairs Division (145 posts) 1 D-2, 1 D-1, 3 P-5, 16 P-4, 10 P-3, 2 P-2, 1 FS, 16 IUNV, 33 NUNV, 35 NPO, 27 NS
Electoral Assistance Unit (4 posts) 1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 NPO, 1 NS
Mission Support (1,725 posts) Headquarters
(689 posts)
1 D-2, 3 D-1, 14 P-5, 38 P-4, 42 P-3, 7 P-2, 170 FS, 16 IUNV, 27 NPO, 371 NS
El Obeid logistics base
(181 posts)
1 P-5, 1 P-4, 5 P-3, 2 P-2, 48 FS, 3 NPO, 121 NS
United Nations Assistance Cell (5 posts)
1 D-1, 1 P-4,
1 FS, 2 NS
Force Commander (200 posts) 1 D-2, 2 FS, 197 NS