# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
Fifty-ninth session
Agenda items 106 and 123
Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
Report of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Contents
* For a full list of documentation before the Advisory Committee, including reports of the Secretary-General covered in the main body of the present report, see annex I below.
Abbreviations
BONUCA United Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central African Republic
CNMC Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization
MINURSO United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
MINUSTAH United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
MONUC United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
ONUB United Nations Operation in Burundi
OSRSG-GLR Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
PRSG Personal Representative of the Secretary-General
UNAMA United Nations Mission in Afghanistan
UNAMI United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
UNAMIS United Nations Advance Mission in the Sudan
UNAMSIL United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
UNDOF United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNFICYP United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
UNIFIL United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
UNIKOM United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission
UNLB United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
UNMEE United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
UNMIBH United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
UNMIK United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
UNMIL United Nations Mission in Liberia
UNMIS United Nations Mission in the Sudan
UNMISET United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
UNMOGIP United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
UNOCI United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire
UNOGBIS United Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
UNOMB United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville
UNOMIG United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
UNOWA United Nations Office for West Africa
UNPOS United Nations Political Office for Somalia
UNSCO Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
UNTAET United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
UNTOP United Nations Tajikistan Office for Peacebuilding
UNTSO United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
UNV United Nations Volunteers Programme
WFP World Food Programme
Introduction
In section II below, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions comments on general issues arising solely from the report of the Board of Auditors on the accounts of the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2004 (A/59/5, vol. II, chap.
In section III it addresses matters arising from the reports of the Secretary-General on peacekeeping operations, including, where relevant, reference to recommendations or observations of the Board of Auditors.
Section IV contains the comments of the Committee on reports on other peacekeeping matters.
(See annex I for a list of the documents considered by the Committee.
) The Committee has issued separate reports on procurement and contract management for peacekeeping operations (A/59/722) and reform of the procedures for determining reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned equipment (A/59/708), issues which have, in the past, been covered in the Committee's general report on peacekeeping operations.
Report of the Board of Auditors
The Board of Auditors audited the accounts of peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2004.
During its consideration of the report of the Board of Auditors, the Advisory Committee met with the members of the Audit Operations Committee of the Board.
The Committee also had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period ended 30 June 2004 (A/59/704).
The audit covered:
(a) Headquarters operations;
(b) Twelve field missions;
(c) The United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
(d) Twenty-one completed missions;
(e) Two field missions that were not visited;
(f) One liquidated mission;
(g) The Peacekeeping Reserve Fund;
(h) The support account for peacekeeping operations.
The Board of Auditors also addresses requests made by the Advisory Committee and the General Assembly, as outlined in paragraph 5 of its report.
The Board's main recommendations are summarized in paragraph 11 of the report.
The Advisory Committee commends the Board for the further improvements it has made in the presentation of its report.
A new feature of the report is the inclusion, at the beginning of each of the sections dealing with specific management issues, of a short summary of conclusions of the Board.
The Committee finds these helpful and encourages the Board to continue to include them.
The report includes clear and user-friendly annexes that support the narrative.
In particular, the Committee finds annex III on the status of implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations well-presented and useful.
In that annex, the Board includes, where appropriate, information concerning the effect of management reform measures taken.
There are, however, a number of areas in which additional improvements could be considered.
The report of the Board is lengthy, and the Advisory Committee believes that some of the descriptive parts of the document could be streamlined without compromising quality.
The Committee also urges the Board to formulate its recommendations in stronger and more direct terms and, in particular, to include, to the extent possible, expected time frames; any delay or failure of implementation within those time frames could then be noted in future.
In this connection, the Committee recalls its previous recommendation that the Board formulate its recommendations so that organizations implement them within a predetermined time frame (A/59/400, para.
As in previous reports, pursuant to a request by the Advisory Committee, the first responses of the Administration to the recommendations of the Board are provided.
In many cases, these refer to the inability of the Administration to carry out functions owing to the “immediate demands” of the establishment of new missions.
The Committee understands the strain that the nearly simultaneous establishment of four new missions has placed on the Administration; however, this does not negate the need to carry out fundamental functions, and the Committee would have expected the Administration to provide the Board with a more detailed explanation of how such functions would be handled under the circumstances.
In paragraph 9 of its report, the Board confirmed that, with respect to the recommendations it had made in its report for the period ended 30 June 2002, there were no significant outstanding matters, except for those addressed in its current report.
With regard to the period ended 30 June 2003, the Board reported in paragraph 10 that out of a total of 69 recommendations, 26 (38 per cent) had been implemented, while 33 (48 per cent) were under implementation and 10 (14 per cent) had not been implemented.
This represents a significant improvement in the rate of implementation over previous years.
The Board also notes the management impact of their recommendations in some areas, such as air operations.
However, there are areas, such as procurement, that show consistent and chronic problems, with the recommendations of the Board appearing in report after report as “not implemented” or “under implementation”.
The Advisory Committee requests the Board, in its next report, to provide details concerning the age of such recommendations.
Similarly, new recommendations should also be identified.
In addition, where possible, the Board could give an indication of the relative priority of recommendations within a given area.
All of this information could easily be included in annex II to its report.
For its part, the Administration, as an immediate follow-up to the report of the Board, should present, in tabular form, time frames for implementation of the recommendations, including specific actions to be taken, focal points responsible for implementation and external factors that might hamper full implementation.
If the expected results are not achieved, the impediments should be identified, an analysis should be undertaken and the results of the analysis should be reported to the Board.
Further, the peacekeeping missions and Headquarters should monitor the management impact of implementation of the recommendations of the Board.
In this connection, the Committee draws special attention to the fact that in a number of missions the Board has identified cases of serious non-compliance with administrative instructions, which have led to overexpenditure; these problems should be addressed without delay.
The Advisory Committee recalls that it stressed the need for full and timely implementation of the recommendations of the Board and other oversight bodies and expressed its belief that the administrations of organizations of the United Nations system should continue to introduce and strengthen effective tracking and monitoring mechanisms, as well as to assign accountability at the highest level of their management structure for implementation and follow-up of the Board's recommendations (A/59/400, paras.
10 and 11).
In this connection, the Committee also recalls General Assembly resolution 59/272, in which the Assembly concurred with the view of the Office of Internal Oversight Services that a high-level follow-up mechanism under the authority of the Secretary-General should be established in the Organization to effectively feed findings and recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the Joint Inspection Unit and the Board of Auditors into the executive management processes, and requested the Secretary-General to establish the follow-up mechanism as soon as possible.
The Committee was informed that the Secretary-General was in the process of establishing an oversight committee to ensure that all recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the external auditors and the Joint Inspection Unit were properly implemented by programme managers.
The Committee was informed that terms of reference, membership and working modalities were in the process of being finalized.
The Committee trusts that the Secretary-General will do his utmost to expedite the establishment of this follow-up mechanism.
The Advisory Committee was informed that the Board was satisfied with the level of cooperation it had received from the Office of Internal Oversight Services and the resident auditors and, in general, found that the assignment of the resident auditors in the missions had led to real improvement in the auditing system for peacekeeping operations.
Members of the Audit Operations Committee indicated that they believed that the resident auditors could be instrumental in helping the Board to identify chronic and generic problems throughout the peacekeeping operations.
To that end, the Board would like more input from the resident auditors in such high-risk areas of the missions' operational activities as fuel management, vehicle fleet management, accommodations, and financial controls and instruments.
The Advisory Committee requests the Board to undertake an evaluation of lessons learned with regard to the assignment of resident auditors in the missions and to include, in its next report, proposals for further improvement of coordination of their work with that of the Board.
Financial issues
As noted in paragraphs 13 to 19 of the report of the Board of Auditors, the financial situation of the peacekeeping operations deteriorated noticeably in the year ended 30 June 2004.
Total income for the year amounted to $3.0 billion, while expenditure totalled $2.9 billion.
Outstanding assessed contributions, however, amounted to $1.52 billion, an increase of 41 per cent over the previous financial year, resulting in a deterioration in the amount of cash available ($1.54 billion) to settle liabilities ($2.01 billion).
The fluctuations in the financial position of the peacekeeping operations are attributable, in part, to the commencement of UNMIL, UNOCI, MINUSTAH and ONUB.
As in its previous report, the Board noted that the ageing of unpaid assessments, with varying uncertainty of recoverability, continues to have an impact on the Organization's ability to meet its financial obligations, especially since the General Assembly did not make provisions for the possible non-collection of assessed dues from Member States.
The Board reports that 53 per cent of the total amount outstanding as at 30 June 2004 had been outstanding for over one year.
This issue continues to be a matter of concern to the Advisory Committee.
In a related matter, the Advisory Committee notes that in some missions greater attention needs to be paid to the proper recording, liquidation and/or cancellation of obligations.
The Committee on numerous occasions has pointed to the need for tighter financial control and to the fact that high levels of unliquidated obligations or prior-period obligations are evidence of laxity in budget preparation and implementation.
In the current round of budget submissions, the Committee has noted that these weaknesses persist.
For example, in UNMIK the Committee has highlighted the large amounts of prior-period obligations that had been included in the performance reports as expenditures were subsequently cancelled.
The performance reports for UNMIK for 2003/04 and 2002/03 reflected savings of $3.1 million and $4.9 million respectively.
Moreover, the Board of Auditors, in its report on peacekeeping operations for the period ended 30 June 2004, noted long-outstanding accounts payable at UNMIK.
Funds Monitoring Tool
In paragraph 40 of its report, the Board notes that mission staff were generally positive about the use of the Funds Monitoring Tool for the management reports relating to the budgets and the monitoring of budgets and expenditure.
Members of the Audit Operations Committee reported that the auditors themselves had used the Funds Monitoring Tool in their audit operations and had found it useful.
The Advisory Committee is encouraged by this and urges the Administration to continue to work on improvements to the Funds Monitoring Tool in the areas recommended by the Board, namely: (a) enhancing its reporting functionality to track monthly redeployments of allotments; (b) developing indicators to measure the impact of its implementation; (c) expediting adequate training on the Funds Monitoring Tool; (d) expediting its installation and implementation at the missions; and (e) rectifying differences between the Funds Monitoring Tool and the financial statements in a timely manner.
Write-off of property and losses of cash, receivables and property
As indicated in paragraph 61 of the report of the Board of Auditors, property valued at approximately $57 million in respect of 15 missions as well as the United Nations Logistics Base was written off during the financial period ended 30 June 2004, representing a decrease of 42 per cent in comparison with the $99.1 million written off in the previous financial period.
Included in the total was an amount of $5.2 million, which the Committee was informed was attributable to: damage ($196,780), deficiency ($2,102), theft ($390,073), accident ($913,683), military activity ($2,988,858), loss ($663,691) or reasons unaccounted for ($55,372).
The Advisory Committee notes that in the budgets for 2005/06, writing off of mission assets has been introduced as an indicator of achievement under the support component.
A decrease in the value of items written off can be either a positive development in that it shows evidence of more careful safeguarding of United Nations property or it could point to laxity in procedures for the swift disposal of assets that are no longer useful to the Organization.
In view of the amounts involved, the Advisory Committee is of the opinion that an analysis should be made by the Administration which could reveal the reasons for the fluctuation in the value of items written off.
In any case, the Committee points to the necessity of achieving a balance between holding on to marginally useful items that are expensive to maintain or transfer and automatically disposing of items irrespective of their continued usefulness (see, for example, the Committee's reports on UNIFIL (A/59/736/Add.3, paras.
24 and 27) and ONUB (A/59/736/Add.12, para.
Management issues
Support account for peacekeeping operations
The Advisory Committee's detailed comments on the support account are contained in document A/59/784.
As the Board of Auditors indicates in paragraph 83 of its report, the level of the support account increased between 2000 and 2005 by 217 per cent, while total peacekeeping costs for the same period increased by 76 per cent.
As noted in paragraph 82 of the report, an additional 93 posts were approved for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in 2001 and a further 91 in 2002.
As at 30 June 2004, 539 posts for the Department were funded from the support account.
The current request is for an additional 110 posts in 2005/06, of which 49 are for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The Advisory Committee points out that while there have been increases in peacekeeping activities resulting from the establishment of new missions, there have also been some decreases relating to closed or downsizing missions (for example, UNMIBH, UNIKOM, UNMISET and UNAMSIL).
Furthermore, much has been done during the past five years to build capacity in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations through training, investment in information technology and the introduction of new management tools and less cumbersome procedures for contingent-owned equipment.
The Committee believes that these factors should lead to efficiencies and possibly, in turn, to reduced support account requirements (see also A/59/784).
In its report on the support account, the Advisory Committee recommends that the Secretary-General be requested to analyse the evolution of the support account, starting with the original concept of providing for overload posts to supplement provisions under the regular budget and describing changing needs, to justify departures from the original concept (ibid., para.
The Committee believes that the Board of Auditors can make an essential contribution to a further analysis of how the support account has evolved to its current application and configuration and how it may further evolve, either by growing or diminishing.
Accordingly, the Committee has suggested to the Board of Auditors that it undertake: (a) an analysis of how fluctuations in the level of peacekeeping activities affect the level of required Headquarters backstopping; (b) an analysis of which factors determine the level of required backstopping; and (c) the delineation of functions as to what must be performed at Headquarters and what can be carried out in the field.
Since the support account is devoted largely to administrative and financial functions performed in connection with missions, the Board is requested to recommend methods of assessing the efficiency and productivity of such work.
In a related matter, the Advisory Committee has also requested the Board to look into the relationship between troop strength and the required civilian support component of a mission.
The Committee notes that in the revised budget of MONUC for 2004/05 (A/59/707), for example, an increase of 5,674 military contingent personnel and 86 civilian police, coupled with the expansion of the Mission's mandate, led to a request for an additional 698 civilian personnel.
Coordination between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other departments or entities
In paragraph 91 of its report, the Board refers to its recommendation that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations formalize its coordination with other departments and entities in memorandums of understanding or service-level agreements.
While the Advisory Committee recognizes the need for such formalities between the United Nations and its funds, programmes and agencies, it questions whether they are necessary between departments of the Secretariat, which are ultimately accountable to the Secretary-General.
The Committee trusts that the Secretary-General will expeditiously take the necessary measures to improve interdepartmental cooperation and coordination, including the development of clear standards for the provision of services from one department to another.
Management reviews
On the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, the Board followed up on the issue of periodic and timely reviews conducted by management.
As indicated in the Board's report, reviews and periodic assessments of peacekeeping missions were conducted on an ad hoc basis by integrated teams led by the Office of Operations of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
However, the Department was unable to provide the Board with an overall plan or specific schedule for the conduct of reviews or periodic assessments.
Furthermore, the Board reports that there was no central point at which information on management reviews or assessments could be obtained.
Consequently, the Board was unable to assess the extent of such reviews or assessments.
The Advisory Committee questions the usefulness of conducting reviews if the findings are unavailable for future reference.
The lack of plans, schedules or a systemic database to track the management reviews undertaken is indicative of weaknesses in the management culture of the Department.
The Committee considers it essential that the Department designate a focal point for analysis and assessment of the results of such reviews for possible application throughout the peacekeeping operations.
In the opinion of the Committee, this is basic to a results-based approach.
Furthermore, the Department has a Peacekeeping Best Practices Section, which the Committee had been informed was developing mechanisms to make lessons learned part of the mission-planning process (see A/58/759, para.
It seems logical that such a focal point for analysis and assessment could be linked to the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section.
Furthermore, in the opinion of the Advisory Committee, the efficiency and effectiveness of management processes should be reviewed before additional resources are requested in order to identify efficiency gains that have been achieved and possibilities for further gains through streamlining and improved methods.
In addition, the Secretariat, drawing upon the support of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, should systematically seek to review, streamline and simplify procedures, as well as to recommend changes to regulations and rules to support more effective and efficient administrative processes, with a view to achieving economies in requirements for human and other resources.
The Committee has also referred to this matter in its report on the support account (see A/59/784).
With regard to the management review of UNOMIG, the inability of the management team to finalize its report owing to disagreements with UNOMIG has rendered the exercise a failure and a waste of resources.
The Advisory Committee supports the Board's recommendation that all reviews undertaken by management should be finalized in a timely manner, even if this means reporting on disagreements.
The Committee has commented further on this matter in its report on the financing of UNOMIG (see A/59/736/Add.7, para.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of peacekeeping operations
With regard to the inclusion of standard statistical data on performance for the current period in each of the peacekeeping reports, this time, owing to various constraints, it has been necessary to supply this type of information in consolidated tables, which are annexed to the present report (see annex II).
The information provided covers the following: (a) expenditure for the current period; (b) current incumbency; (c) status of reimbursement for troop/formed police costs, contingent-owned equipment and death and disability; (d) updated financial position of the peacekeeping operations; and (e) status of contributions.
During its examination of the reports of the Secretary-General, the Advisory Committee continued to focus on issues relating to budget preparation, as well as the monitoring and control of budget implementation, keeping in mind its previous recommendations as approved by the General Assembly.
The Committee also addressed the adequacy of explanations on budget performance changes and budget estimates.
The comments of the Committee on general issues applicable to most peacekeeping operations can be found, where relevant, in the discussion on individual objects of expenditure and management issues in the present report.
As indicated in paragraph 1 above, the Committee has also taken into account the findings and recommendations of the Board of Auditors on those matters.
The Advisory Committee's 2005 winter session (2 February to 22 April 2005) has been unusual in that, aside from the 16 proposed budgets for the financial period 2005/06 (including UNLB and the support account), the Committee has considered revised estimates for three missions for 2004/05 (MONUC, UNFICYP and UNMIK) and two sizeable requests for commitment authority (UNMIS and MONUC) (for a list of documents before the Committee, see annex I below).
Although the Committee had planned for an additional three weeks in order to allow adequate time for it and the Secretariat to handle this unusual volume of work, the largest and most complex peacekeeping budgets were submitted to the Committee towards the end of its session.
Moreover, an overview report, which has been prepared by the Secretariat on its own initiative in recent years, was not available.
In virtually all cases, the Committee considered the proposals by the Secretary-General in an unedited, untranslated version, as the documentation was submitted to the Committee for consideration simultaneously with its submission to the conference services for processing.
The Advisory Committee is increasingly finding itself squeezed between conflicting priorities.
The level of peacekeeping requirements and the complexity of the operations are greater than ever before, yet the Committee has less time for consideration of the proposals of the Secretary-General, owing to their late submission, on the one hand, and the planned timing of their consideration by the Fifth Committee on the other.
Furthermore, the Committee has found itself under pressure to consider items extraneous to peacekeeping during the session.
In this connection, the Committee recalls General Assembly resolution 49/233 A, by which the Assembly, on the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, approved the current budgetary cycle for peacekeeping operations.
At that time, in response to the pressure of work, the Committee had already initiated a winter session to consider the budgets for peacekeeping operations.
The Committee will seek to follow the letter and the spirit of resolution 49/233 A and will maintain its practice of exclusively considering peacekeeping matters during its winter session unless a time-sensitive matter emerges requiring immediate appropriation.
The Fifth Committee secretariat may wish to take the foregoing into consideration when it proposes the timing and agenda of the Fifth Committee sessions.
Further, the Advisory Committee is concerned about the unevenness in the quality of presentation in the documentation submitted for the present session.
While the Committee recognizes the difficulties inherent in assembling information that has been provided to Headquarters from the field, often under trying circumstances (for example, during the start-up phase of a mission), it points out that management in the peacekeeping missions rely on counterparts at Headquarters (in particular, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Management) to verify the integrity of information before it is presented to the Advisory Committee and Member States.
In the view of the Committee, the ultimate responsibility rests with Headquarters for maintaining standards with regard to presentation, timeliness of submission, accuracy of figures and consistency in the definition and application of policies.
The Advisory Committee notes with concern a tendency on the part of the Administration to use the budgets of the peacekeeping operations to introduce initiatives with policy implications, rather than first seeking the necessary policy guidance from the General Assembly.
This was attempted last year with regard to the conversion of mission staff from the 300 series of the Staff Rules to the 100 series (see A/58/759, paras.
Notable current examples of this include:
(a) Training of staff (including national staff) in UNMIK for service in another mission;
(b) Large-scale conversion of General Service posts to the Field Service category in MONUC;
(c) Proposed arrangements with the host country and the World Food Programme for the expansion of UNLB into a new location at San Vito (see A/59/736/Add.2, paras.
13 and 14);
(d) Use of assessed contributions for the humanitarian and development coordination pillar of complex integrated missions.
These matters are discussed at greater length below, as well as in the Committee's reports on the individual peacekeeping missions.
The Committee strongly cautions against what appears to be a less than transparent means for changing policy through the budgets of the peacekeeping operations.
A. Results-based budgeting
The Advisory Committee notes that 2003/04 is the first financial period for which the assessment of performance against the planned results-based frameworks set out in the budgets for the period has been possible.
The Committee expects that the collection by the missions of data from all components will hereafter lead to more realistic baselines and that this will facilitate better comparisons in future.
In this connection, the Committee notes and strongly supports the recommendation of the Board of Auditors in paragraph 301 of its report that “the peacekeeping missions document the baseline data for all indicators from which improvement is to be measured, to the extent possible”.
In response to the concern of the Board of Auditors regarding the lack of a system to ensure the accuracy of the indicators of achievement as reported in the performance reports compiled by mission, the Administration instituted a system of “portfolios of evidence” for all actual indicators of achievement and actual outputs included in the performance reports for the financial period 2003/04.
In paragraphs 293-296 of its report, the Board noted some problems in the implementation of the system.
Notable among these was the fact that in some cases formal data collection was not carried out throughout the period, making the compilation of a portfolio of evidence at the end of the financial period an onerous task.
Other problems included discrepancies between the portfolio of evidence and the source documents and the fact that the summary of evidence did not always have a direct link to the actual output achieved.
The Board recommends that the Administration monitor missions to ensure the implementation of standardized procedures and methods for information-gathering in order to compile a portfolio of evidence.
The Board also recommends the validation of the portfolios of evidence, on a test basis, by the resident auditors at the missions.
The Advisory Committee requests the Board to follow up on this matter.
In the proposed budgets for 2005/06, efforts have been made to ensure that the overall objectives are mission-specific and that the component structure is aligned with the Security Council resolutions and/or the reports of the Secretary-General to the Security Council.
The Advisory Committee also notes some further efforts that resulted in improvements in the measurability of a number of indicators and outputs.
As in the previous financial period, human resources for each mission have been attributed to the individual components, with the exception of the mission's executive direction and management, which have been attributed to the mission as a whole.
The Advisory Committee welcomes the continued progress being made in the presentation of the peacekeeping budgets using results-based budgeting techniques; however, there are areas in which further improvements are required.
The Committee was informed that a number of workshops and training initiatives had been undertaken or were planned to advance progress in implementing the results-based budgeting concept in the peacekeeping missions.
The Advisory Committee has consistently stressed the need to improve the measurability of indicators of achievement and outputs as well as identify time frames for implementation to facilitate monitoring and reporting.
Although progress has been made in this regard, quantification seems to remain a challenge.
At times, the results to be achieved are expressed in vague and uninformative terms, though the underlying activities could have been quantified.
Further improvements could also have been made in qualifying some benchmarks.
The Advisory Committee notes that in the substantive components of a number of missions a concept of zero incidents (violations of ceasefire, abuse of human rights, etc.) was introduced as an indicator of achievement.
The Committee points out that while this approach represents a welcome target or goal, its attainment depends on a number of factors over which the mission does not have sufficient control and that vary in different missions.
Constraints, if any, should be reflected under external factors.
In the support component, there is a need to formulate sufficiently representative and comprehensive indicators of achievement, which taken together can better indicate progress in attaining the expected accomplishment (which is the same for all missions) of efficient and effective logistical, administrative and security support.
The Advisory Committee also makes the following recommendations for improvement in the results-based budgeting presentation:
(a) In future, a short narrative should be included in section I, “Mandate and planned results”, of the proposed budgets, which would indicate the impact of important changes in the planned results;
(b) The presentation of human resources elements of components should be further refined in order to avoid repetition of outputs;
(c) The indicators of achievement and outputs should clearly reflect the mission's functions and responsibilities vis-à-vis those of the Governments and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in order to clarify what falls within and what is outside the control of the mission.
The Advisory Committee stresses the importance of the involvement of and guidance from the most senior levels of the missions in the formulation of objectives, as well as in the budget preparation process.
The Advisory Committee requested information concerning progress made in developing financial systems linked to a comprehensive programme information system, as was discussed in the Committee's general report on peacekeeping operations in 2004 (see A/58/759, paras.
In response to that request, the Committee was provided with information indicating that very little progress had been made since last year.
The Committee regrets this apparent lack of progress in developing an essential element of results-based budgeting.
The Committee intends to revert to this issue when it considers the next round of peacekeeping budgets in 2006.
Military
Rations
On the request of the Advisory Committee, the Board of Auditors has undertaken a review of the issue of management of rations in peacekeeping operations (see A/59/5, vol. II, chap.
II, paras.
The Committee considers this issue to be very important as it affects the health and morale of contingent personnel and has significant financial implications.
The Committee acknowledges the special nature of rations contracts in that they usually involve a chain of activities, which can include acquisition, delivery, central warehousing, breaking up of bulk packages, repacking, distribution to contingent personnel and refrigeration, among others.
As noted by the Board, of the nine rations contracts in place at the time of its review, eight were awarded to two contractors (ibid., para. 198).
The Committee understands that the inherent complexity of such contracts limits the pool of qualified vendors; nevertheless, it encourages the Secretariat to make every effort to identify more potential vendors.
In its previous general report on peacekeeping operations, the Advisory Committee expressed misgivings with respect to plans for the contractor to deliver rations door-to-door by air in MONUC.
The Committee had requested a cost-benefit analysis for MONUC specifically, and stated in general that modalities for the delivery of rations by the contractor by air should be the subject of a cost-benefit analysis (see A/58/759, paras.
72-74, and A/58/759/Add.10, paras.
During the current session, the Committee was informed that the optional provision for air delivery of rations had been incorporated into a number of mission rations contracts and could be activated when and if circumstances dictated.
However, the situation in MONUC has changed significantly with the opening of the Beni-Bunia road on 19 January 2005, which has made possible the delivery of rations by road to unit locations using contractor resources.
The Mission forecasts that the resulting cost savings of having rations delivered by road rather than by air will be on the order of $3.6 million for the first year of operation.
The Committee welcomes this development and re-emphasizes the need for a cost-benefit analysis prior to any activation of the optional provision for contractor delivery of rations by air.
As noted in paragraph 199 of the report of the Board of Auditors, the provisional Rations Management Manual came into effect on 1 July 2004.
According to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, finalization of the Manual requires the concurrence of the Office of Legal Affairs and the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts.
The Advisory Committee supports the Board's recommendation to expedite the finalization of the Manual and to incorporate therein lessons learned at the various peacekeeping missions.
As indicated in paragraphs 209-212 of the report of the Board of Auditors, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was in the process of rolling out performance standards and indicators to the missions.
The Advisory Committee requests the Board to undertake an evaluation of those performance standards and indicators to determine their compliance with industry standards and emphasizes the importance of ensuring adequate training of staff with respect to their use.
With regard to quality assurance, the Advisory Committee recommends that the Administration consider undertaking a cost-benefit analysis concerning the use of an independent inspection mechanism with experience in the field to verify compliance by contractors with rations specifications, hygienic standards and delivery programmes.
In this connection, the Committee stresses once again that the primary consideration should be the timely delivery of fresh, high-quality food in accordance with established standards for the troops in a manner that is cost-effective for the Organization (see A/58/759, para.
In a related matter, the Administration should closely monitor per-person and per-day costs for rations, which vary from mission to mission.
Contingent-owned equipment and troop strength reporting
The Advisory Committee's detailed comments on contingent-owned equipment are contained in document A/59/708.
As indicated in paragraphs 336-338 of the report of the Board of Auditors, an internal audit of reimbursements made to troop-contributing countries during February and March 2004 at MONUC highlighted that the monthly troop strength reports were not always accurate and contained various errors and duplications, estimated at nearly $1.9 million.
The numbers reported in the troop-strength reports submitted by the Chief Military Personnel Officer for the payment of daily allowances to the troops did not match the troop-strength figures provided in the report of the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts.
The Advisory Committee supports the Board's recommendation that the Administration should quantify the differences with regard to daily allowances for troops at MONUC for the entire financial period and develop and formalize procedures to ensure the accurate computation and payment of such daily allowances.
The Committee points out that these weaknesses in the procedures may also have implications with regard to the management of rations.
While the impact of this particular case may not be very great, the Committee requests the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to monitor this matter closely in all missions.
Other matters
In its last general report, the Advisory Committee recalled that the United Nations paid dual tentage and accommodation rates whenever a contingent remained in tents after the first six months of its deployment; however, if troops were offered accommodation, no payment was due (A/58/759, para.
Nevertheless, the Committee was informed that one of the battalions in UNMEE initially refused the hard-wall accommodation offered to it and that dual payments were made.
It is the view of the Committee that a specific policy should be developed for such circumstances aimed at avoiding United Nations responsibility for paying for tentage when hard-wall accommodation is available.
In a related matter, the Advisory Committee, in its report on ONUB, has described a situation whereby the mission, on the basis of its own cost-benefit analysis, concluded that it was more cost-efficient and practical to continue to pay mission subsistence allowance to staff officers than to provide them with accommodation (A/59/736/Add.12, para.
However, in other missions, every effort is made to provide accommodation and meals.
The Committee was informed that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had formed a working group to conduct a review of this matter in all missions.
The Committee looks forward to the working group's findings.
The Committee is of the opinion that a uniform policy should be adopted with exceptions made only in clearly delineated and justified cases.
C. Civilian personnel
Upon request, the Advisory Committee was provided with a consolidated table showing the number of civilian personnel approved in 2004/05 and proposed in 2005/06 for each of the peacekeeping operations (see annex III).
The Committee notes that for 2005/06 a total of 5,552 posts are proposed for international staff and 9,476 for national staff, as compared to 5,500 international and 9,206 national approved for 2004/05.
A total of 2,219 United Nations Volunteers are proposed for 2005/06 as compared to 2,205 approved for 2004/05.
Upon request, the Advisory Committee was also provided with a table showing planned and actual vacancy rates for international and national staff for the period 2003/04 (see annex IV).
In the light of experience that reflected significant savings under civilian personnel costs in the performance reports relating to several missions, a new methodology for budgeting international staff costs has been used in the proposed budgets for 2005/06 based on the average actual costs for salaries by grade level for each of the peacekeeping missions.
For common staff costs, a weighted average percentage of the total salaries has been used, based on actual costs in each mission.
For the new missions, salary and staff assessment rates have been derived from actual average expenditure by staff category and grade levels during the 2003/04 financial period across all peacekeeping operations (excluding the United Nations Logistics Base and established missions), and common staff costs have been estimated at 60 per cent of net salary, excluding hazard pay.
The past practice was to use New York-based standard salary costs and to make arbitrary mission-specific reductions in standard common staff costs.
The new methodology should allow for more realistic budgeting, as the averages are based on actual expenditure patterns in each mission, and will address the issue of accounting for the differences in the contractual status of mission personnel by incorporating into the calculation the most recent staffing composition.
The Committee understands that implementation of the new methodology will be monitored regularly and at the end of each financial cycle.
The Committee welcomes this innovation.
In some missions, the conversion of personnel on special service or individual contractor agreements to national General Service staff is proposed, with the explanation that those personnel carry out core or continuing functions.
In UNLB, 64 individual contractors and in UNIFIL 36 personnel on special service agreements are proposed for conversion to national General Service staff.
In UNDOF, 14 staff who had been converted from casual labourers to general temporary assistance in 2004 are now proposed for conversion to national staff.
The Advisory Committee points out that proper budgetary procedure requires that continuing functions be carried out by staff occupying established posts, with the related costs charged against staff costs rather than operational costs.
Functions of a temporary nature should be provided through general temporary assistance (or, in some cases, temporary posts).
The Committee recalls that during its consideration of the proposed budgets for 2004/05 it was informed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations that when no posts were available, and since other types of contracts were time-limited, requirements for additional personnel to perform functions of a continuing nature had been met through the hiring of individuals on procurement contracts (see A/58/759, para.
In fact, over the years, the Secretariat has consistently misused the provision for special service and/or individual contractor agreements.
This has an attendant financial implication which reflects the accumulated cost of the failure to observe proper budgetary procedures over a number of years.
In order to correct the situation and to restore budget transparency, the Advisory Committee has not objected to one-time across-the-board conversions in UNLB, UNIFIL and UNDOF.
The Committee has found no basis to conclude that the functions described in the three operations, which in some cases have been performed for many years, are not of a continuing nature.
However, the Committee emphasizes that proper budgetary procedure would have required specific proposals to have been made and justified for each and every post/function as the need arose.
While not in any way objecting to the proper utilization of outsourcing, the Committee expects that proper procedure will be followed without exception in future.
The Committee requests that future submissions contain detailed performance information on arrangements with individual contractors in order to confirm that they are being hired in accordance with proper procedure.
Similarly, information should be provided on any projected use of such arrangements in the forthcoming period (see paras.
138 and 139 below).
In the revised budget for MONUC for 2004/05, the Secretary-General has proposed the conversion of 62 General Service posts to the Field Service category.
The Advisory Committee has expressed its opinion that the implications, including financial implications, of such a large-scale conversion of General Service staff should be thoroughly analysed before it is implemented.
Furthermore, the Committee notes that a review of the Field Service category is long overdue.
In this connection, the Committee recalls that the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations in its report recommended that the Field Service category be reformed “to mirror the recurrent demands faced by all peace operations, especially at the mid- to senior-levels in the administrative and logistics areas” (A/55/305-S/2000/809, para.
145 (b)).
The Committee also recalls that it requested the Secretary-General to expedite the completion of the review of the Field Service category and to submit his comprehensive proposals in that regard to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session, as recommended by the Joint Inspection Unit (A/57/434, para.
The Committee requests that the above-mentioned review, which has been called for repeatedly, be undertaken on an urgent basis.
The Advisory Committee is of the view that a gradual replacement of international staff with national staff, wherever feasible and cost-effective, should be encouraged in the peacekeeping operations, as it would contribute to capacity-building and transfer of skills to the local population, as well as increasing the feeling of ownership by the local population of activities presently carried out by the missions.
The Committee was informed that in some mission areas there is fierce competition for qualified local staff among the peacekeeping operation, the United Nations funds and programmes, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the European Union and non-governmental organizations, among others.
The Committee believes that efforts must be made by the United Nations to convince the entities in the mission areas to come to an agreement on a reasonable salary scale for local staff and thus avoid undue competition among them (see paras.
138 and 139 below).
The Committee also points out that the upward movement in local salaries caused by such competition can, in the long run, have a serious impact on the local labour market conditions.
The Advisory Committee has commented in the past on the high percentage of UNIFIL staff on temporary duty assignment to other missions and to Headquarters (A/58/759/Add.6, para.
The Committee was informed that UNIFIL staff were in demand during the start-up phases of missions as they were seen as a reliable source of experienced and skilled personnel, particularly in the areas of logistics and administration.
However, it was not always possible to replace such staff expeditiously.
Moreover, temporary staff hired to replace staff on temporary duty assignment to other missions were charged to and administered by UNIFIL, whereas staff away on temporary duty assignment were charged to the mission to which they were temporarily assigned but continued to be administered by UNIFIL.
The cost incurred to UNIFIL in this regard has not been quantified.
Some staff remain on temporary duty assignment for as long as 10 years (ibid.).
The Advisory Committee is concerned that UNIFIL and other established missions, as well as UNLB, may be used as a training ground for staff earmarked for other missions.
Furthermore, the Committee notes that the temporary duty assignment model of staffing start-up missions is an expensive way of providing service, particularly when absences from the parent duty station last for years.
There are an increasing number of experienced staff who rotate between missions, as well as between missions and Headquarters or UNLB.
The Committee trusts that a new approach will be explored with a view to using greater flexibility when it comes to the deployment of such staff to avoid burdening staffing resources at one or two missions.
The Advisory Committee is concerned about how the humanitarian pillar in complex, integrated missions is functioning.
While the Committee fully supports the concept, it notes that, in a number of missions, resources are requested in some of the areas coordinated by the pillar for activities that are traditionally funded through voluntary contributions.
The Committee was informed that in the proposal for UNMIS, for example, provision had been made in the estimate for preparing contingency plans to disarm and demobilize 15,000 allied militia forces and to provide related assistance to 5,000 others (see A/59/768, para.
In the proposed budget for MINUSTAH for 2005/06 (A/59/745), an amount of $4.55 million is included for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes.
The Committee recalls, in this connection, that in his report on Liberia to the Security Council dated 11 September 2003, the Secretary-General stated that it was “imperative that not only disarmament and demobilization, but also the initial phases of reintegration, be funded from the assessed peacekeeping budget” (S/2003/875, para.
111) and that the initial budget for UNMIL (A/58/539) included provision for disarmament, rehabilitation and reintegration (see also the report of the Committee contained in document A/58/591, paras.
8 and 21).
The Committee points out that the General Assembly has never pronounced itself on the use of assessed peacekeeping contributions for this purpose.
The Assembly may wish to consider a policy decision on the matter at this juncture.
In the meanwhile, the Committee cautions against making automatic provision for the use of assessed contributions for activities that are traditionally funded through voluntary contributions; efforts to coordinate with partners in the system should be maximized so that they mobilize the necessary voluntary contributions.
The Advisory Committee was informed that arrangements with the United Nations Development Programme for the shared funding of the position of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General who heads the humanitarian pillar and also serves as Resident Coordinator have not yet been put into effect.
In this connection, the Committee recalls that it was the understanding that UNDP would usually finance the post up to the grade level of D-2, with the cost difference between the D-2 and Assistant Secretary-General levels to be absorbed by the United Nations (see A/59/390, para.
The Committee has recently been informed that, notwithstanding what was originally described to it in 2004, no formal agreement exists between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNDP for cost-sharing of Deputy Special Representative posts in peacekeeping missions.
Instead, these arrangements are determined on a case-by-case basis between the UNDP regional bureau and the Executive Office of the Secretary-General.
Given the role of this position, the Advisory Committee sees no reason why the arrangements discussed with UNDP would not be applied to all missions concerned, irrespective of what level is eventually determined for the posts.
It expects that an undertaking that UNDP will fund the posts up to the D-2 level will be confirmed and put into practice without further delay, and it requests that it be informed accordingly before the 2006/07 budgets are submitted.
With regard to the benefits package payable to mission personnel, the Advisory Committee draws attention to the fact that UNDP and other agencies and funds apply the special operations approach, which, in general, provides for a much more generous package of entitlements than are given to United Nations staff.
The Committee questions the basis for this departure from the common system of salaries and allowances developed by the International Civil Service Commission and approved by the General Assembly.
The Committee requests that comparative data on entitlements under the special operations approach, 100 series appointments and 300 series appointments be provided to the Fifth Committee for its consideration in connection with the peacekeeping budgets in May 2005.
The Advisory Committee understands that this matter has been taken up by the International Civil Service Commission, which, at its sixtieth session, considered a report from the Human Resources Network on how the United Nations and other organizations of the common system are working to harmonize practices with respect to internationally recruited staff serving in non-family duty stations.
The Commission will continue its work in this area at its sixty-first session, in July 2005.
The Advisory Committee looks forward to a speedy resolution of this problem.
The staffing tables of a number of missions include proposals for separate posts for Information Analysis Officers, Strategic Planning Officers and Best Practices Officers and/or separate units to carry out these functions.
While the Advisory Committee believes that those functions are important, it is not convinced that separate units or fully dedicated staff are operationally required.
The Committee urges the Secretariat to review this approach and to consider the possibility of combining the functions into one position or assigning the tasks to existing positions.
The Advisory Committee notes that staffing resources for a personnel conduct function have been requested in a number of budgets for peacekeeping operations.
The Committee was informed that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in response to the recent allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping personnel in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, had instructed all missions to include personnel conduct functions in their budget proposals, but that this instruction was issued without the support of a larger review or policy framework, which is currently being formulated.
The Committee recognizes that more systematic attention will need to be devoted to the full continuum of personnel conduct issues, including policy development, training, community relations, compliance supervision, investigations and accountability and discipline.
The Committee urges that proposals to strengthen those functions and improve their effectiveness take account of the fact that the functions are not inherently new and are closely linked to human resources management functions and to the leadership functions of the heads of mission, as well as the military and police.
The Committee notes that guidelines have routinely been issued for civilian police, military observers and contingents, all of which operate under their respective civilian police and military chains of command.
The Committee points out that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and the victims, might have been served better if timely preventive personnel conduct oversight measures had been implemented.
The Committee is disappointed that occurrences were allowed to spiral out of control without the early anticipatory introduction of a solid set of administrative controls.
The Committee regrets that the Department's approach to comprehensively addressing personnel conduct matters within the administrative structures of missions has been reactive rather than preventive.
The Advisory Committee recommends that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations consider establishing a management committee in each mission, consisting of section chiefs in the management areas and chaired by the Chief Administrative Officer, to deal with issues of good management, such as best practices, accountability and conduct, strategic planning and implementation of recommendations of oversight bodies.
The Committee could meet on a monthly or bimonthly basis to consider and assess reports of the staff charged with carrying out the functions just mentioned and report to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General as needed.
The Committee points out that capacity in respect of those functions already exist at Headquarters and expects that an integrative approach will be taken with effective collaboration between Headquarters and the field to avoid duplication of effort.
In a related matter, the organizational structures of a number of missions (MINUSTAH, MONUC, ONUB, UNOCI, UNAMSIL and UNMISET) include a Joint Mission Analysis Cell.
Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that the Joint Mission Analysis Cells were to be integrated civilian/military management mechanisms for conducting threat and risk analysis and security assessment in the field, as well as improving civilian and military operations and ensuring the better use of resources.
The Committee was informed that the Joint Mission Analysis Cells were to have a close working relationship with the Department of Safety and Security, which would use the information gathered and analyses conducted by the Cell.
Upon enquiry, the Committee was informed that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was in the process of formulating a policy on the establishment of Joint Mission Analysis Cells.
The Committee trusts that the policy being developed by the departments concerned will clarify how Joint Mission Analysis Cell functions can, for example, be coordinated with strategic planning and best practices functions and whether information gathering, sharing and analysis between the civilian and military components of the mission require the establishment of a separate unit.
The Committee has not objected to the establishment of Joint Mission Analysis Cells in the missions mentioned above; however, it requests the Department, in formulating the above-mentioned policy, to consider the need for and staffing of the Cells, taking into account mission-specific requirements and experience already gained.
During its review of peacekeeping budgets, especially for the complex integrated missions, the Advisory Committee found that problems with duplicative and top-heavy structures persisted.
In some cases, reviews were being carried out, but in others, there appeared to be little evidence that serious thought was being given to streamlining and rationalizing structures and to reassessing the need for a number of higher-level posts.
Moreover, there appears to be little if any Headquarters involvement in the monitoring of the evolution of structures in individual peacekeeping operations.
In this connection, the Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, by its decision 59/507, requested the Secretary-General to submit to it at the second part of its resumed fifty-ninth session a report on the review of the management structure of all peacekeeping operations, inter alia, through administrative comparisons, as appropriate, taking into account the complexities, mandates and specificities of each operation and the necessity of carrying out effectively and efficiently each operation.
The Committee understands that during consideration of the draft decision by the Fifth Committee, the Controller stated that the Secretariat would do its best to comply with the request, but that owing to the heavy workload involved in preparing peacekeeping budgets and performance reports, it might not be possible to produce the report requested in time for the resumed session in May 2005.
While the Committee understands the pressure of work under which the Secretariat finds itself, it is of the opinion that such a review has little value if it is undertaken after the budgets and, indeed, management structures have been approved and put in place.
Nevertheless, the Committee recommends that the Secretariat proceed with the review with the aim of completing it in time for the next round of peacekeeping budgets.
United Nations Volunteers
The Advisory Committee discussed the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Evaluation of the United Nations Volunteers Programme” (A/59/68).
The Committee notes the successful cooperation between the United Nations Volunteers and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The Volunteers have become an integral part of field missions in all three phases of the mission cycle: start-up, maintenance and liquidation.
However, the functions and responsibilities of Volunteers are not always clearly defined, nor is the authority delegated to them.
The Advisory Committee recommends that the Programme and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations define clear parameters of employment for Volunteers working with the Department.
In 2003, the United Nations Volunteers Programme and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations signed an umbrella memorandum of understanding to define the general modalities of mutual cooperation.
The Committee notes that individual memorandums of understanding are also signed on a mission-by-mission basis with a focus on implementation, financial arrangements and conditions of service of Volunteers.
The Committee emphasizes that such memorandums of understanding should also define Volunteers' privileges and immunities.
The Advisory Committee recommends that the General Assembly request the United Nations Volunteers Programme to intensify its follow-up with the Office of Legal Affairs to ensure that the privileges and immunities of Volunteers are clearly defined.
The Advisory Committee agrees with the Joint Inspection Unit that UNDP should introduce a regular review cycle for the United Nations Volunteers Programme to ensure objective risk control and management oversight.
Operational costs
Training
The Advisory Committee has written extensively about training in recent years, and in its reports on peacekeeping budgets for 2005/06 it has continued to express its concern, with particular emphasis on the need to justify training in terms of the specific requirements of the missions in which the training is budgeted.
The Committee has also suggested several ways to make training more cost-effective, for example by training the trainers and maximizing on-site training, e-learning and training via videoconference.
The Committee is also particularly cognizant of the need to evaluate the results of training and to identify areas where more training is needed or where training needs to be developed.
In this connection, the Advisory Committee notes the continued postponement of the development of a system for reporting on training in the peacekeeping operations, as outlined in paragraph 318 of the report of the Board of Auditors.
The Board reports that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has started a formal examination of the learning management systems in use by United Nations agencies and that, following a decision on which system was to be acquired, standard guidelines for the preparation of reports would be issued.
The process is expected to be completed by June 2005.
The Board was informed that the Department did not yet have the capacity to evaluate the long-term effectiveness of training for the individual or the work unit.
The Board was also informed that the mission “culture” and systems were not set up to use the performance appraisal system process to identify training needs and evaluate achievements, and there was no mechanism that could be connected to the electronic performance appraisal system to gather information across groups or missions to track competency gaps.
The Organization has made a major investment in training in the peacekeeping operations, and the Advisory Committee would expect to see a greater degree of accountability for results.
The Committee recognizes that the United Nations is working towards the development of a framework and methodology for the evaluation of training (see A/58/753).
It points out, however, that until such a comprehensive system is completed and put in place it will be impossible to know whether or not training programmes are effective and whether they improve implementation of programmes, thus justifying their cost and the staff time devoted to administering, travelling to and attending them.
Moreover, the model that is finally developed must be specifically suited to the unique organizational qualities and the particular skill requirements of the United Nations and its peacekeeping activities.
It also should be connected to existing means of evaluating staff, such as the performance appraisal system.
Furthermore, the lack of a viable system to track competency gaps renders the development of an effective training strategy difficult.
The problems mentioned above do not seem insurmountable.
The Advisory Committee considers it essential that a mechanism be put into place to evaluate the effectiveness of training and to track competency gaps.
In a related matter, the Advisory Committee notes that in the proposed budget for UNMIK, provision is made for English-language training for 150 national staff “to facilitate transfer of competencies and job skills from international to national staff with the aim of contributing to deployment of national staff to other peacekeeping missions” (A/59/633, para.
The Committee points out that training national staff of a particular mission for service in another constitutes a new policy approach, which should be thoroughly assessed and considered by the General Assembly before it is applied, especially in view of the fact that such staff would be serving as international staff at the new mission and might possibly be performing functions that could be carried out by national staff in that mission area.
In its report on the proposed budget for UNMIK, the Advisory Committee has noted that the link between proposed training and mission-specific activities is not always apparent (A/59/736/Add.1, para.
For example, training in rapid deployment is proposed for six staff in Brindisi, even though UNMIK is in the process of downsizing.
It appears to the Committee that such staff are being trained for future assignment to another mission.
In the view of the Committee, by training staff in one mission for service in another, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is creating a cadre that, in essence, duplicates the Field Service category of personnel.
A better approach might be to undertake a reform of the Field Service category of staff, as suggested in the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (see A/55/305-S/2000/809, para.
145 (b)), to meet the demands faced by peace operations (see also paras.
138 and 139 below).
Official travel, including training-related travel
The Advisory Committee notes that a high level of travel related to training is proposed for 2005/06.
This is one area where, in the opinion of the Committee, significant savings can be achieved.
In a number of cases, more serious consideration should be given to conducting training courses at mission headquarters instead of sending staff on lengthy journeys; this would be feasible, for example, if a number of staff were enrolled in train-the-trainer programmes.
They could then transfer their knowledge to staff at mission headquarters.
Training, especially away from mission headquarters, should be restricted to those staff who need it for mission-specific purposes, such as certification training for specialized skills or for participation in train-the-trainer programmes.
Furthermore, the Committee reiterates its view that as more staff are trained in mission-related skills, the requirement for such training should decrease, and with it the requirement for mission-specific training-related travel, particularly in missions that are no longer growing or are in the process of downsizing.
Finally, as has been frequently stated by the Advisory Committee, maximum use should be made of advances in communication and information technology so as to minimize the need for travel.
E-learning could largely obviate the need for additional training-related travel.
The Advisory Committee welcomes the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to organize travel of Headquarters officials to missions so as to include visits to other missions in the region as part of the same trip.
The Committee has commented on this matter in its report on UNIFIL (see A/59/736/Add.3, para.
The Advisory Committee has in the past called attention to the fact that the authority and responsibility for the management of missions' financial resources are delegated to the Chief Administrative Officer; all requests for travel must therefore be cleared by that official, who is able to refuse any unforeseen travel requests that lack adequate justification (see A/58/759, para.
The Committee has commented with regard to MONUC, however, that it appears that the Director of Administration, although he has been delegated that authority, has no control over unforeseen travel by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (see A/59/735, para.
The Committee reiterates that the use of peacekeeping budgets to cover Headquarters expenditure is not consistent with transparent budgeting and should cease (A/58/759, para.
Ground transportation
Upon enquiry concerning the wide variety of armoured personnel carriers used in the missions, the Advisory Committee was informed that, although the United Nations did not procure armoured personnel carriers, it was current practice in the peacekeeping missions that procurement of certain types of armoured personnel carriers is usually advised by the military personnel in a mission and subsequently endorsed by the Military Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Efforts are made to obtain the armoured personnel carriers by negotiating contingent-owned equipment with troop- and police-contributing countries.
A limited number of armoured personnel carriers reported as part of inventory were provided by troop-contributing countries with ownership later transferred to the United Nations under the old methodology of reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment.
With regard to this latter category of United Nations-owned equipment, the Committee notes the persistent use of outdated vehicles, which are expensive to maintain.
The cost-effectiveness of utilizing such vehicles should be reviewed as a matter of priority.
The Advisory Committee was also informed that the selection of mine- and ballistic-protected military vehicles was based on considerations such as the nature of the threat, the protection level and overall operational capabilities required, as well as the terrain and prevailing operating conditions of the mission.
As these factors change, a mission may change its requirements.
For example, as mine threats have decreased in UNMIK, mine-hardened vehicles were phased out and replaced with armoured four-wheel-drive vehicles.
The Committee was further informed that requirements may vary from sector to sector even within the same peacekeeping mission area.
Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that the use of representational vehicles was mission-specific.
Some of those vehicles are of standard civilian type, others are equipped with special armoured protection at a greatly increased cost.
The Committee notes that in some missions, two or more vehicles, including specially equipped armoured vehicles, were assigned to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and that other vehicles of both types were distributed among the civilian staff without a standard policy as to their entitlement to or need for such vehicles.
The Committee has addressed this issue, where relevant, in its reports on the individual peacekeeping operations.
In view of the high cost involved, the Committee is of the view that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should develop a policy with regard to the purchase and assignment of both standard civilian and specially equipped armoured vehicles, as well as representational vehicles.
In developing this policy, advice should be sought from the Department of Safety and Security and others as to the realistic security and road safety requirements for special vehicles.
Representational and specially equipped vehicles should not be utilized as status symbols, but should be assigned on the basis of demonstrated need and in accordance with an established policy.
Air transportation
The Advisory Committee was briefed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations Logistics Support Division on air operations in the peacekeeping missions and held an extensive discussion with the Board of Auditors on the matter.
Following an analysis of the costing structure relating to air operations contracts, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is endeavouring to move from the commercial industry approach of block-hours costing to a methodology whereby the United Nations pays only for actual flight hours utilized.
The Advisory Committee was informed, however, that a number of contracts were still entered into or renewed on the basis of block-hours costing, if the terms were favourable to the Organization.
The Committee urges in this regard a prudent approach that takes into account the cooperation extended by vendors who have agreed to work with the Organization on the basis of the new costing structure.
Upon enquiry as to the impact of the new pricing structure, the Advisory Committee was informed that a confluence of factors in the last two years had led to rising aviation costs, namely, the depreciation of the United States dollar, rising fuel costs and the scarcity of aircraft.
These factors, coupled with the increased demand for the type of aircraft used by the Organization and the application of more rigorous standards for aviation safety and other requirements, have led to a significant increase in the cost of aviation services.
The Committee was informed that it was therefore difficult to isolate the impact of the new pricing structure, especially since it had been implemented for less than two years.
The Committee requests the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to undertake an analysis of the impact of the new pricing structure in order to assess its cost-effectiveness and to report thereon at the next opportunity.
In its general report on peacekeeping operations of 6 April 2004, the Advisory Committee requested the Board of Auditors to continue to monitor the progress made by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the management of air operations (A/58/759, para.
As noted in the report of the Board, the total air transportation budget for 2003/04 amounted to approximately $350.2 million, while actual expenditure incurred totalled $288.4 million, representing a budget implementation rate of 82.4 per cent.
The Board conducted an analysis of some of the missions where air operations were considered significant; unfortunately, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was unable to provide statistical information for MONUC and UNMIK.
Of the 43,067 block flight hours budgeted for the missions included in the analysis, 26,570 (62 per cent) were utilized, and a total of 16,604 extra hours were budgeted, of which 4,688 (28 per cent) were utilized.
A total of 9,882 hours had been flown by the missions under the new base costing structure, but as these hours had not been budgeted for under that structure, no further analysis could be undertaken (see A/59/5, vol. II, chap.
II, paras.
Upon request, the Advisory Committee was provided with an updated table including statistical information for MONUC and UNMIK (see annex V).
The main reasons given by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for such significant variances were (a) savings realized by UNAMSIL in reduced contract rates for certain replacement aircraft, as well as for landing and ground handling fees, and (b) the slow pace of the start-up phase of UNMIL (ibid., para.
While the Advisory Committee commends UNAMSIL for obtaining more favourable contract rates, it believes that in the case of UNMIL, where expenditure for air transportation amounted to only 53 per cent of the amount appropriated, the slow pace of the start-up phase could have been better anticipated.
Furthermore, the Committee points out that, while the largest variance amounts are attributable to UNAMSIL and UNMIL, most of the missions show significant underexpenditure in percentage terms.
It appears to the Committee that the overbudgeting of air transportation requirements has become a chronic problem.
The Committee once again asks the Department to come up with a way to better formulate the air operations budget to make it more reflective of actual operations (see A/58/759, para.
In its report, the Board of Auditors comments on the use of executive jets in MONUC and UNMEE (A/59/5, vol. II, chap.
II, paras.
As of October 2004, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had five such aircraft, one each in UNMIL, UNMEE and UNOCI and two in MONUC.
The requirements for this type of aircraft relate mainly to medical evacuations and movements of senior personnel.
As regards MONUC, the Board reports that in 2003/04 approximately 780 hours were utilized by the two executive jets, representing approximately 60 per cent of the expected flight hours, at a reported cost of $1,163,476 (ibid., para.
The Department informed the Board that the functions of these aircraft were emergency-related and therefore could not be scheduled, and, further, that there were instances in which both aircraft were used simultaneously.
The Department also informed the Board that, as ONUB had no such high-speed aircraft, arrangements were being made to share MONUC assets when necessary.
The Advisory Committee was also informed that UNMIS and MONUC had already cooperated on a number of occasions and that UNMIS was looking into the possibility of sharing its (one) light jet aircraft with the UNMEE.
The Committee welcomes the intention of the Department to regionalize its approach and urges the Department to continue to explore ways to increase regional management of all air assets.
The Advisory Committee also requests the Board of Auditors to look into medical evacuation arrangements in the missions, with a view to assessing the availability, effectiveness and cost of various alternatives, including the sharing of regional air assets and commercial medical evacuation services, and taking into account local and mission medical capacities as well as those of neighbouring countries.
As part of its review, the Board may wish to examine how missions analyse different medical evacuation scenarios.
The Advisory Committee once again requests that all missions using executive jets continue to keep under review the need and cost-effectiveness of using such aircraft, as outlined in its general report on peacekeeping operations of 6 April 2004 (see A/58/759, para.
The Committee also supports the Board's recommendation that MONUC and UNMEE document a cost-benefit analysis to contribute to the justification of the need for executive jets in their reassessment of aircraft fleet requirements (A/59/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
Upon enquiry concerning efforts to regionalize air safety programmes, the Advisory Committee was informed that ICAO had recommended that the air safety programmes be consolidated into regional safety offices, and this regional concept had been implemented for MONUC and ONUB on a pilot basis.
The project did not provide for the establishment of a new regional safety office in MONUC; rather, the MONUC Aviation Safety Unit, with its available resources, conducted oversight of ONUB through visits every two to three months.
The Committee was informed that both missions responded positively to the project during an aviation safety assistance visit in March 2005, and it was agreed that a project paper would be prepared outlining the modalities of the joint safety oversight programme.
Once approved, these modalities would also serve as a basis for a working paper for implementing similar programmes in other regions.
The Advisory Committee welcomes this initiative and requests that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations report at the next opportunity on progress achieved in this regard.
In its examination of the various peacekeeping financing reports, the Advisory Committee has noted the inclusion, at additional expense, of some safety and other special equipment on aircraft deployed in areas where the equipment is of little use.
For example, the Committee understands that in UNOCI, rescue hoists were included as standard equipment but never used and, in fact, were removed by the mission to free up space for other purposes.
The Committee recognizes that there may be difficulties in obtaining aircraft that are customized for mission-specific requirements.
However, to the extent that the provision of equipment is within the control of either the mission or the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, care should be taken to avoid unnecessary expense.
In this connection, cooperation among missions in the same subregion in the utilization of air assets should take into account their common needs for special equipment.
The Committee has recommended the approval of a P-3 post in the Aircraft Management and Contracts Unit to ensure that aviation services are safely and effectively justified, determine aviation specifications and perform technical analyses relating to selection of aircraft, airfield services and infrastructure (see A/59/784, para.
In a related matter, the Advisory Committee was informed, upon enquiry, that the Aviation Safety Unit had initiated a review of the existing instructions on the invitations to bid and contracts concerning equipment on board contracted aircraft.
The review would determine what equipment is mandatory for each mission and type of aircraft and would also lay down standards for such equipment on the basis of the area and terrain of operations and the types of operations performed by the aircraft.
The Committee believes that the institution of such standards could result in significant savings for the Organization under air operations, and it urges the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to complete the above-mentioned review as expeditiously as possible.
The Committee requests the Board of Auditors to keep this matter under review.
In view of the increase in the number of aircraft managed and the need to conduct more safety assistance visits to missions, the Committee has recommended the approval of an additional P-3 post in the Aviation Safety Unit (A/59/784, para.
In the case of MONUC, it was a standard requirement of the aircraft charter agreements in 2004 to have a tracking system installed in all Mission aircraft.
As noted in the report of the Board of Auditors, the cost of the system could not be quantified, as it was incorporated in the contract price; however, the system was not being utilized by October 2004 (see A/59/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that the Mission had not been utilizing the system owing to problems of software compatibility between the Mission and the tracking system.
The Committee was informed that these problems had been ironed out and that the system was now operational.
The Committee welcomes this development and supports the recommendation of the Board that the Administration assess the feasibility of implementing the aircraft tracking system at other missions.
The Advisory Committee was informed that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the World Food Programme (WFP) had jointly developed and finalized common aviation standards pursuant to specific recommendations issued by ICAO.
These standards will be used as a basis for interoperability in peacekeeping and humanitarian air transport.
The Committee welcomes this development and recommends that the Department explore the possibility of inter-agency cooperation in other aspects of air transportation.
The Committee welcomes, for example, the initiation by the Air Transport Section, in conjunction with WFP, of the coordination of on-site vendor inspection and prequalification visits on a selected basis (ibid., para.
This initiative could afford both the Department and the agencies the possibility of wider coverage of vendors and greater quality assurance.
The Advisory Committee has noted that, in a number of missions, the rates for liability insurance for aircraft have increased significantly, while in others they have decreased.
The Committee expects that future budgets will provide clear explanations for fluctuations in the cost of this item.
E. Other matters
Assets management
In its report of last year, the Advisory Committee commented extensively on management of assets, which is essential to the efficient functioning of any operation (see A/59/759, paras.
Many of the concerns expressed at that time, including with regard to the write-off and disposal process (see also paras.
15 and 16 above), are still valid.
The Committee reiterates the need to take effective measures to ensure inventory control, replenishment of stocks and reasonable write-off procedures for the disposal of assets no longer required or useful.
In this connection, the Committee draws attention to the need to take into account the expected lifespan of equipment when evaluating the potential for its continued usefulness.
Staff should be held accountable for their decisions in this regard.
The Advisory Committee has noted that in a number of missions the ratios of information technology equipment and vehicles to staff exceed the established standard ratios.
Furthermore, in some missions projected requirements do not reflect the projected vacancy rates or include staff that do not require such equipment to perform their duties.
While, for the most part, not recommending reductions in the vehicle fleet or information technology equipment requirements, the Committee expects that significant improvements will be made by the missions in their programmes of acquisition and management of vehicles and information technology equipment; savings resulting from the missions' efforts should be reflected in the next round of performance reports.
The Committee also recommends that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations develop a policy for reserve vehicle holdings.
The Advisory Committee has noted that estimates for fuel consumption are mission-specific, with significant variations between missions.
The Committee recommends that thought be given to rationalizing the methodology for estimating fuel consumption.
The Advisory Committee enquired as to the impact of the Galileo system on inventory control of field missions and the strategic deployment stocks.
It was informed that Galileo had yet to be implemented in MONUC, UNMIK and UNAMA, but that it was expected that this would be achieved by the end of June 2005.
Work was also ongoing on fine-tuning the system software and training mission staff in Galileo operations; however, the full scope of the impact on inventory control could be evaluated only after the system was fully deployed and the operators had attained the required level of proficiency in the new system.
The Committee will revisit this matter in the context of its consideration of the proposed budgets for 2006/07.
Upon enquiry concerning the status of implementation and impact of the Saturn fleet management system, the Advisory Committee was informed that consultants were hired during the 2003/04 period, and on the basis of their initial findings it was established that it would be more expedient and economical to incorporate the inventory management aspects in Galileo by enhancing its existing capabilities.
The lack of a demand forecasting tool was one of the critical deficiencies identified by the consultants.
It was envisaged that this system would be acquired during the 2005/06 period.
Procurement and contract management
The Advisory Committee's detailed comments on procurement and contract management for peacekeeping operations are contained in its report in document A/59/722.
The Committee's comments in the paragraphs below should be read in conjunction with that report.
The Advisory Committee is concerned about the lack of obvious progress in a number of areas identified by the Board of Auditors and the Committee relating to procurement.
In the first place, little progress has been made in the procurement planning process.
The Board notes that, out of a total of 17 missions that were required to submit procurement plans, only 8 (47 per cent) submitted their plans by the required date, 6 (35 per cent) submitted theirs after the deadline and 3 (18 per cent) had not yet submitted theirs by the time of the audit.
Furthermore, none of the peacekeeping missions revisited procurement plans on the prescribed quarterly basis, and a number of missions operated without any reference to their procurement plans (MONUC, UNDOF, UNIFIL and UNOMIG).
The Committee emphasizes that procurement plans are intended to serve as operational and management tools for procurement officers.
The Committee therefore supports the Board's recommendation that the Administration make it compulsory for all peacekeeping missions to revisit their procurement plans at least on a quarterly basis to ensure that these plans are updated with regard to the operational requirements of the missions (A/59/5, vol. II, chap.
II, para.
The Board also reports that with respect to a sample of nine recently expired (June 2004) contracts valued at $62.3 million, no supplier evaluations could be found, and eight of the vendors still appeared on the active supplier roster in October 2004.
The Board reiterates its recommendation that the Administration ensure that peacekeeping missions compile assessments of progress and final performance of vendors and forward them to the Procurement Service in a timely manner in order to prevent situations in which contracts are maintained, extended and/or renewed in the absence of vendor evaluations (ibid., para.
The Advisory Committee finds the continued insistence of the Board in this area to be especially important; the Committee requests the Board to continue to follow up on these concerns and trusts that noticeable progress will be reported in the next report of the Board.
The Board notes that average lead times for purchase orders continue to range from six to eight months at some missions.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has prepared a detailed flow chart on the acquisition process with a view to identifying critical gaps in the process (ibid., para.
The Advisory Committee welcomes this approach.
Functional requirements of field missions for communication and information technology and analysis of establishing a global procurement hub for all peacekeeping missions in Brindisi, Italy
The report of the Secretary-General on functional requirements of field missions for communication and information technology (A/58/740) was issued in response to a request of the General Assembly for comprehensive information on these subjects.
No proposals are made.
The Advisory Committee has noted the detailed information provided on requirements for military contingents, observers, civilian police, mine action services and substantive elements (i.e., civilian staff).
The report also contains a detailed survey of policies on assets management and governance and the status of new and ongoing information and communication technology projects.
Finally, there is an evaluation of current policies and practices in terms of their cost-effectiveness, efficiency and productivity benefits.
The Committee has utilized the information and analysis provided in the report of the Secretary-General as a general background to its detailed consideration of the reports of the Secretary-General on individual peacekeeping missions and the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy.
The Committee has devoted considerable attention to the development of information and communication technology, both under regular-budget activities and in peacekeeping operations.
The aim of the Committee has been to encourage the translation of advances in information and communication technology into identifiable productivity gains (in terms of both quantity and quality) and, to the extent possible, actual savings and/or increased potential for future economies once the initial investment has been amortized.
In this connection, the Advisory Committee recalls its request that there be a comprehensive examination of establishing a global procurement hub for all peacekeeping missions at the United Nations Logistics Base, including relocating communication and information technology functions to Brindisi (see A/58/796 and General Assembly resolution 58/297).
This review was undertaken, and the results are contained in the report of the Secretary-General in document A/59/703.
As part of the review, the services of an international consulting firm were engaged to conduct an independent study of the operational efficiencies and financial costs related to the request.
The Committee welcomes the presentation of the report, which provides an analysis of functions that could be transferred, a matrix of the advantages and disadvantages of the transfer and its impact on the activities of related departments, divisions and other clients involved with those functions and a financial sensitivity analysis (see A/59/703, annexes I-III).
Based on the consultants' findings, the report indicated that the financial benefits of a relocation of procurement and logistic functions would be very limited, with savings in operating costs estimated at less than 5 per cent and a return on investment expected only after nine years.
It was also mentioned in the report that, given the current trend in United States dollar and euro exchange rates, a relocation does not seem advisable at this time.
Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that the analysis was conducted on the basis of the costs and benefits prevailing under the current operating conditions in New York and Brindisi and that potential changes to the current cost-sharing arrangements were not discussed with the host country as part of the exercise.
With regard to the comparative costs of rental space in New York and Brindisi, the Committee was informed that the annual cost of renting premises for 130 people in New York was $685,000.
According to the Secretariat, the lack of adequate suitable rental space in Brindisi could mean that the United Nations would have to build or renovate and maintain its own location.
The Committee points out that much would depend on what kind of agreement might be worked out with the host country.
Construction costs for a suitable facility are estimated by the Secretariat to be at least $5 million, and annual maintenance costs would be on the order of $590,000.
With regard to post adjustments, the Committee was informed that a multiplier of 40.6 was used for Brindisi and 60.7 for New York.
Notwithstanding the disadvantages described by the Secretary-General of actually relocating staff and related resources to the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, the Advisory Committee is convinced that there is a greater potential to maximize the benefits derived from the considerable investment in communication and information technology at Brindisi and elsewhere.
The Committee is therefore of the opinion that a further analysis should be made of how the Logistics Base at Brindisi could best be utilized to provide efficient and economical communication and information technology services, as well as other services, for United Nations peacekeeping and Headquarters clients.
The analysis should also address the cost-effectiveness of reducing reliance on commercial providers in favour of increasing the role of the Logistics Base at Brindisi.
Such an analysis should be available to the Committee in time for account to be taken of it during its consideration of the next round of peacekeeping budgets for 2006/07.
Training policy and evaluation system of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
The comments of the Advisory Committee on the report of the Secretary-General on the training policy and evaluation system of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations are contained in paragraphs 73 to 79 above.
Arrangements for the Galaxy system
The Advisory Committee was informed that at present the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was responsible for the development, maintenance and support of the Galaxy e-staffing system, using the resources of peacekeeping missions.
In an audit review of Galaxy, conducted from April to September 2004, the Office of Internal Oversight Services, recognizing that Galaxy is now established as one of the Organization's core application systems, recommended that primary responsibility for this system be migrated from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to the Information and Technology Services Division of the Department of Management, where such systems belong.
However, the auditors indicated that the transfer should not take place until the Division was in a position to assure a continued level of service, given that significant financial resources may be required for this purpose.
At the same time, the General Assembly has requested the Secretary-General to further improve Galaxy (see resolution 57/305).
In his report (A/59/265/Add.1), the Secretary-General states his intention to undertake a review of possible arrangements for regularizing the budgetary and technical support of Galaxy and for transferring responsibility from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to the Department of Management.
He further indicates that the review will evaluate the most appropriate technological infrastructure, including the possible use of standard, “off-the-shelf” packages for supporting Galaxy functions.
From its discussions with the representatives of the Secretary-General, the Advisory Committee understands that options for replacing Galaxy with a new software package would also be evaluated.
Following the review, a report would be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session on a strategic plan for technical support for the Galaxy system by the Department of Management and on possible financial implications of the new arrangements for the programme budget.
The study proposed by the Secretary-General is therefore not limited to the transfer of technical support for the system from one department to another.
It is broader in scope and amounts to an intention to evaluate alternative e-staffing systems.
Given the well-known difficulties experienced with Galaxy, the Advisory Committee recommends that lessons learned and experiences acquired during the development, implementation and roll-out phases of Galaxy by information technology specialists, as well as by users and applicants, be fully documented and analysed.
This will ensure that the same mistakes are not repeated.
It would also be useful to review the experiences of other large organizations having installed similar systems and to consider sharing the applications developed or acquired by other international organizations.
The results of the above should be reflected in the report to be submitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.
In the view of the Advisory Committee, that report should also provide an evaluation of the impact of the changes proposed on the information and communication technology strategy of the United Nations, on interactions and interfaces with other systems and on users and applicants.
Special attention should be paid to the modalities of the transition and planning for a seamless transition without disruption of services to users and a clear definition of the phases during which there will be an overlap of responsibilities between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Management.
Finally, a detailed analysis of the human resource requirements in terms of both United Nations staff and consultants, as well as all other financial implications, should be provided.
The Advisory Committee appreciates the effort of the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly of developments with regard to the Galaxy system and its future evolution.
The Committee looks forward to the full report that the Secretary-General will submit in the near future.
In the opinion of the Committee, however, the study proposed by the Secretary-General is one that can be undertaken on his own authority, especially since there is no indication of any additional resource requirements for this purpose.
The Committee therefore recommends that the General Assembly take note of the report of the Secretary-General.
Staff in the field
The following reports of the Secretary-General on staff in the field are discussed in the paragraphs below:
(a) Measures that would better streamline the policy guidelines related to the temporary duty assignment of staff in peacekeeping missions (A/57/787);
(b) Measures to expedite recruitment for field missions (A/58/764);
(c) Greater use of national staff in field missions (A/58/765);
(d) Staffing of field missions, including the use of 300 and 100 series appointments (A/59/762);
(e) Status of the civilian rapid deployment roster (A/59/763).
Measures that would better streamline the policy guidelines related to the temporary duty assignment of staff in peacekeeping missions
The Advisory Committee points out that the report of the Secretary-General on measures that would better streamline the policy guidelines related to the temporary duty assignment of staff in peacekeeping missions (A/57/787) was prepared in early April 2003 in response to General Assembly decision 56/471 and is yet to be considered by the Assembly.
The Committee has on several occasions pointed out the need to reduce the number of reports prepared for submission to various intergovernmental bodies.
A step in this direction would be for the Secretariat to consider ways and means of combining reports on similar and/or related issues; not only would this reduce the number of reports that need to be taken account of, but it would provide for a more comprehensive consideration of the subject matter in question.
In the case of the report at hand, the Committee notes that it has, in a number of respects, been overtaken by events.
For example, the statement in the conclusion that “perhaps most critical constraint limiting career and mobility of civilian staff in field missions is the recent reduction in posts in peacekeeping operations” (A/57/787, para.
The Committee notes that the Secretariat is now preparing a comprehensive report on a framework for the use of staff in missions (see paras.
138 and 139 below).
b.
Measures to expedite recruitment for field missions, taking into account the delegation of recruitment authority to field missions, including the use of fair and transparent recruitment procedures and monitoring mechanisms
The report on measures to expedite recruitment for field missions (A/58/764) was submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 57/290 B.
The report outlines the measures taken by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to expedite staffing, describes current staffing policies and procedures and reports on the progress made in meeting the standards of expeditiousness, competitiveness, fairness and transparency in recruitment.
Additionally, it describes and assesses established policies pertaining to the delegation of recruitment authority to field missions, namely UNMIK and UNMISET.
The Committee points out that since the report of the Secretary-General was prepared more than 12 months ago (April 2004), some data contained in it need to be updated.
The Secretariat submitted, upon request, updated information on a number of paragraphs of the report (see annex VI).
As indicated in the report, since January 2002 internal and external vacancy announcements have gradually become the vehicle for filling vacant posts, particularly in missions that are in their maintenance phase (see A/58/764, para.
In February 2003, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations launched the rapid deployment roster of staff who could be deployed to missions during their start-up phase for a period of up to three months.
According to the Secretariat's update, the enhanced rapid deployment roster scheduled for the first half of 2004 did not take place (paras.
140-144 below deal in detail with the issues of the rapid deployment roster).
In June 2003, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations implemented part one of an online vacancy tracking and reporting system, which enables the Organization to track, monitor and report on all vacancies and staffing actions once a decision to fill a post has been made.
The Department has also developed a draft Human Resources Handbook to further guide mission management and staff in policies and procedures relating to recruitment in field missions.
With regard to the vacancy announcement compendium (A/58/764, paras.
23-28), the Committee was informed that as of July 2004 all vacancy announcements are published through the Galaxy system; consequently, the vacancy compendium is no longer in use.
Paragraphs 29 to 32 of the report deal with the extension of delegation of recruitment authority to field missions; as indicated in paragraph 32, further delegation of recruitment and staffing authority to the field missions is on hold, pending the completion of standard operating guidelines on the revised staffing procedures, sufficient qualified recruitment specialists for all field missions and the institution of appropriate administrative monitoring and evaluation mechanisms at Headquarters.
The Advisory Committee encourages the Secretariat in this effort.
While the Advisory Committee does not dispute the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to improve the practices governing peacekeeping operations (see para.
33 of the report), it points out that the report does not provide the most important benchmark: the number of days required to fill vacancies in peacekeeping operations, which could objectively indicate whether or not progress has been made in expediting recruitment for field missions.
The Committee requests that this indicator be included in future reports on this issue.
The Committee recommends that the General Assembly take note of the report of the Secretary-General.
c. Greater use of national staff in field missions
The report of the Secretary-General on greater use of national staff in field missions (A/58/765) was submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 57/290 B, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to encourage greater use of national staff in peacekeeping operations.
The Committee points out that since the report of the Secretary-General was prepared more than 12 months ago (April 2004), some data contained therein need to be updated.
The Secretariat submitted, upon request, updated information on the number of national staff and functions of National Professional Officers in field missions as at 13 April 2005 (see annex VII).
The use of National Professional Officers is governed by specific criteria approved by the International Civil Service Commission, which were outlined in annex VI of the 1994 report of the Commission (A/49/30) and adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 49/223.
The use of National Professional Officers is limited to functions that have a national content and which require national experience and knowledge of local culture, language, traditions and institutions; National Professional Officers should be employed in accordance with the stated criteria and not merely as a convenient substitute for international Professionals.
National General Service staff are represented in all components of every mission.
The Advisory Committee notes from paragraph 13 of the report that the overall experience of using national staff in various missions has been positive and that feedback received from field missions indicates that National Professional Officers have generally produced high-quality work in their area of competence and that their knowledge of local institutions, culture and language has proven especially helpful; the staff is of a high calibre, and they are well educated, experienced and professional.
At the same time, the greater use of National Professional Officers in peacekeeping operations is limited by the conditions governing their employment, in particular the requirement that their use be restricted to functions that have a national content and require national experience and knowledge.
As indicated in paragraph 15 of the report, it is the intention of the Secretariat to develop flexible and creative staffing strategies in order to expand the use of National Professional Officers in field missions.
The Advisory Committee has consistently supported a wider use of national staff whenever and wherever possible.
It welcomes the intention to develop greater flexibility.
The Committee encourages the Secretariat to review the currently applied criteria and to present, as necessary, the related proposals for consideration by the International Civil Service Commission.
The Committee recommends that the General Assembly take note of the report of the Secretary-General.
d. Staffing of field missions, including the use of 300 and 100 series appointments
The report of the Secretary-General on staffing of field missions, including the use of 300 and 100 series appointments (A/59/762), is submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 59/266, section X, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to report on the reappointment of mission staff who have reached the four-year limit under a 300 series appointment of limited duration by 31 December 2004 or later and to submit proposals for consideration by the Assembly on functions that are relevant for reappointment under a 100 series contract.
The Secretary-General indicates in paragraph 4 of his report that by 30 June 2005, a total of 346 international staff will have reached, or exceeded, four years of service under a 300 series appointment of limited duration.
The 346 staff members were considered for reappointment under a 100 series contract in accordance with the criteria set out in section X, paragraph 2, of resolution 59/266, i.e., that their functions had been reviewed and found necessary and that their performance had been confirmed as fully satisfactory.
The Secretary-General also indicates in paragraph 5 that the results of the review are as follows:
(a) Two hundred and eighty-seven staff members met the criteria for reappointment from 300 to 100 series contracts set out in resolution 59/266;
(b) Forty-eight staff members did not meet these criteria because of the anticipated downsizing or closure of the mission in which they were serving; these 48 staff members remain employed under a 300 series contract;
(c) Four staff members did not meet the criteria for reappointment, and there is no expectation of their continued service; these staff will reach the mandatory age of separation by 30 June 2005;
(d) Five staff members, or 1.5 per cent of the total, were not approved for reappointment since their performance record was not confirmed as fully satisfactory;
(e) The consideration of the reappointment of two staff members is still pending.
The Advisory Committee was informed that the Secretariat was working on a comprehensive report that would elaborate on the criteria to be used in reappointing staff from 300 to 100 series contracts.
The report would also propose a comprehensive framework for the use of staff in missions, including a definition of functions and proposals aimed at the development of a cadre of staff to meet core peacekeeping needs.
According to information received by the Committee, the development of such a group would enable the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to centrally manage staff and deploy them at short notice in response to operational requirements.
The Committee was informed that, in addition, it is intended that the report of the Secretary-General will address conditions of service of special representatives vis-à-vis conditions of service offered under the special operations approach offered by the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes (see para.
63 above).
In the opinion of the Advisory Committee, there should also be a broad effort to harmonize conditions of service for all staff in field missions.
The Advisory Committee welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to prepare the comprehensive report on this subject and looks forward to receiving it in a timely manner so that it can be taken into consideration well before the next round of peacekeeping financing proposals.
In the meantime, the Advisory Committee recommends that the Secretary-General be authorized to continue the practice of reappointing serving staff under 100 series contracts after they reach the maximum period of service permitted under a 300 series appointment of limited duration, subject to the criteria set out in section X, paragraph 2, of resolution 59/266, i.e., a continuing need for their services and a fully satisfactory performance record.
The Committee trusts that the criteria for reappointment will be rigorous and will be consistently applied.
As to the issue of appointing staff under the 100 series, the Committee is of the opinion that no action should be taken pending consideration of the comprehensive report mentioned above.
e. Status of the civilian rapid deployment roster
The report of the Secretary-General in document A/59/763 is submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 58/298, in which the Secretary-General was requested to report to it at its fifty-ninth session on the status of the civilian rapid deployment roster, including measures to improve its utility, taking into account recent experiences with its use.
The report evaluates the status of the civilian rapid deployment roster and makes recommendations to improve its utility.
As stated in paragraphs 3, 6 and 7 of the report, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations initiated the establishment of the rapid deployment roster of civilian personnel in February 2003, in response to one of the key recommendations of the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations: the enhancement of the capacity of the United Nations to rapidly mount or expand field operations.
The pilot rapid deployment roster was to be composed of experienced staff members of the Department who were to be deployed for a maximum period of three months to undertake critical tasks in the start-up of a mission, mission enhancement or mission liquidation.
The pilot rapid deployment roster was to function in a staggered manner with three integrated teams.
The official launch of the rapid deployment roster was announced on 4 June 2003.
The Advisory Committee notes that out of 6,500 applications by staff members in the field and in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, 283 were approved for the three rapid deployment teams.
As stated in paragraph 8 of the report, the selection criteria included previous peacekeeping experience and language skills; gender balance and geographical distribution were also taken into account.
According to the Secretariat, 57 staff members had been deployed from the rapid deployment roster to six missions as of July 2004.
The Advisory Committee observes that an internal evaluation of the pilot rapid deployment roster was conducted by the Personnel Management and Support Service (in late 2003) and the Peacekeeping Best Practices Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (in the first quarter of 2004).
The main observations and recommendations on the rapid deployment roster are summarized in paragraphs 14 to 23 of the report.
The Committee notes that the team structure of the rapid deployment roster will be replaced by a single integrated roster whose members will be deployed individually as and when needed; the Secretariat anticipates that the new rapid deployment roster will comprise approximately 365 staff members performing critical functions in peacekeeping operations.
Moreover, in order to have a larger pool of candidates, the application process will be opened and extended beyond the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to include the Secretariat and, under conditions to be negotiated, United Nations Volunteers serving in peacekeeping operations.
The rapid deployment roster will be renewed annually.
The Advisory Committee encourages the maximum use of existing personnel management and database systems, including Galaxy, in the management of the rapid deployment roster; this should contribute to improving the efficiency of the roster and reducing management costs.
The Committee also requests that the Secretariat increase cooperation with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in establishing the humanitarian, development and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration components of the rapid deployment roster in order to ensure that the requirements of integrated missions are fully met.
The Committee recommends that the General Assembly take note of the report of the Secretary-General.
Special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse
The report on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse was submitted by the Secretary-General in compliance with General Assembly resolution 57/306, by which the Secretary-General was requested to maintain data on investigations into sexual exploitation and related offences.
The report also describes progress made in the creation and implementation of measures designed to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse and measures for processing allegations.
The Advisory Committee used the report as background during its consideration of the statement of programme budget implications (A/C.4/59/L.21) of draft resolution A/C.4/59/L.20, on the comprehensive review on a strategy to eliminate future sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The Advisory Committee paid particular attention to paragraphs 12 to 21 of the report, which describe measures taken so far to address this problem, including a number of mission-specific measures to eliminate abuses.
The Committee encourages the Secretariat in its endeavours to address this vital issue.
The Committee has commented on some aspects of this matter in paragraph 65 above.
As acknowledged in paragraph 21 of the report of the Secretary-General, while some progress has been made, numerous shortcomings persist in terms of policies, procedures and guidelines.
The Advisory Committee notes, in particular, that doubts about the confidentiality of the complaints process, as well as a lack of trust in investigative and disciplinary systems, persist and that underreporting of incidents of sexual exploitation or abuse is therefore probable (see A/59/782, para.
The Committee trusts that efforts will be made to address this matter urgently and to promote staff confidence in the complaint and response mechanisms so that they feel reassured about coming forward with complaints.
In its report on the statement of programme budget implications referred to above, the Advisory Committee called for a comprehensive approach to this problem for all United Nations activities, both at Headquarters and in the field, and for an analysis to be made of the related resource requirements necessary to implement a consistent policy in this area.
The Committee will await the results of that analysis and will revert to this matter as necessary during its consideration of the proposed programme budget and other relevant matters.
Annex I
Reports considered by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Report of the Board of Auditors to the General Assembly on the accounts of the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2004 (A/59/5, vol. II and Corr.1, chap.
Reports of the Secretary-General on financial performance for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 and/or on proposed budgets for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 of the peacekeeping operations.
The reports of the Advisory Committee concerning the specific peacekeeping operations are presented as addenda to the present report.
The list below gives the symbols of the reports of the Secretary-General on financial performance and on the proposed budget (or the disposition of assets, where applicable) and the reports of the Committee, in that order:
(a) United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (A/59/623 and Corr.1, A/59/633 and A/59/736/Add.1);
(b) United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and strategic deployment stocks (A/59/681, A/59/691 and A/59/736/Add.2; also A/59/701);
(c) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (A/59/626, A/59/654 and A/59/736/Add.3);
(d) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (A/59/625, A/59/653 and A/59/736/Add.4);
(e) United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) (A/59/619, A/59/629 and A/59/736/Add.5);
(f) United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (A/59/620, A/59/656 and Add.1 and A/59/736/Add.6);
(g) United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (A/59/622, A/59/634 and A/59/736/Add.7);
(h) United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (A/59/751 and A/59/736/Add.8);
(i) United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (A/59/635 and Corr.1, A/59/758 and A/59/736/Add.9; also A/59/759);
(j) United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (A/59/616, A/59/636 and A/59/736/Add.10);
(k) United Nations Mission in Liberia (A/59/624, A/59/630 and A/59/736/Add.11);
(l) United Nations Operation in Burundi (A/59/748 and A/59/736/Add.12);
(m) United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (A/59/745 and A/59/736/Add.13);
(n) United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (A/59/614 and A/59/736/Add.14);
(o) United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (A/59/750 and A/59/736/Add.15);
(p) United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (A/59/657, A/59/779 and A/59/736/Add.16);
Reports of the Secretary-General on peacekeeping matters on which the Committee commented separately.
The list below gives the symbols of the report(s) of the Secretary-General and the report of the Committee, in that order:
(a) Procurement and contract management (A/58/761, A/59/688 and A/59/722);
(b) Reform of the procedures for determining reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned equipment (A/59/292 and A/59/708);
(c) Financing arrangements for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 (A/59/692 and A/59/728);
(d) Financing arrangements for the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 (A/59/718 and A/59/734);
(e) Revised budget for the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 (A/59/707 and A/59/735);
(f) Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan for the period from 1 July 2004 to 31 October 2005 (A/59/756 and Corr.1 and 2 and A/59/768);
(g) Financial performance report on the budget of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 and proposed budget for the support account for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 (A/59/714 and Add.1, A/59/730 and A/59/784);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund (A/59/787 and A/59/791);
(i) Note by the Secretary-General on closed missions (A/59/752 and A/59/790).
The following reports of the Secretary-General are covered in the present report (paras.
70-72 and sect.
(a) Report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Evaluation of the United Nations Volunteer Programme” (see A/59/68);
(b) Functional requirements of field missions for communication and information technology (A/58/740);
(c) Analysis of establishing a global procurement hub for all peacekeeping missions in Brindisi, Italy (A/59/703);
(d) Training policy and evaluation system of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (A/58/753);
(e) Arrangements for the Galaxy system (A/59/265/Add.1);
(f) Measures that would better streamline the policy guidelines related to the temporary duty assignment of staff in peacekeeping missions (A/57/787);
(g) Measures to expedite recruitment for field missions, taking into account the delegation of recruitment authority to field missions, including the use of fair and transparent recruitment procedures and monitoring mechanisms (A/58/764);
(h) Greater use of national staff in field missions (A/58/765);
(i) Staffing of field missions, including the use of 300 and 100 series appointments (A/59/762);
(j) Status of the civilian rapid deployment roster (A/59/763);
(k) Special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse (A/59/782).
Annex II
Statistical data on performance for the current period
Status of expenditure for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 (as at 31 March 2005)
(In thousands of United States dollars)
a Includes budgeted voluntary contributions in kind, where applicable.
b Apportionment includes commitment authority of $49,950,000 granted by the Advisory Committee on 8 December 2004.
c Apportionment includes the amount of $2,176,900 for strengthening the security and safety of the staff and premises of the Force.
d Apportionment includes the amount of $7 million for security and safety approved by the General Assembly in resolution 58/295.
B. Incumbency for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 (as at 31 March 2005)
a Represents the highest authorized strength for the period.
b Represents the planned strength for the third quarter, per deployment schedule for 2004/05.
c Reflects previously authorized troop strength.
Downsizing of military contingent personnel to a revised strength of 860 personnel (Security Council resolution 1568 (2004)) will commence in March 2005.
d Represents average monthly incumbency for the period.
C. Amounts owed for troop costs by peacekeeping missions
(Thousands of United States dollars)
a Includes estimates for March 2005, pending receipt of certified troop-strength reports for some missions.
Amounts due for contingent-owned equipment from ongoing missions
(Thousands of United States dollars)
a Includes amounts in accounts payable.
b Covers the period up to 30 June 2005.
c Reported only for memorandums of understanding that have been signed as at 31 December 2004.
d Based on old reimbursement methodology; awaiting in/out survey.
e Amount due includes requirements resulting from the expansion authorized by the Security Council in October 2004.
E. Status of death and disability compensation by peacekeeping missions (as at 31 March 2005)
(Thousands of United States dollars)
a Covers the period up to 30 June 2005.
b Pending claims include claims which are under clarification owing to the absence of claimed values.
c Under clarification as claim was submitted without a claimed value.
Updated financial position of peacekeeping operations
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Status of contributions as at 31 March 2005
(Thousands of United States dollars)
a Since inception.
Annex III
Number of civilian personnel by mission and type of personnel
a National personnel comprise National Officer and National General Service posts.
b Staffing for 2005/06 relates to essential additional posts proposed in the commitment authority request for the period from 1 July to 31 October 2005 only and are considered temporary, without prejudice to decisions the General Assembly may take on the Mission's staffing establishment, upon review of its full 2005/06 budget.
c Includes 125 staff (16 international staff, 74 national staff and 35 United Nations Volunteers) for the Electoral Assistance Office, who are to be retained until 1 October 2005.
d The 2004/05 staffing represents estimated deployment by 30 June 2005, while the 2005/06 staffing represents estimated deployment by 31 October 2005.
The staffing for both periods relates to the commitment authority request for the period from 1 July 2004 to 31 October 2005 and is considered temporary, without prejudice to decisions the General Assembly may take on the Mission's staffing establishment, upon review of its full budgets for 2004/05 and 2005/06.
Annex IV
Planned and actual vacancy rates for the period 2003/04
a As a result of the suspension of the activities of the Identification Commission, budgetary provision was made for only 184 international posts.
However, following the transfer of the Identification Commission files to the United Nations Office at Geneva, all personnel of the Identification Commission were repatriated by 31 December 2003.
b Data cover the period from 1 October 2003 to 30 June 2004 and actual vacancy rates are based on the authorized strength.
Annex V Air operations statistics for the period ended 30 June 2004
Annex VI Updated information on the report of the Secretary-General on measures to expedite recruitment for field missions*
Paragraph 7
Since 1 July 2004, vacancy announcements for international posts in field missions have been posted through the Galaxy system.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has posted 503 generic vacancy announcements for field missions, which yielded 105,663 applications.
Of the applications received, 48,374 were reviewed.
Of these, 1,310 met both the technical clearance and minimum requirements for the post under consideration.
Paragraph 8
The vacancy rate for international posts in field missions is 22 per cent as at 13 April 2005.
Paragraph 13
In 2004, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations recruited 1,176 external candidates for international posts in peacekeeping missions.
Paragraph 18
The electronic self-nomination system for inclusion in the rapid deployment roster was a one-time exercise.
The figures reflected in paragraph 18 therefore remain the same.
Paragraph 19
The planned second rapid deployment roster scheduled for the first half of 2004 did not take place.
Paragraph 23
As from 1 July 2004, all vacancy announcements are published through the Galaxy system.
Consequently, the vacancy compendium is no longer in use.
Annex VII National staff in field missions
Number of authorized and encumbered national staff posts in field missions
a Incumbency set at 100 per cent.
Breakdown of National Professional Officers by mission and function as at 13 April 2005
a Incumbency set at 100 per cent.