# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
As the rapporteur for this Parliament on the original resolution four years ago, I cannot but comment that this represents a failure of political commitment in Europe to aiding five million refugees, some of the poorest of the poor, in Asia and in Latin America.
Nevertheless we are here now, and the Socialist Group supports the rapporteur' s recommendation for adoption of this regulation with the minimum of amendments, already agreed in principle with the Council, in order to allow a fast-track, one-reading approval of the extension, and in reality to allow refugee support projects this year to go ahead rather than be cancelled.
The need for this work remains as strong as it did four years ago.
It is no good us debating conflict resolution in the Parliament and then finding that the sole support to assist people when the guns are put down or when the period of immediate humanitarian assistance is at an end is then forgotten altogether.
This regulation has enabled us to intervene in countries where there is deep conflict with serious abuses of human rights.
For example in Afghanistan, which has today broken all world records for refugees with six million people having left the country since 1992, leaving the single largest and longest staying refugee population in the world.
Or like the protection of the terrorised indigenous peoples fleeing from Burma.
As one conflict ends another begins, as the half a million returnees expected in Timor by December this year go to demonstrate.
On this regulation, we know that the Council has some divided thinking.
I have to say, Mr Patten, I regret that the Commission does too.
Whilst it has supported projects in Asia to a great degree it has failed to address properly and with sufficient vigour the problems of refugees and internally displaced people in Latin America.
You know that I have spent much time visiting and studying the problems of violent, armed conflict in Colombia.
In that country alone there have been 800 000 internally displaced people since 1996; 123 000 new internally displaced people between January and June last year.
It is a disgrace that with this regulation the European Commission in the past has failed to address this problem.
The sort of forced displacement that we have seen in Colombia I have seen too in Chiapas in southern Mexico where the presence of international aid workers is essential for the protection of human rights.
Finally, I would like to congratulate Mr Deva on his report, thank him for his kind words in his speech and endorse what he says.
I know he will be listening carefully to the Commissioner when he sums up to see if he will put on record that promise to ensure that a future proposal for a multiannual regulation comes forward and that the annual reports will be provided.
With Mr Deva we ask those questions of you, Mr Patten, and if we do not get satisfactory answers the Socialists on this side of the House will be supporting Mr Deva in taking a very different stance on this report altogether.
Mr President, I should like to thank Mr Deva for a very good report, of which it might be said that it is as long as the Commission' s text is short.
It no doubt says something about the relationship between Parliament and the Commission at the moment that the text presented to us has been produced very urgently and is therefore very brief and very simple.And, as Mr Howitt also mentioned, is it, of course, not particularly satisfactory to receive it four or five months after the regulation has in fact expired, but this is actually the usual way, although I do not suspect Mr Patten of being up to no good.
It is the usual way things are debated in parliaments.
A report is submitted which says that we must now extend the regulation.
It is four months since it expired.
Parliament is thus, in actual fact, compelled to say: all right, then, we really have to accept the extension for, otherwise, there will be even more people dying of hunger and destitution.
It is not a fair way of doing things, and I shall therefore, like Mr Deva and others, also listen to what Mr Patten has to say.
That said, however, I would also say that we need to implement this proposal as quickly as possible, for we must try to help as best we can and just hope that we can find a more satisfactory way of doing things in future.
One simple little matter, which Mr Deva also emphasises, and which I too think we ought to discuss in the future, is the situation of women and children, which is, of course, extremely difficult and always will be in these situations.
We therefore need to concentrate very heavily on this area and find some methodical ways of doing so, partly by involving NGOs and others who can make a contribution.
Mr President, I would like to join in the heavy criticism which has been levelled by the parliamentary Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Development and Cooperation and which has been outlined in the otherwise very constructive report of Mr Deva.
These committees complained about the fact that the annual reports have not been issued by the Commission, and what is worse, the independent evaluations have failed to materialise, although these are, of course, vital in order to establish that the validity period of the regulations definitely needs to be extended.
But how can we do this without the necessary reports at our disposal?
As has already been expressed in other criticism, this is probably once again a case of outstanding payments, unnecessarily complicated procedures for financial control and a fragmentation of efforts.
Also the fact that the amounts spent are disproportionate to the number of displaced persons raises questions.
Commissioner, of the EUR 240 million, 40% has been allocated to Latin America which has less than 1% of refugees in the world, while 60% has been granted to Asia which has 40% of the displaced persons.
Were it not for the fact that a sudden discontinuation of the programmes would cause undesired effects and result in innocent victims, we would follow the advice of the Committee on Budgetary Control, but instead we will now follow Mr Deva' s recommendation.
He has called for an extension of that programme by one year, although Mr Howitt has already pointed out that, in actual fact, we are already halfway through that year.
We hope that the report and in-depth evaluation will as yet be forthcoming.
Mr President, we are not talking about humanitarian aid but about viable projects aimed at self-sufficiency and the reintegration of refugees and displaced persons, ex-soldiers, etc.
Surely we should be able to come up with the goods and establish that there is indeed reduced dependency on aid.
Mr President, we are prepared to give the Commission some respite because we know that so many people are making huge efforts and because Parliament too is not exactly whiter than white as far as the Council is concerned, which you are under-staffing, but I think that, in any case, we will need to get the Commission to keep its promise to us, because otherwise this cooperation will be futile.
Mr President, it seems simple.
All we need to do is to change the year 1999 to 2000 and the European Union can support campaigns for another year for the benefit of uprooted people in Latin America and Asia.
There is, however, more to it than that, as evidenced by the opinions of the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control.
With regard to the implementation and evaluation of this programme, the Commission has not exactly come up smelling of roses.
Little consideration has so far been given to the operation of this programme.
Sound annual evaluation reports are lacking.
Moreover, we are still waiting for a long-term vision for this programme.
I would, therefore, make the approval of the extension of this programme dependent on the availability of reports.
Parliament must use this as a way of forcing the Commission to account for the spending of the development funds.
None of this detracts from the fact that the recipient countries sometimes have dire situations to contend with.
The European Union must help where it can.
The role of the national Member States, however, is at least as important.
Indeed, at European level, we are always running the risk of making pledges that we cannot keep due to budgetary restraints.
The most important prerequisite to a long-term solution for the problems outlined is sound coordination of Member State efforts.
Nothing more, nothing less.
Mr President, it is not only a political responsibility but a moral responsibility that the European Union has to help those in straits outside its boundaries as equally as they can.
This being the purpose of this report, I congratulate its rapporteur, Mr Deva.
To help those in need when it is in our hands to do so, at the end of the day, results in our really helping ourselves.
The Bible as always is right when it states that there is a giving which does not impoverish.
The other side of the coin is also true.
Hoarding does impoverish.
Countries that have serious internal hostilities and all the terrible reaping of that where the innocent go to the wall and countries encouraging displaced persons to return home ought to be helped.
The fact of the matter is that those displaced are mostly women and children.
This makes it even more imperative that action should be taken.
Food supplies, water and sanitation, housing and shelter, education are, of course, the top priorities.
I welcome the recognition of this.
I believe that the four amendments submitted by the Committee on Development and Cooperation must be accepted by the Commission and I hope that the Commissioner, Mr Patten, who did not very often give me happy replies on other things when he was in another office, perhaps today will give me some little encouragement that Christmas is really coming.
It is essential that annual reports are submitted by the Commission to this Parliament and to the Council, as is specified.
If such reports are not forthcoming then I could not find my vote to go with this renewal.
I believe that the Commission must answer to this and tell us what they are going to do.
The financial framework needs to be introduced in keeping with provisions already agreed to.
These provisions must be strictly adhered to and this change is absolutely necessary.
The new text on comitology is necessary and when the long-term future of this regulation is assessed, this Parliament must have before it independent valuation reports, so where improvements can be made they can press upon the Commission to make those improvements.
Where they think this expenditure of finance can be maximised to a better reaching of the objective and target of these regulations, then we should have the information before us so as to give us a good, healthy and proper debate.
Mr President, the Commission proposes that the existing regulation be extended.
According to the regulation, the Commission is obliged to prepare an annual evaluation for Parliament and the Council, something it has not done.
However, the programme must not be halted under any circumstances; that would be quite wrong.
It is important that the programme should be extended, but not before we have seen the evaluations.
The Commission promised that we would have the evaluations in March, then in April and then in May.
So where have they got to?
An independent evaluation is needed for otherwise we have no guarantees that the money has been spent properly.
The purpose of the evaluation is, of course, to improve the future programmes.
Everything concerning development aid, including the rehabilitation of refugees, ought to fall within the remit of the Directorate-General for Development.
It is this Directorate-General which has the expertise and it should therefore also have the responsibility.
The Court of Auditors has also criticised the lack of clarity in the way the different initiatives are related to one other.
It is indefensible and damaging to the programme that no effort is being made to introduce coherence.
I am glad that there is support, especially in the Committee on Budgetary Control, for my amendment to the effect that the programme should only be extended once the Commission has fulfilled its part of the agreement and submitted annual reports and evaluations.
Without this amendment, the Commission could get away with not having submitted a single evaluation report since the regulation came into force in 1997.
I have also noted that my dear friend, Mr Dell'Alba, has had his grumbles printed as an appendix to my opinion.
However, he is only speaking for himself.
At any rate, he had no backing in the Committee, since he was the only one to vote against the conclusions.
Mr President, let me first of all thank my honourable friend for his extremely thoughtful report and for the care and attention that he has devoted to the issue of uprooted people in Asia and Latin America.
It is common to all the speakers in the Chamber and to others outside that it is an excellent report but, speaking for myself, I would not have expected any less from my honourable friend.
Regulation 443/97 on aid to uprooted people is an important instrument clearly, an instrument to deliver aid that is not covered by humanitarian assistance and the honourable Member Ms Maes made this distinction extremely clearly.
It supports projects implemented by international organisations like the UN and the UNHCR and NGOs and these measures are designed to improve living conditions, not only for returnees but also for the communities into which they will integrate.
In that context particular importance is attached to clearing the land of mines, a point which my honourable friend referred to, rebuilding farming systems, supporting secure livelihoods and embracing key health and education challenges.
A number of honourable Members have made clear the good and practical work done as a result of this regulation.
I noted in particular what the honourable gentleman, Mr Howitt, said about geographical balance and one or two other honourable Members referred to that as well.
I also noted what the honourable gentleman Dr Paisley said about our moral duties to those who are uprooted.
Dr Paisley and I have not always seen eye to eye on every subject but I hope that this is a subject on which we can see eye to eye and even share quotations from both the Old and the New Testament.
The Commission started preparations for the renewal of this regulation in Spring 1999.
However, these discussions were delayed by the former Commission' s resignation last year.
It was decided as an interim step to propose an extension of the current regulation up to the end of the year 2000.
A Commission activity report covering the three years of implementation of the regulation from 1997 to 1999 was presented in its preliminary version to Mr Miranda, the President of the Committee on Development and Cooperation of Parliament, and, of course, to the rapporteur.
In parallel, preliminary findings of an on-going external evaluation on the implementation of the regulation were also transmitted.
The final evaluation report will be submitted to the Parliament by September of this year.
Now to the amendments: the Commission broadly agrees with the four amendments which have been tabled by the Parliament.
However, concerning the first amendment I would like to stress again that the draft of the activity report has already been made available to the Committee on Development and Cooperation and that official submission will take place next June at the latest.
The Commission agrees with amendments two and three since they reflect the existing framework of interinstitutional cooperation with regard to budgetary discipline and comitology.
Now let me come to the fourth amendment.
I recognise that the Parliament would like to see the independent evaluation report extremely soon.
A number of honourable Members have argued that you should see that by July.
We believe however, that given the late contracting of the 1999 programme, which means that some activities are only now getting under way, it would be better to finalise the report, which must be a thorough and comprehensive document, a month or two later, say by September.
That will give us a reasonable period to evaluate 1999' s activities.
However, as you know, the evaluation is already under way and I will make any interim reports available as soon as they are produced.
I want to make that commitment unequivocally.
I hope that Parliament would be willing to agree this approach.
There have been references to the new regulation.
I can confirm that the new regulation is under preparation.
It will need to take into consideration the findings of the evaluation exercise and, of course, before presenting it to the legislative authority, we in the Commission will have to ensure that we are able to mobilise the necessary human resources for its effective implementation.
Too often, in my experience of just seven months, we undertake to do things without having first made sure that we have got the resources to carry them through and it is important for us to be honest about what we want to do and how we can achieve it.
Before closing let me once again thank Parliament for its support in extending the validity of this important instrument.
I can assure honourable Members that I have taken account of the criticisms and of the aspirations that have been expressed during the course of this debate.
I am old enough and experienced enough in political life to recognise the difference between a standing ovation and a raspberry, or a bronx cheer as the Americans would call it, and I do not wish to sit through another debate about a subject as important as this and hear it dominated by well-meant criticisms.
So I hope that we can do better by the time we next discuss this important subject.
We are dealing with important technical details but, above all, we are dealing, as honourable Members have pointed out, with human tragedies that lie behind the need for all these measures and that is why we have to ensure that our own response is as rapid and as effective as possible.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11a.m.
EC-Switzerland agreements
The next item is the report (A5-0118/2000) drawn up by Mr Carraro, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreements between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other part (7260/2000 - COM(1999) 229 - C5­0204/2000): 1. on the free movement of persons (9748/1999 - C5­0197/2000­1999/0103(AVC)); 2. on air transport (9749/1999 - C5­0198/2000 - 1999/0104(AVC)); 3. on the carriage of goods and passengers by rail and road (9750/1999 - C5­0199/2000 - 1999/0105(AVC)); 4. on scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and the European Atomic Energy Community, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other part (9751/1999 - C5­0200/2000 - 1999/0106(AVC)); 5. on certain aspects relating to public procurement (9752/1999 - C5­0201/2000 - 1999/0107(AVC)); 6. on trade in agricultural products (9753/1999 - C5­0202/2000 - 1999/0108(AVC)); 7. on mutual recognition in relation to conformity assessment between the European Community and the Swiss Confederation (9755/1999 - C5­0203/2000 - 1999/0109(AVC))
Mr President, this draft recommendation marks the end of a political and institutional process which began 10 or so years ago under the auspices of the then President of the Commission, Jacques Delors, who, as far back as the early 1990s, predicted the entry of the Swiss Confederation into the then common economic area.
As you are aware, this project was blocked by the Swiss referendum in December 1992, when, albeit by a very narrow majority, the Swiss citizens decided to block the entry of the Swiss Confederation into the European Community.
That was the beginning of a period of uncertainty, of widely sectoral agreements, which is being brought to an end by this package of seven agreements, which are closely related to the economy but which are also wide-reaching and of general interest.
The seven agreements govern the free movement of persons, air transport, the carriage of goods and passengers by rail and road, scientific and technological cooperation, public procurement, agricultural products and, in relation to these, mutual recognition in the area of conformity assessment.
They are also characterised by a specific simultaneous enforcement clause to the effect that the agreements will enter into force only insofar as they are approved or rejected en masse.
For this reason, although the draft legislative resolutions are separate documents, they have to be tabled and approved en bloc because, and I stress this, they have to be enforced en bloc.
The agreements were signed as early as June 1999, ratified by the Swiss Parliament on 8 October 1999, and tomorrow they will have reached the stage of ratification by the European Parliament.
However, I would also like to point out to the House that the citizens of Switzerland will, once again, be called upon to pronounce judgement on this package of agreements, and, therefore, also on relations with the European Union, in the referendum on 21 May next.
Nevertheless, it is as well to remember that this declaration will certainly be different from the 1992 decision in form and substance.
In 1992, the people of Switzerland were called upon to pronounce judgement on Switzerland' s accession, whereas on 21 May they will be asked to approve or reject a package of strictly economic agreements which do not have the political implications of the 1992 agreements.
However, I feel it is highly significant that Parliament is voting on and approving the texts - if that is the decision of the House, as it was the largely unanimous decision of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy and as it is the desire of all the parliamentary committees which have expressed their opinion - and giving its assent before the Swiss referendum on 21 May.
Not, of course, in order to undermine the sovereignty of the Swiss people' s vote in any way, but, on the contrary, to give a further sign of confidence and conviction that the development of a common European economic area and growing integration of the markets and economies of this Europe - of which Switzerland is, clearly, at the heart owing to its central geographical position - are a concern which we share and which we consider more important than disputes over procedures.
In my opinion, it is politically significant - and, for this, all thanks go to the Chairman of the Committee on Industry and the staff which have made it possible - that Parliament is going to vote before 21 May, for this will present the Swiss citizens with a sure, well-defined legal framework on which to pronounce judgement.
The opinion of the Committee on Industry is wholly favourable and I recommend that the House votes unanimously for the motions during tomorrow' s sitting.
Mr President, I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur for the committee responsible.
He has produced a very coherent opinion.
I also want to thank the Commission for its good work in connection with the negotiations.
With regard to my committee' s area of responsibility, that of citizens' freedoms and rights, this agreement is welcome.
I also want to emphasise that it is important to view the agreement in its entirety.
In the course of my work on the opinion, I in fact became aware of quite a number of problems and difficulties for EU citizens who live and work in Switzerland.
In certain cases, it has been a matter of discrimination pure and simple.
There is no doubt that the agreement we now have provides great opportunities to solve those problems which exist and to prevent new problems from arising.
In this connection, I would just mention, for example, the right of entry, the right of establishment, the opportunity to enter the labour market, the coordination of social security systems, the right of establishment for non-gainfully employed people and students, together with new opportunities for cross-border workers.
I want to emphasise, as the rapporteur for the committee responsible pointed out, that it is important for our opinion to be made available before the referendum in Switzerland - not because it is for the Swiss to say 'yes' or 'no' to the opinion, but to show our desire for cooperation, that is to say further cooperation, with Switzerland.
Our committee has pointed out possible future areas of cooperation, for example operations to combat trafficking in women and to combat organised crime and economic crime.
We view these agreements, especially the agreement concerning the free movement of persons, as being very important in the context of cooperation between the EU and Switzerland.
Mr President, I too want to thank the rapporteur for his report and congratulate him.
The Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism as a whole is pleased about this agreement because it was well known how very difficult it was to reach a transport agreement which established a fair balance between competition and the environment and which would also produce a satisfactory solution for both sides.
The two agreements that directly concerned us, and that we have analysed, concern air transport and road and rail transport.
Here we must note, with regard to air transport, that Switzerland is, of course, already a member of numerous international conferences and organisations and has therefore incorporated in its legislation quite a few aspects of what we in the EU regard as the acquis communautaire.
Its adoption of the regulation on the liberalisation packages is the most practically significant measure.
The Transport Committee regards it as a small weakness that the duty-free agreement is not applicable to Switzerland in this case.
The road-rail discussion is a more difficult and also a more interesting one.
We think the experiment being proposed here is most interesting.
On the one hand, Switzerland will gradually forego reducing the number of heavy goods vehicles.
It will allow vehicles of 34 to 40 tonnes up to the year 2004; on the other hand, it will abolish the quotas accordingly.
Eventually it will replace this system with a road tax, of approximately EUR 200 on average.
So you can understand why the transport operators are rather critical of that.
And in my view their criticism is fair because we believe these road taxes do not take sufficient account of the fact that the transport operator may invest in environment-friendly lorries.
But what the Transport Committee considered even more important was that this agreement points the way to a transport policy entirely in line with that of the EU: reducing the burden on the roads while supporting transport by rail.
We believe the proposed agreement between the EU and Switzerland is a pilot agreement; the same applies to the analysis of the means by which what we regard as a theoretical transport policy may subsequently be put into practice.
Mr President, the Social Democrats Group and I myself most emphatically welcome this agreement between the European Community, on the one hand, and the Swiss Confederation, on the other.
It is a step in the right direction.
After all, Switzerland is located at the heart of Europe but is not yet a member of the Union.
The conclusion of the bilateral negotiations with Switzerland will put the Union' s relations with Switzerland on a new footing, and we all hope that, in a few weeks' time, the Swiss people will give their assent to these agreements.
But there are a few aspects that still need clarification.
I am not referring to what I usually refer to in this connection, namely closer cooperation to combat tax evasion at the cost of the European taxpayers.
Tonight I will confine myself solely to the question of freedom of movement and will specifically address the subject of cross-border workers.
In all, there are 140 000 cross-border workers in Switzerland who come from Germany, France, Italy and Austria.
These cross-border workers are very seriously affected by the most recent deteriorations in Swiss pension schemes.
Prior to the tenth review of old-age and surviving dependants' insurance there was a so-called spouse' s pension, which was paid without regard to the place of residence of either spouse.
Under the tenth review, which recently came into force, this rule was removed.
It was replaced by educational credits, which were, however, tied to residence in Switzerland.
As a result, cross-border workers from the European Union had to pay the same contributions as Swiss residents, but received a 30% lower pension.
The forthcoming eleventh review even provides that only widows resident in Switzerland are entitled to a widow' s pension, which, of course, once again makes the situation worse for cross-border workers from the EU.
Unfortunately, European Union governments have paid too little attention to this issue until now.
I hope all this will change in the near future.
The current rules on old-age and surviving dependants' insurance conflict with the principle of equal treatment and equal status.
Cross-border workers pay in just as much pension insurance as their Swiss counterparts but receive considerably lower pensions.
I hope that this unilateral discrimination by the Swiss Government will be remedied in the wake of this bilateral agreement.
I am extremely grateful to the rapporteur for touching on and bringing up this question in his explanatory statement.
A glance at the map shows that these are probably not the last negotiations and agreements we will see between the Union and Switzerland.
That makes it all the more important to abide not just by the letter but also by the spirit of the agreements we are deciding tomorrow.
For that can only be to the benefit of future negotiations and future agreements which we will be negotiating and deciding bilaterally.
Mr President, the bilateral agreements between the European Union and Switzerland are analogous to the multilateral agreement arrangements that have come into effect within the framework of the European Economic Area.
It is the opinion of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party that the European Parliament for its own part should support their adoption.
Switzerland' s position illustrates the curious nature of Europe' s present arrangements for integration, and the need to aim to change them, especially now that the EU is expanding throughout the whole of Europe.
The merging Europe has organised itself into a series of concentric rings, at the core of which has been the founder members of the European Union.
First there was the Council of Europe at Strasbourg, which divided in two when France, Germany, Italy and the Benelux Countries formed the European Coal and Steel Community.
The attempt to form a political and defence community came to nothing, but the European Community was created.
The Outer Seven, as opposed to the Six, formed the European Free Trade Association, EFTA.
The expansion of the Six into a Community of, in the first instance, eight, and then twelve, went relatively smoothly.
Since these instances of enlargement, a debate has begun on differentiated integration.
At the end of the 1980s, a plan was drafted in the European Commission whereby the then European Community would consolidate as a federation and the other countries of Europe would join the Single Market via the European Economic Area arrangements.
The first Agreement on the European Economic Area was offered to the EFTA countries.
It was then that concentric circles were being spoken of for the first time.
The EEA Agreement was established, although for Austria, Sweden and Finland it turned out to be a short-lived arrangement.
EEA membership was rejected in a Swiss referendum.
So the only countries remaining in the EEA were Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein.
Bilateral agreements began to be drawn up for Switzerland.
Negotiations are now under way regarding the future accession of twelve countries to the European Union.
It is strange that neither Switzerland nor any of the EEA countries are among them, although they would be the best suited of all to join.
There is a simple reason for this, however.
They do not want to join the present Union, nor that of the foreseeable future.
Now that the Union is growing fast, it is reasonable that it should be subject to internal differentiation.
Just as Jacques Delors, Valery Giscard d'Estaing and Helmut Schmidt, among others, recently proposed, the core countries of Europe should go further along the road towards integration than the others, while the rest of the Union could develop as a confederation of independent states and differentiate.
In this way, we could ease and speed up accession for the countries of Eastern Europe and this would also make membership possible for Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein and even Switzerland.
Mr President, Mr Väyrynen' s comments just now about concentric circles remind me a little of a hole with circles drawn round it, looking at Switzerland and Europe.
I hope this hole will be filled sometime in the next few years with the accession of Switzerland to the European Union.
For then we would not have to negotiate and decide seven different agreements but all this would be a matter of course.
I very much hope we will make progress in this regard over the next few years.
But perhaps these seven agreements are a preparation for that debate and I very much hope that just as Parliament will be approving these seven agreements by a large majority tomorrow - or so I assume - the Swiss people will also approve them by a large majority on 21 May in order to make it clear that Switzerland is part of Europe.
I would like to say a few words about the agreement on scientific and technological cooperation because I myself have been repeatedly involved in that area of cooperation with Switzerland over the past few years.
I warmly welcome that agreement because basically it means that Switzerland will take part in the European Union' s framework research programme on an equal footing.
To that end, it will pay a contribution in line with its GDP yet participate fully in the programme.
That is a major advantage for both sides.
Yet there is one drawback: it is the European Parliament and the Council that decide the content of this programme, not Switzerland.
That means that Switzerland, like Israel, Norway, Liechtenstein and Iceland, which also take part in this framework research programme, can only participate in something that is decided over their heads.
They have no say as regards its content.
So I would propose that we take our time preparing the sixth framework research programme and that we at least hold informal talks with the Swiss parliamentarians - just as we do with Israel, Norway and so on, i.e. states which do not belong to the EU but which do take part in the framework research programme.
That is something the European Parliament could organise.
Parliament could take the initiative and invite parliamentarians from these countries, so that we can know in advance what input the Swiss can contribute, what problems they may have, what proposals they may have.
In fact, this would also be a step towards bringing Switzerland and the European Union closer together.
I would very much hope we could do that.
Aside from that, let me thank Mr Carraro again for this excellent report.
Anyone who wants to learn will find a great deal of information in his report.
Once again, many thanks and I hope we will adopt it by a large majority tomorrow.
Mr President, the attendance in this Chamber shows that there is no dispute about this agreement, that Members want it, and I am sure we will vote for Switzerland and for this agreement by a great majority tomorrow.
We want closer cooperation in Europe.
We want more dialogue.
We want to analyse problems pragmatically, find compromises, although on the basis of democracy and the rule of law, and we want, at the end of the day, to vote in the proper manner.
We often see the Swiss people voting on issues and as a democrat I am constantly delighted by the democratic attitude of Switzerland.
The peaceful settlement of conflict - i.e. democracy - versus the declaration of war.
In fact, war never has been a solution for the people of Europe.
We need ground rules for democracy, and in the end we must also abide by them.
After over 50 years of a policy of peace, the German Foreign Minister acting as President of the Council has called on the military to take a decision.
That should set us thinking.
I believe it is important that we use democratic methods to safeguard peace.
Now he, as President of the Council, and the 12 prime ministers have taken an arbitrary decision without any legal basis against a Member State.
It has no legal basis and in particular it goes against the European institutions.
The decision with regard to Austria was taken without any de facto participation by the Commission, without the participation of the Council and, of course, without the participation of Parliament.
In my view, that raises a number of problems, especially for Switzerland.
And I regard the signs of weakness the euro is currently showing as a judgement by the international community of this conflict within the European Union.
The crux of the matter is that this is a conflict between the prime ministers and the European institutions, a conflict that is putting a spanner in the European works and creating insecurity.
In fact, Austria was always seen as the blue-eyed boy in matters of human rights and democracy.
I think Austria has fared very well with its neutrality over the past decades, a neutral position between east and west.
In joining the European Union we clearly committed ourselves to the west, with the aim of preventing any future military conflicts.
But that means talking to each other, meeting each other, analysing things pragmatically, finding compromises.
I must say that in Austria, too, it is now time to review the situation for, when it comes to their referendum, the Swiss people will be looking very carefully at how the 14 prime ministers decide.
In Austria, Mr Haider resigned on 1 May.
He no longer plays an active role in Austrian politics.
I think it is high time the sanctions against Austria were lifted and I believe the prime ministers should also apologise to the people of Europe for choosing to go down a road that is unacceptable to Europe.
I demand the immediate suspension of the sanctions against Austria and I believe this decision with regard to Austria will be of the utmost importance to future plebiscites and referenda in Europe.
We very much welcome the report by Mr Carraro and his colleagues.
I totally agree with the remarks of the honourable Member, Mr Linkohr, about the quality of the report.
I am also grateful for the authoritative comments made by the honourable Member, Mr Carraro, and by representatives of other relevant committees during this debate and the other contributions we have had as well.
One or two honourable Members have been able to bring in subjects about which they care passionately like the honourable Member, Mr Rübig, and I commend them on their inventiveness.
But it has been a useful debate which has reflected the importance of the subject.
We are extremely satisfied that Parliament has given this verbal approval to the seven agreements with Switzerland.
They are the result of four years of extremely difficult and tough negotiations.
The outcome of those negotiations has been excellent and I am delighted that Parliament has reacted in the way that it has.
The agreements are very important.
They are very important politically and they are very important from a technical point of view as well.
They unblock the stalemate in the relations with one of our closest neighbours and our second biggest trading partner.
They open the way to closer relations and, I hope, to further integration.
Through these agreements the biggest problems in our bilateral relations will be resolved in a number of key sectors: technical barriers to trade, public procurement, research and development about which the honourable Member knows so much, agriculture and air transport.
Equally important, a viable solution has now been found for alpine transit.
The European standard of free movement of persons will also be introduced in relations with Switzerland.
I am glad that Parliament has found the result of the negotiations to be in general so positive but we have also taken note of some more critical remarks, especially regarding cooperation in the fight against transit fraud, cigarette smuggling and other fiscal crimes, where you want to see our Swiss friends doing much more.
Parliament has repeatedly called for better cooperation and the problem will be further investigated I know by a special delegation of the Budget Control Committee.
I want to make it absolutely plain that the Commission shares these concerns.
Losses of several billion euros are caused to the Community budget every year because Switzerland does not apply the relevant Council of Europe protocols on judicial cooperation.
The Commission has repeatedly stated that we see a rapid solution to this problem as the prerequisite for any further agreements in other areas.
It is a point that I am looking forward to discussing with the Swiss Foreign Minister when he comes to Brussels a little later in the summer, as well, I hope, as discussing more positive matters with him.
I want to assure all honourable Members that we have taken account of the detailed concerns that have been expressed in this useful debate and of the other comments that we have received on these negotiations.
As a number of honourable Members have said, the Swiss Parliament has already approved the seven agreements.
They did that in October last year.
We very much hope that the Swiss people themselves will give their blessing in the referendum scheduled for May 21.
It would be constitutionally indelicate I am sure for me to urge them to vote in one way or the other but I do very much hope that these negotiations which have been conducted in good faith and have led to very satisfactory outcomes will be endorsed by the people of Switzerland.
I am sure that the assent of the European Parliament will be very helpful in this respect in encouraging people in Switzerland to vote on May 21 in what we all think would be the right way.
So I very much hope that the vote which the Parliament holds tomorrow does not surprise any of you and does not surprise the Commission either.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11a.m.
Financial assistance to Moldova
The next item is the report (A5-0082/2000) drawn up by Mrs Matikainen-Kallström on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy on the proposal for a Council decision providing supplementary macro-financial assistance to Moldova (COM(1999) 516 - C5-0261/1999 - 1999/0213(CNS)).
Mr President, Moldova bears the heavy burden of communism as do many other newly independent countries that were formerly part of the Soviet Union.
Examined in human and economic terms, Moldova is faring very badly.
The social situation is chaotic and democratic progress painfully slow.
A civil war and the repercussions of the economic crisis in Russia have been paralysing the country for a long time now.
Industry is still underdeveloped and unevenly distributed regionally.
A modest export trade is based on the sale of agricultural produce to neighbouring regions.
A look at the figures will show the level of desperation that exists.
Since 1992, the Moldovan economy has shrunk by almost 70%.
Life expectancy has fallen dramatically, and, according to a study undertaken last year by the UN, 50% of the people live below the absolute poverty line.
The Commission deserves praise for having proposed a considerable increase in financial aid to Moldova at the suggestion of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
Bilateral financial aid via the TACIS programme has been reasonably successful.
A big step forward is particularly visible in the areas of local administrative training, the weeding out of corruption, and the promotion of exports and agriculture.
This, however, is not enough.
More financial aid must be made available if we are to solve the problem in macro-financial terms.
This involves developing democracy and establishing a proper financial and economic policy.
Positive action to develop Moldova must be supported with measures that boost the democratic system.
The Commission must see to it that the additional funding is used properly, flexibly and in a way that strengthens the basic structures of society.
Since the biggest economic problem in Moldova is its dependence on Russia, the new EU aid action must aim at severing this dependence.
For example, Moldova relies totally on Russian imports of energy, and is consequently tied by a leash to Russian energy companies.
The circle can only be broken by establishing Moldova' s own energy sector and the diversification of its export trade.
The other problem with regard to Russia is connected with the withdrawal of troops from Moldovan territory.
The EU must do all it can to make it clear to the Duma that withdrawing Russian troops from Moldova would enhance the country' s stability.
Furthermore, talks on dismantling Russian missiles stockpiled in Moldova must be pushed through immediately.
My report was unanimously adopted in committee.
There were good and sensible additions made to it by the Committee on Budgets.
I hope that this spirit of consensus will be present too in tomorrow' s sitting.
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets.
(FI) Mr President, as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets, I would like to draw attention to the economic effects this legal decision will have.
The European Union is granting different forms of economic aid to different countries.
Macro-financial aid is one of the most important, in addition to which equivalent forms of aid can be given in the form of European Investment Bank guarantees and Euratom loans.
There is, however, a ceiling to this provision of loans, which has been determined in interinstitutional agreements.
That is a maximum annual figure of EUR 200 million from the Guarantee Fund.
This causes problems for possible new loans from the European Union, because this ceiling is inflexible.
The present loan and guarantee decisions might lead to a situation where this ceiling is easily exceeded, if something unexpected happens.
I would therefore think that, from the point of view of the Committee on Budgets, it is important that the Commission should make a multiannual assessment of likely future fund requirements, which would serve as a general guide.
The aim should be that Parliament and the Council agree on priorities concerning the use of left-over margins, and that a procedure should be agreed in order to make any changes to these principles.
In the case of macro-financial aid, the Commission appears to have considerable faith in the ability of the international institutions - the IMF and the World Bank - to evaluate the economic situation in whatever countries are concerned.
The role of these institutions is perhaps too important, and the Commission often automatically accepts conditions imposed by others on these loans.
For this reason, I think that Mrs Matikainen-Kallström' s remarks and amendments are very important, as they take account of the fact that such areas as employment and social security should also be examined when determining how the money from loans should be spent.
Mr President, the excellent report by our colleague, Mrs Matikainen-Kallström, on supplementary assistance for the budget of Moldova gives us a rare opportunity to cast our eyes on this small country on the periphery of the European Union, on its economic development and political orientation.
The people once again find themselves living in poverty.
The average monthly per capita income in Moldova is only approximately EUR 30.
Privatisation is making only slow headway and so far the country has not managed to entirely resolve the problem of integrating its Russian minority groups.
It has still not achieved monetary or budgetary stability and Russian occupation troops are still stationed in part of the country, in Trans-Dnestr.
For days now, there has been a very real risk of all the lights going out in Moldova.
The Russian energy company Gazprom suspended gas supplies because Moldova could not pay its bills in German Marks and US dollars.
So we are quite literally witnessing this country' s almost desperate fight for economic survival and political existence.
Geographically, Moldova is a narrow strip of land between Ukraine and Romania.
Many young Moldovans are looking towards the European Union.
Some are studying at our universities and technical colleges thanks to funding from the European Union and its Member States.
At home, most of them want Moldova to become more open to the European Union.
How can we, the European Parliament, make it easier for Moldova to become more open?
The macro-economic financial assistance, which the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats firmly support, is an important step towards building up the necessary confidence in the Moldovan administration system and thereby consolidating its budget.
Moreover, the aid under the TACIS programmes must concentrate more on vocational training, education and improving the totally outmoded transport, communications and energy infrastructure.
Small crafts and services businesses can only be started up if there are prospects of improving the framework conditions for competition and investment, which is only feasible in the long term with the help of the European Union.
But Moldova must also know where it wants to go.
Does it want to remain in a state of insecurity because it relies so heavily on cheap Russian raw materials, which it cannot even pay for yet, and also remain incapable of reform in many areas, which would mean tying its long-term future to the imponderables of Russian economic and social development?
Or does it want to follow the example of Romania and resolutely tread the long and difficult road of economic reforms and closer cooperation with the European Union?
In that case, it also deserves stronger support on our part.
That support must be conditional on a radical modernisation of its economy and administration.
We hope Moldova will opt for renewal and for Europe.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Matikainen-Kallström' s report deserves our full support.
She has guided this 'child' in difficult circumstances, for which I thank her.
When we talk of transitional economies we might ask where these economies are really going.
It seems that the direction is not always clear.
Moldova imports all its raw materials from abroad and is very dependent on energy imports.
One tenth of its GNP goes on a bill from just one Russian company, Gazprom, which - as the previous speaker said - is switching out the lights in the state of Moldova.
There is therefore a stranglehold on energy that does not just affect Moldova but also its neighbour, Ukraine; and Belarus, too, for that matter.
Consequently, this phenomenon has a broader political significance, which may create tension in this region, and which we will then have to attempt to relieve.
Moldova' s need for finance will be huge in the years to come.
The Russian crisis on 17 August 1998 had an enormous effect on Moldova.
It has become a ragamuffin state.
The basic pension is just one fifth of the heating costs of one small flat.
No nation can live and function like that.
The balance of trade surplus is a massive 23 - 25%.
As has been said, Russian troops are in the region of Trans-Dnestr, Lebed' s famous 14th army, not all of it, but nonetheless it has some influence.
We obviously support the loan decision and the line the report adopts, the macro-financial assistance, but this will not be enough.
We are taking stability eastwards, so that we will not have to import instability from there.
The next zone of enlargement, the following zone of candidate countries, will be the one we shall have to concentrate on.
We have to create an area of special action, of which Moldova will be a part, and we have to help them.
We therefore have to create an Eastern programme, to run alongside the current round of enlargement, which will help these countries - Moldova, Ukraine, Belarus and Russia - at a stage when we are receiving new members, so that no new curtain falls between these states.
Mr President, I would also like to thank the rapporteur, Marjo Matikainen-Kallström, for preparing a sound report.
She has got to grips with the issue in a comprehensive way and raised some important issues connected with it.
Our Group supports the rapporteur' s views.
As has been said here several times, the situation in Moldova is extremely difficult.
Although a little headway has been made in the areas of administrative development, social pluralism, and human rights, the economic and social situation is still extremely grave.
The country' s economy has shrunk by around two thirds in the last ten years alone.
Discrepancies in income have grown wildly and half the population lives below the poverty line.
Development in Moldova depends essentially on whether the country can achieve political, social and economic stability.
It will be extremely hard for Moldova to overcome its huge problems without foreign assistance.
The Union' s support for Moldova is thus in place.
The EUR 15 million loan now to be made must be coordinated with assistance from the IMF and other international agencies with the aim of boosting Moldova' s social and economic stability.
It is also important that the Commission guarantees the aid by attaching certain economic conditions to it, so that it is used properly in the right areas, for example, in improving administration, organising basic civil services and increasing economic efficiency.
Later, we have to ensure that the conditions have been fulfilled properly and that the country is progressing along the path of democracy and that people' s living conditions are improving.
The report' s proposal for the possibility of revising the financial perspective to increase the amount of funds in the guarantee reserve is also in order.
Mr President, establishing and consolidating a multi-ethnic state is no picnic in political terms.
Moldova is still living proof of this.
Ever since its conception in 1991, it has been faced with intransigent separatism from the Dnestr Republic.
And we ought to remind ourselves of the Russian military presence in that republic, which is again completely at odds with repeated international withdrawal obligations on the part of Moscow.
Faced with a double challenge in internal and external politics between being absorbed by Romania or by Russia, the political élite and the electorate of this small former Soviet Republic opted without hesitation in favour of its own independence in 1994.
It did so precisely because of Moldova' s political unity.
This commendable strategy of phasing out internal and external hotbeds has made room for, among other things, the autonomous statute of the minority population of the Gagauz and the border treaty with neighbouring Ukraine which is less than one year old.
These achievements, however, cannot begin to conceal Moldova' s extremely difficult transformation process from ex-Soviet Republic to democratic constitutional state based on a social market economy.
In terms of energy supply and a market for its goods, Moldova is extremely dependent on the Russian Federation.
As such, Chisinau is looking to the West for financial support for modernisation.
Hence the present, third request for macro-financial support from the European Union.
Given the level of exchange rate stability and internal currency stability achieved by Moldova, I can go along with this.
However, I have two questions.
What has been the effect of the European Union' s two previous capital injections into that country?
Could the Commission be specific about this?
Also, Amendment No 1 tabled by the competent Committee seems to clash with the objective of this specific long-term loan.
Needless to say, I too much prefer giving the average Moldovan citizen financial support rather than lining the pockets of the Gazprom bigshots!
Mr President, I should like to extend a warm thank you to Mrs Matikainen-Kallström for the effort she has put into this report.
The European Union is prepared to invest EUR 15 million, equivalent to SEK 120 million, in a long-term loan.
The desire is for this to be given to Europe' s poorest country, which has a gross national product as low as that of the poorest countries in Africa.
Moldova is a country where the community, or society, has abdicated responsibility in a number of areas.
The average wage among State employees is MDL 230, which is to say approximately SEK 150 or about EUR 19.
The lowest pension is a mere quarter of this, or MDL 64.
Because the State' s finances have been completely undermined, neither State employees nor pensioners receive their payments on time.
Many have to wait for over a year for their money, and sometimes even longer.
Moldova is a deeply tragic example of the devastating consequences of Soviet Communism, an appalling ideology which has destroyed whole societies, countries and peoples spiritually, morally, socially and economically.
What we see fully revealed here is the harvest of the dragon' s teeth sown by communism.
According to the Swedish professor, Per Ronnås, Moldova has seen a more devastating peacetime fall in its standard of living than any other country in modern times.
At the same time, all the intelligence about people' s exposure to extensive torture by the police, involving electric shocks and suffocation with the aid of plastic bags placed over the head, is a very serious source of concern.
Moldova is today experiencing general migration.
A quarter of the country' s four million people are estimated to have travelled abroad in search of work.
Many poor and destitute girls have ended up in the hands of crime syndicates which degrade them and exploit them sexually.
We can do nothing other than support this country, Europe' s very poorest.
Mr President, I would firstly like to thank Mrs Matikainen-Kallström for her report and all of you for the sensitivity you have shown with regard to such a serious problem as Moldova.
I note that the sensitivity of the different political groups is in line with the sensitivity of the Commission when it made the proposal for supplementary macroeconomic assistance for Moldova and, in this respect, we are especially grateful for their support.
It is true that today, we are talking about macro-financial assistance, therefore, with clearly defined objectives, which will undoubtedly improve the financial room for manoeuvre so that we can tackle the other difficulties such as those which you have raised during tonight' s debate.
Of the amendments presented in the report, the Commission has no difficulty in accepting Amendments Nos 1 to 4 referring to the final objective of the aid, the need for a coherent approach in our various instruments for Community assistance and the need for social balance in that assistance.
Therefore, the Commission will support these amendments in the Council and I hope they can be taken forward.
Nevertheless, I would suggest to the rapporteur and honourable Members that they reflect further on the remaining amendments.
Amendments Nos 5, 6 and 8 advocate the establishment of a new committee to control this type of aid.
In our opinion this initiative would be excessively bureaucratic and would not make sense.
Macro-financial assistance is usually granted for periods of one year, it is not always renewed, it is granted in different areas, different countries, according to the circumstances and we believe, therefore, that the current system of concentrating its control in a particular body, the Economic and Financial Committee, makes sense since this is the group of people with the greatest experience and knowledge of the control and management of this type of aid.
I would remind you that the Economic and Financial Committee is not a normal committee.
It is a committee provided for in the Treaties which, in practice, consists of personal representatives of the Ministers for Economic and Financial Affairs.
In our view these are the people who really have the ability to carry out this management.
The creation of specific ad hoc committees would achieve less and would not be as effective as the current model.
I would also like to make another comment on Amendment No 9, which asks us - and I suspect that it also coincides with Mr Belder' s demand - whether we can provide information on the effectiveness of aid.
We agree that the Commission should report on what we must do, but what causes us difficulty is the idea that this should be done before 15 September.
By definition, macro-financial assistance includes a series of general economic indicators, which are not always available at that time.
In some cases they will be available to us, in other cases they will not.
We think it is much more reasonable that the Commission' s obligation should refer to the whole year and that we should be allowed greater room for manoeuvre between 15 September and 31 December to present these reports.
We believe they will be of better quality if we have additional time available to us.
The Commission' s concern, as I see it, that it should be provided with figures for the budgetary debate should not cause any difficulty, since every six months, a report is sent to the budgetary authority on the guarantees covered by the general budget along with an annual report on the management of the Guarantee Fund.
By means of both reports, the Commission will have access to all the necessary budgetary information.
Nevertheless, in order to assess the aid we should be allowed more time.
Lastly, I would like to make a comment on Mr Seppänen' s concerns regarding the budgetary availability of resources for this type of aid.
In our view, there is no difficulty.
We believe that this type of aid can be dealt with by means of the current budgetary resources.
It is true that, in the future, we will possibly have to debate whether the current priorities and our financial room for manoeuvre are coherent or not, but we do not think that this is a debate which can be held in relation to a specific report; rather it will require a much more profound and more general debate, which we will be happy to take part in at this Parliament' s convenience.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 10.55 p.m.)