# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
International cooperation against the world drug problem
Report of the Secretary-General
Contents
Introduction
In its resolution 59/163 of 20 December 2004, entitled “International cooperation against the world drug problem”, the General Assembly reaffirmed its commitment to the outcome of its twentieth special session, devoted to countering the world drug problem together, held in New York from 8 to 10 June 1998.
Aware that progress had been uneven in meeting the goals set out in the Political Declaration adopted by the Assembly at the twentieth special session (resolution S-20/2, annex), as reflected in the biennial reports of the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Assembly recognized that the drug problem remained a global challenge posing a serious threat to public health and safety and the well-being of humankind, in particular children and young people, and that it undermined socio-economic and political stability and sustainable development, including efforts to reduce poverty.
In section II of the resolution, the Assembly reaffirmed the Joint Ministerial Statement and further measures to implement the action plans emanating from the twentieth special session of the Assembly, adopted during the ministerial segment of the forty-sixth session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (A/58/124, sect.
II.A); called upon all States to strengthen their efforts in the fight against the world drug problem, in order to achieve the objectives targeted for 2008 in the Political Declaration; and stressed that data collection, analysis and evaluation of the results of ongoing national and international policies were essential tools for further developing sound, evidence-based drug control strategies.
In section II of resolution 59/163, the General Assembly also urged all Member States to implement the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction (Assembly resolution 54/132, annex) and to strengthen their national efforts to counter the abuse of illicit drugs, in particular among children and young people; and urged States, in order to achieve a significant and measurable reduction of drug abuse by 2008, to further implement comprehensive demand reduction policies and programmes, including research, covering all the drugs under international control, in order to raise public awareness, and to further develop and implement comprehensive demand reduction policies.
In the same resolution, in the area of illicit synthetic drugs, the Assembly urged States to renew their efforts to implement the comprehensive measures covered in the Action Plan against Illicit Manufacture, Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and Their Precursors (see Assembly resolution S-20/4 A).
Concerning control of substances, the Assembly encouraged States to establish or strengthen mechanisms and procedures to ensure strict control of substances listed in the international drug control treaties and used to manufacture illicit drugs of natural and synthetic origin.
With respect to control of precursors, the Assembly encouraged States to establish or strengthen mechanisms and procedures to ensure strict control of chemical precursors used in such illicit manufacture and to support international operations aimed at preventing the diversion of chemical precursors.
In the area of judicial cooperation, the Assembly called upon States to strengthen international cooperation among judicial and law enforcement authorities at all levels in order to prevent and combat illicit drug trafficking and to share and promote best operational practices in order to interdict illicit drug trafficking.
In the area of countering money-laundering, the Assembly urged States to strengthen action aimed at preventing and combating the laundering of proceeds derived from drug trafficking and related criminal activities, with the support of the United Nations system, international institutions such as the World Bank and regional development banks, to develop and strengthen comprehensive international regimes to combat money-laundering, and to improve information-sharing among financial institutions and agencies in charge of preventing and detecting the laundering of those proceeds.
The Assembly also called upon States to consider including provisions in their national drug control plans for the establishment of national networks to enhance their respective capabilities to prevent, monitor, control and suppress serious offences connected with money-laundering and the financing of terrorist acts, and in general to counter all acts of transnational organized crime.
In the area of illicit crop eradication and alternative development, the Assembly called upon States to enhance support, including, where appropriate, through the provision of new and additional financial resources, for alternative development, environmental protection and eradication programmes undertaken by countries affected by the illicit cultivation of cannabis, especially in Africa, of opium poppy and of coca bush; to enhance joint strategies, through international and regional cooperation, to strengthen alternative development, eradication and interdiction capacity, with the aim of eliminating illicit crop cultivation and fostering economic and social development; to encourage international cooperation, including, as appropriate, preventive alternative development, to prevent illicit crop cultivation from emerging in or being relocated to other areas; to provide, in accordance with the principle of shared responsibility, greater access to their markets for products of alternative development programmes, which were necessary for the creation of employment and the eradication of poverty; and to continue contributing to the maintenance of a balance between the licit supply of and demand for opiate raw materials used for medical and scientific purposes and to cooperate in preventing the proliferation of sources of production of opiate raw materials.
In section III of its resolution 59/163, the General Assembly encouraged the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the global coordinating body in international drug control and as the governing body of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme, and the International Narcotics Control Board to continue their useful work on the control of precursors and other chemicals used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
The Assembly welcomed the efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to implement its mandate, and requested the Office to strengthen dialogue with Member States and also to ensure continued improvement in management, so as to contribute to enhanced and sustainable programme delivery; to strengthen cooperation with Member States and with United Nations programmes, funds and relevant agencies, as well as relevant regional organizations and agencies and non-governmental organizations; and to provide, on request, assistance in implementing the outcome of the twentieth special session.
The Assembly encouraged the meetings of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies and of the Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to continue to contribute to the strengthening of regional and international cooperation, taking into account the outcome of the twentieth special session and the ministerial segment of the forty-sixth session of the Commission.
Finally, the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit to the Assembly at its sixtieth session a report on the implementation of the resolution.
International cooperation to counter the world drug problem and follow-up to the twentieth special session of the General Assembly
Follow-up by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and its subsidiary bodies
In paragraph 20 of the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, the Assembly requested all States to report biennially to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on their efforts to meet the goals and targets for the years 2003 and 2008.
In its resolution 42/11, the Commission requested the Executive Director to submit biennial reports for its examination at its regular sessions in 2001, 2003, 2005, 2007 and 2008.
The Assembly also requested the Commission to analyse those reports in order to enhance the cooperative effort to combat the world drug problem.
At its forty-eighth session, held in Vienna from 7 to 11 March 2005, the Commission considered the third biennial report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on the world drug problem (E/CN.7/2005/2 and Adds.1-6), drawing upon the responses of Member States to the biennial reports questionnaire covering the period June 2002 to June 2004.
The Commission welcomed the fact that the third biennial report of the Executive Director indicated that considerable progress continued to be made by Member States towards meeting the goals set for 2008 at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly.
It was also noted that the report drew attention to areas requiring further efforts by the international community, such as the need to promote and strengthen international cooperation through enhanced mutual legal assistance and exchange of information; prevention, treatment and rehabilitation programmes; reducing the negative health and social consequences of drug abuse; capacity-building; programme coordination; monitoring and evaluation; raising awareness of the problems associated with amphetamine-type stimulants and preventing experimentation by young people; and precursor control.
The Commission also noted that many Member States needed to make greater efforts to provide full and timely responses to the biennial questionnaires, in order to obtain the most accurate results from the reporting process.
At its forty-eighth session, the Commission stressed that the international community should be innovative in its action to follow up on the twentieth special session, in order to be able to deal with new developments, such as the challenges faced by countries suffering from the transit of illicit drugs through their territory.
Many Governments had adopted, updated or made progress in the implementation of national drug control strategies or action plans, which were essential to ensuring the planning and coordination of comprehensive drug control activities, covering action involving health, education, law enforcement and other relevant authorities and for promoting a balanced multidisciplinary approach.
Reference was made to regional approaches and tools for strengthening cooperation and the coordination of drug control policies.
At the same session, Member States voiced their concern about the challenges and threats posed by the phenomenon of globalization, and its exploitation by criminal groups, and by the links between drug trafficking, terrorism and national and transnational organized crime.
The need was stressed to make international cooperation more effective, in particular among judicial and law enforcement authorities.
The successes achieved through bilateral, regional and multilateral agreements and arrangements between States were recalled, in particular in the areas of mutual legal assistance, extradition, cooperation among law enforcement agencies, exchange of information, sharing of experience and controlled delivery.
Reference was made to existing mechanisms for fostering international cooperation, such as the mechanism for issuing the European arrest warrant.
In the area of international cooperation in eradication of illicit opium poppy and coca bush cultivation and in curbing illicit opium and cocaine production, the Commission at its forty-eighth session emphasized that the sustainability of eradication efforts needed to be ensured and that particular efforts were required to alleviate poverty among former opium poppy and coca growers, particularly during the transitional period immediately after they had abandoned opium poppy cultivation and that, in the Andean region, alternative development had not kept pace with the sustained eradication of illicit crops because of a lack of resources.
Regarding efforts to eradicate cannabis cultivation, a number of countries were reported to be studying cannabis cultivation and its socio-economic impact and assessing the feasibility of implementing alternative development programmes to tackle illicit cannabis cultivation.
In that context, several countries had appealed for assistance from the international community in support of their efforts.
Action taken by Governments and international cooperation to counter the world drug problem and follow-up to the twentieth special session
The third biennial report of the Executive Director and its addenda (E/CN.7/2005/2 and Adds.1-6) submitted to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its forty-eighth session provided an overview and a detailed analysis of the efforts by Governments to implement the action plans and measures emanating from the twentieth special session of the General Assembly: (a) the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction (Assembly resolution 54/132); (b) the Action Plan on International Cooperation on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development (Assembly resolution S-20/4 E); (c) measures to promote judicial cooperation (Assembly resolution S-20/4 C); (d) the Action Plan against Illicit Manufacture, Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and Their Precursors (Assembly resolution S-20/4 A); (e) control of precursors (Assembly resolution S-20/4 B); and (f) countering money-laundering (Assembly resolution S-20/4 D).
A total of 93 States responded to at least one part of the third biennial reports questionnaire (2002-2004) on the basis of which the third biennial report of the Executive Director on the world drug problem was prepared.
The number of responses received in 2004 was below that received in the second reporting period (2000-2002) (117 responses).
A total of 81 responses were received for the preparation of the first biennial report 1998-2000 (E/CN.7/2001/2), which, following the forty-fourth regular session of the Commission, was revised to incorporate a further 28 replies.
This was reflected in the consolidated first biennial report (E/CN.7/2001/16), which the Commission considered at its reconvened session, in December 2001, reflecting a total of 109 responses.
The present chapter summarizes the analysis of the responses received in the third reporting period.
National drug control strategies
National drug control strategies provide a valuable mechanism for the planning and coordination of drug control policies and activities at the national level, including interaction among law enforcement, health, education, economic development and other sectors, as well as for promoting a balanced approach between demand and supply reduction.
The majority of States replying to the third biennial report questionnaire (91 States) had adopted or updated their national drug control strategy or plan, while others indicated that a plan or strategy was under preparation.
Of the responding Governments, 90 per cent had established a central authority charged with coordinating the implementation of the national drug strategy and 92 per cent indicated that its strategy was multisectoral in nature covering, inter alia, health, social programmes, education, law enforcement, justice, employment or other areas.
The involvement of non-governmental organizations, civil society associations, churches, charitable funds and communities in the formulation and implementation of national drug strategies took place in almost all responding countries (see figure I).
Figure I
National drug control strategies adopted, 1998-2000, 2000-2002 and 2002-2004
The data provided by States indicate that the majority of reporting Governments have taken steps to implement the action envisaged at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly with regard to the establishment of national drug control plans or strategies and appropriate coordination and implementation mechanisms, reflecting the high priority accorded by Member States to countering the drug problem through a balanced and comprehensive multisectoral approach.
Demand reduction
At the twentieth special session, Member States committed themselves to achieving significant and measurable results in the field of demand reduction by the year 2008.
The responses to the biennial reports questionnaire in 2004 indicated that most Governments had developed comprehensive drug demand reduction strategies.
Countries in all regions have kept their high level of commitment during the three reporting periods.
The situation regarding the implementation of demand reduction programmes had improved in sub-Saharan Africa and Europe, while countries in Central, South and South-West Asia seemed to have fallen back to the levels reported for the biennium 1998-2000.
Most regions had established a good degree of partnership between the relevant authorities and other sectors of society.
Some of the reported increases in collaboration or networking mechanisms were a reflection of a broader trend towards the decentralization of demand reduction efforts to the regional and municipal levels in some regions.
This was particularly the case in Latin America and the Caribbean.
On average, over 60 per cent of States responding to the questionnaire in the three reporting periods (1998-2000, 2000-2002 and 2002-2004) indicated that demand reduction activities were based on epidemiological assessments of the drug abuse situation.
Well-developed drug information systems were available in Europe and North America, whereas the situation in sub-Saharan Africa, North Africa and the Middle East could be further improved and significant progress was being made in other regions, including Latin America and the Caribbean, Central, South and South-West Asia and East and South-East Asia, with the establishment of mechanisms for monitoring drug abuse trends.
The majority of countries responded positively concerning training for planners and practitioners and the evaluation of strategies and activities to improve national demand reduction plans.
However, in relation to specific types of demand reduction interventions, under 30 per cent of reporting countries conducted systematic evaluation of the results of their interventions.
Moreover, only Europe and North America seemed to have been also relatively active in disseminating information on good practices and lessons learned.
Most responding States have built the political and strategic foundations for effective demand reduction strategies, although further action is needed to improve data collection and evaluation capacity in order to support the development of future interventions.
The trend in the abuse of illicit drugs presents a diverse picture depending on the substance and the region.
Increases, stabilization and decreases in patterns of drug abuse have been reported in various regions.
Taking into account this situation, prevention initiatives should be increased in scale so that they cover a wider range of settings and target groups, including those at greater risk, and national and regional prevention initiatives should be expanded and sustained in order to meet the targets for 2008.
Further investments appear to be required for the provision of treatment and rehabilitation, in particular in Latin America and the Caribbean and in East and South-East Asia.
More resources also seem to be required for initiatives focusing on special needs and one of the major challenges remains the reduction of the negative health and social consequences of drug abuse.
A significant change in these areas will require sustained long-term efforts.
Illicit synthetic drugs
In the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, the Assembly called for the strengthening or establishing by the year 2003 of national legislation and programmes giving effect to the Action Plan against Illicit Manufacture, Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and Their Precursors and decided to devote particular attention to the measures for the control of precursors and to establish the year 2008 as a target date for States to eliminate or significantly reduce the illicit manufacture, marketing and trafficking of psychotropic substances, including synthetic drugs, and the diversion of precursors.
On the basis of the biennial reports questionnaire, there was a decline in the proportion of Governments that reported having taken measures to detect the clandestine manufacture of amphetamine-type stimulants (53 per cent during the 2002-2004 period, compared with 63 per cent in the 2000-2002 period).
However, improvement was registered at the regional level with regard to the monitoring of the manufacturing methods used in clandestine laboratories, including the monitoring of the trade in tableting machines and technical equipment required for the illicit manufacture of amphetamine-type stimulants.
During the 2002-2004 period, 54 per cent of reporting States (60 per cent in 2000-2002) had adopted specific measures to improve the operational capabilities of forensic laboratories and the provision of technical training for law enforcement and regulatory personnel on matters related to amphetamine-type stimulants increased.
Over one third of the responding Governments (33 per cent) took measures to control substances not covered by the international drug control conventions, but for which special surveillance had been recommended.
These measures related in particular to those substances included in the limited international special surveillance list established by the International Narcotics Control Board.
Almost half of the reporting Governments (48 per cent) had enhanced cooperation with the chemical industry to prevent the diversion of precursors of amphetamine-type stimulants and with the pharmaceutical industry (42 per cent) to prevent the diversion of licit pharmaceuticals containing amphetamine-type stimulants.
Further measures and more effective action continued to be taken by Governments to prevent the irresponsible marketing and prescribing of amphetamine-type stimulants.
Member States have achieved considerable progress in the implementation of the Action Plan against Illicit Manufacture, Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and Their Precursors.
Nevertheless, additional efforts are needed in order to achieve the targets set for 2008, in particular in order to raise awareness of the problem of amphetamine-type stimulants, reduce illicit demand and prevent drug experimentation by youth, as well as to improve the operational capabilities of forensic laboratories and establish effective cooperation between the authorities and the chemical and pharmaceutical industries.
Effective implementation of the Action Plan requires the further strengthening of international cooperation at the bilateral, regional and international levels.
Control of precursors
The third biennial report of the Executive Director reported that more States than in the first and second reporting cycles had established a framework for the control of precursors.
This included systems of prior import/export notification, measures to identify and trace traders in precursors (“know-your-client” principle), measures to provide and/or request end-user certificates, as well as setting up procedures to investigate the diversion of chemicals and to identify and dismantle clandestine laboratories.
The effective implementation of prior import/export notification systems had enabled competent national authorities to verify the legitimacy of transactions and to identify suspicious shipments, thus preventing diversion of precursor chemicals.
While good progress had been made in the control of precursors through, inter alia, the implementation of the prior import/export notification system by States, lack of resources and technical know-how and loopholes in the legislation and/or regulatory frameworks remained obstacles to further improvement in some countries and regions.
Governments need to provide sufficient material and human resources to ensure the effective functioning of national precursor control systems and increase their efforts to ensure that officials engaged in the control of precursors receive the training required to facilitate the operation of those systems.
Notwithstanding the above, the majority of reporting States (80 per cent) had enhanced their legal framework, having in place precursor control legislation, and 60 per cent had enacted new or revised laws, compared with 55 per cent in the second reporting period.
Most reporting States (83 per cent) had placed under control substances listed in Tables I and II of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, and an increased proportion (88 per cent, compared with 84 per cent in the second reporting period) had established a framework that included a system of prior import and export notification.
In the third reporting period, 63 per cent of States (compared with 56 per cent in the second) were implementing the recommendations of the International Narcotics Control Board concerning the limited international special surveillance list of non-scheduled substances and over one third of respondents had introduced penal sanctions in their legislation as a means of preventing the diversion of precursors.
States also reported action in relation to the implementation of controlled deliveries, the sharing of information, the establishment of cooperation with the chemical and pharmaceutical industries and the adoption of procedures to identify and report the use of substitute chemicals and new methods of illicit drug manufacture.
Only 26 per cent of respondents reported that the seizure of precursor chemicals was the result of cooperation with other States.
However, several multilateral international initiatives for the control of precursors, such as Operation Topaz, Operation Purple and Project Prism, coordinated by the International Narcotics Control Board, had enjoyed notable successes.
Reference was also made to Operation Six Borders in Latin America, which had facilitated international cooperation on precursor control.
States should strengthen partnerships with the private sector by developing codes of conduct with the chemical and pharmaceutical industries and enhancing cooperation with companies engaged in licit trade in precursors, for example by introducing the “know-your-client” principle.
States should further strengthen international cooperation, inter alia in the exchange of information among competent authorities, including through the International Narcotics Control Board, and in the implementation of controlled deliveries and joint law enforcement investigations, including backtracking operations.
In connection with further international cooperation on the control of precursors, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, in its resolution 48/11, entitled “Strengthening international cooperation to prevent the illicit manufacture of and trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances by preventing the diversion and smuggling of precursors and essential equipment in the context of Project Prism, Operation Purple and Operation Topaz”, drew the attention of Member States to further measures to enhance the control of precursors and, in particular, called upon Member States to take careful note of the third biennial report of the Executive Director on the world drug problem and in particular of its addendum on the control of precursors (E/CN.7/2005/2 and Add.5), in order to take required implementation measures and action.
Judicial cooperation
In the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, States were encouraged to review and strengthen the measures to promote judicial cooperation adopted at the special session (Assembly resolution S-20/4 C).
The international drug control treaties provide the framework for international cooperation in countering the drug problem, enjoying almost universal adherence.
Most States continued enhancing their legal framework in order to facilitate international judicial cooperation.
Of the States responding to the biennial report questionnaire for 2002-2004, 85 per cent had implemented legislation on extradition and 31 per cent had strengthened extradition procedures for drug-related cases, bringing to 70 the total number of States that reported revising or reviewing their procedures since the twentieth special session.
Most States (82 per cent) responding in the third reporting period had adopted legislation on mutual legal assistance; approximately one third had also reviewed mutual legal assistance procedures.
Most States (74 per cent, compared with 70 per cent for the 2000-2002 period) had entered into bilateral legal assistance agreements and many had entered into multilateral legal assistance agreements (67 per cent, compared with 60 per cent two years earlier).
Progress also took place in law enforcement cooperation and information exchange, with 78 per cent of responding States operating exchange programmes with other States, often based on bilateral, multilateral, regional or subregional agreements and arrangements.
The international framework on judicial cooperation has been considerably strengthened since the twentieth special session of the General Assembly in 1998, although the non-extradition of nationals remains an important barrier to extradition.
The legislation in almost half of the States responding in 2004 precluded or limited the extradition of nationals, a proportion that has remained stable since 1998.
States referred to a number of other impediments leading to the refusal of requests for extradition, such as the absence of dual criminality, statute of limitations, the political nature of the offence and procedural or formal deficiencies.
Differences between legal systems, language problems and lack of resources posed further obstacles to the implementation of requests for extradition and mutual legal assistance.
Similar difficulties, as well as logistical and technical problems and lack of experience and expertise, were also reported to affect the execution of controlled deliveries and international maritime cooperation to combat drug trafficking by sea.
The responses indicate that further action is required to ensure successful implementation of the measures to promote judicial cooperation adopted at the twentieth special session.
Countering money-laundering
The twentieth special session of the General Assembly set the year 2003 as the target date for the adoption of national money-laundering legislation and programmes, in accordance with relevant provisions of the 1988 Convention.
Most States (88 per cent) reporting in the third biennial report questionnaire, for the period 2002-2004, had adopted legislation criminalizing the laundering of proceeds derived from drug trafficking, an increase of 8 per cent since the first reporting cycle.
A further 8 per cent were in the process of adopting legislative measures in that regard.
Laundering proceeds derived from other serious crimes was a criminal offence in 76 per cent of the States reporting in the third reporting period, while a further 8 per cent reported they were planning to introduce legislative measures to do so.
Money-laundering was considered a serious offence in most countries (86 per cent), as well as an extraditable offence (70 per cent).
Two thirds of the replying States explained that these legislative frameworks had enabled investigations, prosecutions or convictions for money-laundering offences in their jurisdiction.
The legislation of most of the States (89 per cent) replying to the questionnaire in 2004 provided for the freezing, seizure and confiscation of the proceeds from drug trafficking offences and for the freezing, seizure and confiscation of proceeds derived from other serious crimes (71 per cent).
Nearly three quarters of the respondents (73 per cent) had also successfully frozen, seized or confiscated proceeds from illicit drug trafficking, compared with 62 per cent in the reporting period 2000-2002 (see figure II).
While significant progress continued to be made towards achieving the goals set at the twentieth special session in the field of combating money-laundering, further improvement is still possible, in particular in the areas of legislative measures, the establishment of financial intelligence units and international cooperation.
Several States referred to constraints faced during investigative, prosecution and trial phases, in particular the lack of financial resources and trained personnel to secure confiscation of assets.
They also stressed the need for increased technical assistance to ensure that all States have the capacity to combat money-laundering and to facilitate international cooperation by removing the impediments to mutual legal assistance, including, in particular, bank secrecy.
Support for the establishment of financial intelligence units, which could serve as a link between law enforcement, financial and regulatory authorities, is a key factor in attaining the goals set at the twentieth special session.
Figure II
Freezing, seizure and confiscation of proceeds derived from drug trafficking or other serious crimes, 1998-2000, 2000-2002 and 2002-2004
Crop eradication and alternative development
In the Political Declaration adopted at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, Member States committed themselves to developing strategies to eliminate or reduce significantly the illicit cultivation of coca bush, cannabis plant and opium poppy by the year 2008.
All countries where significant illicit coca bush cultivation takes place (Bolivia, Colombia and Peru) and most of those where illicit opium poppy cultivation takes place (Afghanistan, Colombia, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Mexico, Myanmar and Viet Nam) responded to the biennial reports questionnaire in 2004.
Most States implementing alternative development and/or illicit crop eradication programmes reported that their programmes were balanced and multifaceted, supporting institution-building at the local and regional levels, as well as community development activities.
They also reported that their alternative development programmes provided for participatory approaches and took into account gender issues, the poorest and most vulnerable groups, environmental concerns and drug demand reduction.
A larger proportion of States were monitoring illicit crop cultivation using methodologies such as ground surveys (41 States), aerial photography (24 States) and satellite imagery (11 States) (see figure III).
Half of the States responding to the questionnaire reported that they shared information at the national, regional and international levels.
For the third reporting period, 22 countries (24 per cent of respondents) reported having systems enabling the monitoring and quantitative and qualitative evaluation of the impact of programmes for alternative development and eradication of illicit crops.
A total of 39 countries or 32 per cent of respondents reported that they assessed the impact of such measures on a regular basis (see figure III above).
Figure III
Alternative development and illicit crop eradication monitoring and evaluation, 1998-2000, 2000-2002 and 2002-2004
The main countries affected by illicit opium poppy and coca bush cultivation continued to make good progress towards the reduction and elimination of illicit crops.
Excluding Afghanistan, the total area under illicit opium poppy cultivation worldwide in 2004 amounted to 32 per cent of the total area under such cultivation in 1994, while potential opium production in 2004 amounted to 29 per cent of that in 1994.
Regarding the eradication of illicit coca bush cultivation, considerable progress had been made by 2003, the last year for which complete figures were available, when illicit coca bush cultivation was less than half of its level in 1994.
With regard to cannabis cultivation, no such comparable data exists, but it is clear that further efforts by the international community are urgently needed.
Lack of financial resources remained the major obstacle identified by Governments to the implementation of alternative development programmes, together with lack of supporting structures, technical expertise and adequate coordination mechanisms.
Only 20 per cent of States reporting in 2004 indicated that they had provided alternative development assistance to other States on a bilateral, regional or multilateral basis in the 2002-2004 reporting period, compared to 27 per cent over the 2000-2002 period.
In order to meet the targets set for 2008, those countries most affected by illicit crop cultivation need additional and sustained support from the international community, including in the areas of capacity-building, programme coordination and the establishment of monitoring and impact evaluation systems, as well as longer-term socio-economic development, to prevent the re-emergence of illicit crops.
Action by the United Nations system
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, through its drug programme, supports the work of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, coordinating and leading United Nations drug control activities and serving as the repository of technical expertise in international drug control for the Secretariat of the United Nations.
The Office is the custodian of international conventions to counter the world drug problem.
The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, which have been ratified by nearly all Member States, provide the legal framework for international drug control.
The Office assisted States in complying with the provisions of those conventions and supported the International Narcotics Control Board in monitoring their implementation.
The Office worked to strengthen the international drug control system through its integrated portfolio of global programmes and regional and country projects, including legislative and capacity-building assistance in addressing problems involving drugs, crime, corruption and terrorism in countries of Africa, the Americas, East Asia, West and Central Asia and Eastern Europe.
Protection of the environment is a high priority, as illicit crop cultivation and illicit drug production result in environmental degradation and the safe disposal of seized chemical substances is essential.
New initiatives were launched with support from the donor community—ranging from a regional intelligence coordination centre for Central Asia to a container programme in major seaports in Africa, Asia and Latin America, aimed at disrupting the flow of illicit commodities.
Furthermore, in order to strengthen programmatic responses, the Office continues to assist Member States and the international community to improve data collection and analysis.
In June 2004, the Office published the two-volume World Drug Report 2004, which now merges the former Global Illicit Drug Trends with the World Drug Report and will be published annually.
In June 2005, the Office launched the World Drug Report 2005, which incorporated two new research initiatives: the establishment of standardized indicators on the evolution of the global drug problem; and a methodology for calculating the proceeds of the global illicit drug markets, the value of which is estimated at $322 billion.
Initiatives to maintain and strengthen dialogue with Member States continued, aimed at facilitating provision by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of policy guidance concerning priorities and management to the Office on its drug programme, with regular intersessional meetings of the Commission and of the extended bureau.
In the area of strengthening dialogue and cooperation with multilateral development banks and institutions, following consultations between the Office and the World Bank, the two bodies agreed in July 2004 to work together to implement a set of action plans, covering specific geographical regions and countries (Afghanistan, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, the Caribbean and Central Asia) and thematic areas (money-laundering/financing of terrorism, corruption, drug abuse and HIV/AIDS).
The first phase of this collaborative arrangement covers a wide range of topics, such as information-sharing; complementarity of work; and joint activities.
In 2005, an agreement was concluded with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization identifying common areas of work, such as alternative livelihood programmes.
Similar forms of partnerships will be developed with regional financial institutions and other organizations.
In June 2005, the Office published a major study, entitled Crime and Development in Africa, which covers the illicit drug market on that continent.
The study will serve as a basis for the development of an African programme of action, to be discussed at a Round Table for Africa, to be held in Abuja, on 5 and 6 September 2005.
Drug demand reduction
The Global Assessment Programme on Drug Abuse has contributed to the further improvement of drug abuse information systems in a number of countries.
To date, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has provided technical assistance under the Global Assessment Programme to over 50 countries in the form of training, situation analysis and network establishment.
The Global Youth Network against Drug Abuse project now links approximately 300 youth groups and community-based organizations working on the prevention of substance abuse among young people.
From July 2004 to June 2005, the Office chaired the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) Committee of Cosponsoring Organizations, drawing attention to the need to address HIV/AIDS prevention and care programmes for injecting drug users.
The Office remained the convening agency for UNAIDS on injecting drug use issues through the inter-agency task team on injecting drug use and the United Nations Reference Group on HIV/AIDS Prevention and Care among injecting drug users in Developing and Transitional Countries in 2004.
At its forty-eighth session, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs focused special attention on HIV/AIDS, with a thematic debate on drug abuse prevention, treatment and rehabilitation in the context of community capacity-building and preventing HIV/AIDS and other blood-borne diseases.
The Commission adopted resolution 48/12, entitled “Expanding the capacity of communities to provide information, treatment, health care and social services to people living with HIV/AIDS and other blood-borne diseases in the context of drug abuse and strengthening monitoring, evaluation and reporting systems”, in which it encouraged Member States to continue to incorporate drug abuse prevention and treatment measures in relation to HIV/AIDS and other blood-borne diseases into their various socio-economic development programmes, especially programmes designed to enhance the social and economic empowerment of women and child welfare.
Supply reduction and law enforcement
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime continued to serve as the secretariat of the subsidiary bodies of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East and the regional meetings of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies.
Four meetings of the subsidiary bodies of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs were held in 2004.
In 2005, the Sixth Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, Europe, was held in Vienna from 7 to 11 February; and the Fifteenth Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, Africa, met in Ouagadougou, from 29 March to 1 April, with three more meetings planned for later in the year.
Following a review of trends in drug trafficking and regional and subregional cooperation, each of the subsidiary bodies addressed drug law enforcement issues of priority in its region.
Consideration of those issues was facilitated by the discussions that had been held during informal meetings of the working groups established for that purpose.
In addition, the implementation of previous recommendations was reviewed by all subsidiary bodies.
The Commission on Narcotic Drugs considers the reports of its subsidiary bodies annually.
Working in cooperation with international and regional law enforcement partner agencies, such as the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol), the Customs Cooperation Council, also known as the World Customs Organization and the European Police Office (Europol), the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has contributed to building up capacity within law enforcement agencies and assisted in their efforts to ensure operational coordination to combat cross-border trafficking.
To assist Member States in addressing the threat from illicit drug trafficking and related cross-border crime, technical law enforcement assistance has been provided in all regions of Africa, Central Asia and Afghanistan, the Balkans, South-East and South-West Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean.
Such assistance covered precursor chemical control, promoting operational information-sharing, information systems for developing operational intelligence, specialist training and provision of the Office's e-learning system of interactive computer-based training, support in forging operational agreements between agencies and the provision of technical equipment.
An important initiative to improve operational cooperation between law enforcement agencies in Central Asia was launched by the Office to establish a Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre.
In addition, to meet the challenge of trafficking by sea container, the Office has launched a global initiative to establish effective controls over containers to prevent their use for illicit drug trafficking, precursor chemical diversion and other illicit activity.
The Commission recommended to the Economic and Social Council that the Council approve, for adoption by the General Assembly, a draft resolution entitled “Providing support to Afghanistan with a view to ensuring effective implementation of its Counter-Narcotic Implementation Plan”.
It was noted with concern that the report of the Office entitled “Afghanistan: Opium Survey 2004” showed that the cultivation of opium poppy in Afghanistan had increased to an unprecedented level and stressed that threats to the security and stability of that country, neighbouring regions and the entire world had emanated from the increased illicit cultivation of opium poppy and production of and trafficking in illicit drugs.
It called upon the international community to provide the necessary technical and financial support to the objectives of the Counter-Narcotic Implementation Plan of the Government of Afghanistan.
In the area of money-laundering prevention, the Office continued to deploy professional expertise in the field to train people and build institutional capacities, delivering direct technical assistance in States and regions.
Current mentor assignments include Central Asia, the Philippines, Eastern and Southern Africa, the Pacific Islands and the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada.
The Office organized, in cooperation with the Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units, several meetings and workshops.
C. Alternative livelihoods and protecting the environment
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has focused its work in the area of sustainable livelihoods on providing support to the design and implementation of quality alternative development programmes and projects in all key regions producing illicit drugs.
In the Andean countries, the Office has supported generating agro-industries with proven markets, producing cash and food crops, agroforestry productive systems and microenterprises.
The Office supported the Governments of seven countries in carrying out illicit crop monitoring surveys in 2004.
The Illicit Crop Monitoring Programme assists the international community and Governments concerned in monitoring the extent and evolution of the illicit cultivation of narcotic crops.
The results compiled by the Office to determine global estimates on an annual basis enable the international community to guide and assess the progress of the measures implemented to reach the objective of eliminating or reducing significantly illicit crop cultivation by the year 2008.
The results of the surveys have also assisted the Governments concerned in planning the delivery of alternative development and poverty alleviation interventions.
Strengthening the drug programme of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
In the area of financial support to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs adopted resolution 48/3, entitled “Securing assured and predictable voluntary funding for the Fund of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme”, which requested the Executive Director to continue his efforts, in cooperation with Member States, to broaden the donor base and to increase voluntary contributions to the Fund, including, in particular, general-purpose funds, as well as funds earmarked for the support budget.
It also requested the Executive Director to keep Member States informed on the use of general-purpose funds, as set out in the guidelines for their use, and to monitor the ratio between the programme and the support budgets to ensure that support costs were not increased to the detriment of expenditure on programmes.
In its resolution 48/2, entitled “Strengthening the drug programme of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs as its governing body”, the Commission encouraged the ongoing process of reform of the Office, designed to create more effective and efficient organizational practices, and requested the Office to maintain a culture of continuous improvement in management practices.
In the same resolution, the Commission also encouraged the ongoing review of financial management, expected that it would allow the Office and Member States to assess the cost, impact and effectiveness of operational activities in an open manner and contribute to the full introduction of results-based budgeting, and looked forward to the continued development of the system, including the implementation of results-based management.
It supported the efforts of the Executive Director in forming and developing partnerships with international organizations and other international entities, to ensure that issues relating to the world drug problem became an integral part of the sustainable development agenda.
Conclusions and recommendations
Progress continues to be made to enhance international cooperation against the world drug problem.
The information provided by Member States for the third biennial reporting period, from June 2002 to June 2004, indicated that considerable progress has been made towards meeting the goals set for 2008 by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session.
A growing proportion of States have developed and are implementing a multisectoral and coordinated national drug control strategy, including national demand reduction plans or strategies, which provide the political and strategic foundations for effective and coordinated drug control action.
The percentage of States that have adopted national plans or programmes to reduce and eliminate the cultivation of illicit crops is also growing and more States have included alternative development measures in those plans or programmes.
The legal framework pertaining to the illicit manufacture of, trafficking in and abuse of synthetic drugs, particularly amphetamine-type stimulants, has been enhanced and the control of precursors strengthened.
Most States have, meanwhile, adopted legislation against money-laundering, including provisions for the freezing, seizure and confiscation of proceeds of crime, while the percentage of States that have reviewed, simplified or strengthened judicial cooperation procedures since 1998 continues to increase.
However, much remains to be done, especially relating to implementation of legislative measures adopted in relation to international cooperation.
Procedural, logistical, technical and financial problems still hamper the execution of requests for judicial cooperation.
Also often lacking are the expertise and capacity required to combat money-laundering successfully, including by the freezing, seizure and confiscation of criminal assets.
The countries most affected by illicit crop cultivation need further capacity-building, programme coordination, the establishment of monitoring and impact evaluation systems and long-term socio-economic development in order to sustain illicit crop eradication and alternative development efforts and to prevent the re-emergence of illicit crops.
Further efforts are required to strengthen precursor control and to combat the illicit manufacture of and trafficking in amphetamine-type stimulants.
In this regard, law enforcement action and cooperation needs to be strengthened, the operational capabilities of forensic laboratories improved and partnerships with the chemical and pharmaceutical industries further enhanced.
Such action should be combined with efforts to prevent the abuse of amphetamine-type stimulants, especially experimentation by youth, and to treat abuse of amphetamine-type stimulants.
In general, more should be done to develop systems for the assessment of the problem of all illicit drugs, comprehensive prevention programmes, treatment and rehabilitation services and programmes to prevent the negative and social consequences of drug abuse, including HIV/AIDS, among injecting drug users and in prison settings.
Activities should be evidence-based, involving a range of settings and targeted both at the general population and at especially vulnerable groups such as youth.
The Assembly may wish to call on the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, with the support of Member States and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to continue to monitor carefully the progress of Member States towards the fulfilment of their stated goals, with a view to undertaking a comprehensive review and assessment of the achievement of the targets and goals set by Member States at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly in 1998.
In view of the fact that the success of the analysis through the biennial reports questionnaire relies upon a high level of response, both in terms of the number of States responding and the quality of the information provided, and is fundamental for assessing progress made towards achieving the goals and targets agreed at the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, the Assembly may wish to reiterate its call to States to take into account the outcome of the special session, as reflected in its Political Declaration, and invite States to respond, in a timely manner, to the biennial reports questionnaire on their efforts to meet the goals and targets, as well as on the implementation of the measures to enhance international cooperation to counter the world drug problem, as agreed at the twentieth special session, in order to enable the Secretariat to prepare accurate and comprehensive assessment reports.
Notes
The following countries returned at least one part of the biennial report questionnaire: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1582, No. 27627.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515.
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
United Nations publication, Sales No.
United Nations publication, Sales No.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Crime and Development in Africa (June 2005).
The Global Assessment Programme completed modules on Focus Assessment Studies: a Qualitative Approach to Data Collection (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.04.XI.15) and Ethical Challenges in Drug Epidemiology: Issues, Principles and Guidelines (United Nations publication, Sales No.
It also improved the analysis on drug abuse trends through the Weighted Analysis on Drug Abuse Trends.
The work of the Global Youth Network has resulted in a series of publications, including Drug Abuse Prevention among Youth from Ethnic and Indigenous Minorities (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.04.XI.17); Schools: School-based Education for Drug Abuse Prevention (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.04.XI.21); and Monitoring and Evaluating Substance Abuse Prevention.
The thirty-ninth session of the Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East, held in Beirut from 26 to 29 October; the Fourteenth Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies (HONLEA), Africa, held in Cairo from 30 May to 3 June; the Fourteenth Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, Latin America and the Caribbean, held in Mexico City from 11 to 15 October; and the Twenty-eighth Meeting of Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, Asia and the Pacific, held in Bangkok from 29 November to 3 December 2004.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Afghanistan: Opium Survey 2004 (November 2004).
Coca surveys in Bolivia, Colombia and Peru; opium poppy surveys in Afghanistan, the Lao People's Democratic Republic and Myanmar; and a cannabis survey in Morocco.