# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
That is the true sense of this communication and my first request to the Commission is that we act in this area diligently, and with some urgency, since time is passing at Internet speed.
Each year is equivalent to four years and we ask that those proposals included in the Commission' s legislative programme be communicated to Parliament as soon as possible.
I think that I can say, on behalf of the whole House, that we will show a special interest in making the parliamentary procedure as quick as possible, as dictated by the importance of the issues in question.
I believe that the citizens expect this of us and that the Treaty of Amsterdam allows us to shorten and speed up these processes.
Many important things have been said.
Allow me to support what has been said with regard to universal service, access for schools, etc.
However, there are three questions which seem to me to be more problematic.
Firstly, we must establish a better definition of what public service means, failing which we will not be able to make progress, and for the same reason we must also define what the general interest in the field of telecommunications really means.
Secondly, we must separate the regulations for private open television and public television, regardless of the transmission system.
Furthermore - and this has already been said - it is necessary to promote dialogue between the national regulators and the regulators of society, of the private sectors, on this "co-regulation" which is a distinguishing mark for Europe.
Thirdly, I will say that it is necessary to protect - and we are relying on the diligence of Commissioner Bolkestein who is responsible for this area - this system which we are putting in place on copyright, which is one of the great traditions of European culture which is in real danger in this new state of affairs.
.
Mr President, I first wish to join in the congratulations of many here today to Mr van Velzen, whose profound knowledge and experience can be seen in this important report.
I also want to congratulate the whole Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy on the quality of its work.
The debate here shows that many members of that committee have taken part not only in the reflections on this report but also on the whole range of issues on the information society.
The Commission can agree with most of the report and welcomes the conclusions and recommendations.
The report reflects a deep understanding of the sector and what sector-specific regulation should do to support future development of the electronic communications area.
The Commission shares the goals of the report to regulate with a view to achieving a competitive market in this sector.
We also share an understanding of how sector-specific rules can contribute to this objective.
Furthermore, the report accurately notes the two kinds of ex ante regulation needed: first, the regulation needed to inject effective competition into the market.
This includes a symmetric regulation related to market power and other pro-competitive regulations, such as number portability.
In this respect, I welcome the fact that the report pays attention to the need to ensure that number portability is not impeded by technical measures or other arrangements which limit consumers' choice of operators and service providers.
Second, the regulation needed in respect of general public policy objectives, like consumer protection and universal service.
The report concurs with the Commission's intention to withdraw ex ante regulation needed to substitute for competition and to allow the normal competition rules to apply once the markets in this sector are competitive.
It is also noteworthy that this report represents the shared vision of what the sector can contribute to society and to individuals.
Looking in the same direction is an important step in ensuring that everyone reaches the desired destination.
The report proposes that in order to be able to respond quickly to market developments, the directive should be in place during 2001 and that the working period of the directive should be limited to the year 2005.
With regard to the fast adoption of directives, the Commission totally agrees.
As to limiting the life span of the directive to 2005, this raises some questions.
The risk is that it would weaken the credibility of legislation and, in particular, the independence of the regulators.
However, of course we are ready to discuss any comments made in the report.
The Commission accepts that there is a certain tension between legal certainty and flexibility.
Our approach to flexibility is to allow the regulators to determine on the basis of a close-to-the market analysis that effective competition in the market allows the ex ante rules to be dismantled.
This sends the right signals to markets.
Otherwise major players will have an incentive to simply delay until the time period expires.
It also takes account of the different levels of competition in each Member State and the different speeds of development, both of which the report recognises as needing consideration.
On licensing, Parliament calls for one-stop shopping in respect of authorisations in this sector.
The Commission's proposals would both harmonise and simplify the process that companies go through in order to provide communications services.
If the current widely diverse system were retained, then the one-stop shop model would be logical as the report says.
If the harmonised registration system is the solution, it could be as simple as the one-stop shop model.
We must consider the alternatives at the end of the process.
Mr van Velzen has sent me a written question on the auctions.
I will use the normal internal procedures to reply to that question, but perhaps I can make some comment at this time.
I will return to this issue in the formal way.
The same question was put by Mrs Matikainen-Kallström.
According to current law, Directive 97(13), Member States determine which procedures to follow in allocating the limited-frequency spectrum available for third-generation networks, provided they comply with the principles of objectivity, non-discrimination, proportionality and transparency established by Community law.
The Commission is of the view that the use of auction procedures for the allocation of radio frequencies for third-generation mobile networks is not in itself contrary to those principles and as such cannot be subject to infringement procedures.
Regarding the need to foster the development of innovative services and competition, it depends on the economic effect of the various auction formulae used.
These are dependent on a variety of variables - length of licence, rules of payment for licence fees, conditions for network deployment, roaming obligations, etc. which cannot yet be assessed.
The Commission continues to monitor the licensing process in Member States with great attention to ensure that the above-mentioned principles are respected.
It is making an ongoing assessment of the economic impact of procedures used.
I will return to this issue in detail, when I reply to the written question of Mr van Velzen.
Mrs Matikainen-Kallström put forward the question about local laws and also put the question about the local loop.
How can we guarantee that the liberalisation of the last mile will take place?
When the Commission discussed this issue last time it was decided to make a recommendation to Member States to liberalise the last mile so that both full access and shared access can be guaranteed in the local loop.
I find it a very important issue.
Added to that, my colleague, the competition Commissioner, will monitor the issue from the viewpoint of potential abuse of a dominant position.
Thirdly, we have decided to put that issue, too, into the legal proposal for the future legal framework.
The first question is: could this part be separated out to get it through more quickly?
But I agree with your concern that the question of the local loop is the biggest issue this year.
In two or three years' time we will have other issues, but right now we have the network ready, connecting lines everywhere and we can use the existing network with new technology to achieve an enormous increase in broad band everywhere in Europe.
Mr Glante asked the question of who decides what.
This is a big issue which we have discussed in many contexts.
Some people say we should have a European regulator to guarantee full European coherence on those issues.
On the other hand there are people who say that it should all go to the Member States' national authorities and national regulators.
Our intention is to try to balance this issue so that we have some coherence at European level, coherence of interpretation, so that we can have a European level playing field but not to interfere in the issues where the national regulators can do their jobs in a coherent manner.
We shall come back to that issue in our final proposal.
I want once more to express my thanks for the report and for the very interesting debate today.
The Commission will look forward to working together with the European Parliament in the course of the forthcoming legislative process.
After the debate and your votes it will go back to the Commission and I hope that we will be able to make proposals at the end of this month.
I share Mrs Palacio's wish that on this issue the European Parliament and the Council will be able to take decisions very speedily.
Of course there will continue to be a need for an in-depth discussion, but we must be able to create a competent and clear legal framework for electronic communications in the new converged world.
Otherwise the European economy will suffer severe losses and European consumers, too, will lose the possibilities that new technology can give them if applied in the proper legal framework which guarantees full competition between operators.
EU strategy on financial information
The next item is the Commission communication on European Union strategy on financial information.
Mr President, the Commission approved a communication a moment ago which forms an essential part of the financial services action plan.
The capital markets within the European Union display a lack of comparability with regard to the annual accounts published by listed companies.
This leads to an increase in the capital cost for companies and presents a considerable obstacle in the establishment of an efficient European Union capital market with the best possible capital allocation.
In its communication, the Commission proposes to completely overhaul this situation.
By no later than 2005, all listed companies will be required to compile their consolidated annual accounts on the basis of International Accounting Standards (IAS).
This is a major change which directly impacts on approximately seven thousand companies.
These International Accounting Standards are being developed by an organisation from the private sector, namely the International Accounting Standards Committee.
The European Union has no control whatsoever over this organisation, even though various Europeans are actively involved in the work of the IASC.
It is therefore necessary, both politically and legally, for standards approved by the IASC to gain official recognition from a mechanism set up within an EU context.
This mechanism must be pro-active in providing input to the IASC in order to establish new standards.
After approval of a standard by the IASC, it has to give its verdict on the appropriateness of this standard for financial accounting in the European Union.
This EU approval mechanism will comprise a political and technical aspect.
The technical aspect will consist of representatives of the key groups which are closely involved in the problems of financial accounting.
This is mainly the compilers and users of annual accounts, i.e. the bodies which are responsible for establishing standards in the field of annual accounting in the different Member States and the profession of accountant too, of course.
The political aspect will encompass all Member States.
How it will take shape exactly is still to be decided on.
More specifically, thought will be given to how the European Parliament can be involved in the decision-making process.
It is, of course, crucially important that the standards also be applied correctly in practice.
This requires close cooperation between the Member States and between the authorities responsible for supervision on the capital market.
Finally, it is also important that the existing European annual accounts directives, which apply to approximately three million joint stock companies, be modernised in order to accommodate the new developments in financial accounting.
The pressure exerted by the markets and Member States to make the necessary changes to the legislative framework as soon as possible is considerable.
This is why the Commission will be presenting a draft directive or draft regulation as early as the autumn, which will formally set the legislative process in motion.
This proposal will also contain transitional measures which will help to ensure that listed companies switch to the International Accounting Standards for their annual accounting as soon as possible and certainly by no later than the year 2005.
Commissioner, I would like to congratulate you on this initiative because transparency and benchmarking are the most important basic prerequisites for functioning competition.
It would be worth considering - and this is the point of my question - whether you could envisage leaving it to a standardisation committee to make a voluntary decision on this issue in the first round, and only resorting to technical legislation, i.e. to the adoption of a regulation or a directive, when this is seen not to be working?
Perhaps it would make sense to implement it on a voluntary basis to begin with, taking particular account, of course, of the companies, i.e. those on the receiving end, the rating agencies and the tax offices.
Furthermore, I believe the offshoot of this is that a measure of this kind should not, of course, be applied as strictly to small and medium-sized enterprises, which are not listed on the stock market.
Mr President, in response to this question, I would first of all like to point out - and I am dealing with the second part of the question first - that it is a huge undertaking to persuade the seven thousand companies which I mentioned a moment ago, to switch to the IAS, the International Accounting Standards.
Seven thousand companies are required to do this before the year 2005 and this will be quite something.
To say at this early stage that these IAS should also apply to unlisted companies would be too much of a good thing, or des Guten zu viel, as they say in German.
I hesitate to answer this question in the affirmative.
As far as the first part of the question is concerned, which refers to the voluntary aspect of setting up these International Accounting Standards, well, the Commission is waiting for the IASC (International Accounting Standard Committee), which originates in the private sector, to submit the standards.
It is thus up to that committee from the private sector to lay down these standards.
This will, of course, be done on the basis of a majority decision-making process within this committee and these standards then need to be laid down and approved, first technically and then politically.
Technical approval is necessary because many of the components are so complex that one can hardly expect humble politicians to have the necessary technical know-how and this must be followed by political approval because it is a political matter which should also be laid down at political level.
They are standards which are laid down by a committee from the private sector and are, as such, to some extent standards which have been produced on a voluntary basis.
Once these standards are laid down and the European Union is of the opinion that they should be approved technically and politically, then this is what will be done.
Everyone should then adhere to them.
If the latter were not the case, it would, of course, make little sense to come up with international standards at all.
In my opinion, a standard which combines a voluntary start, followed up by political approval and is then imposed on seven thousand companies strikes the right balance between being voluntary and compulsory.
Thank you, Commissioner.
That concludes the debate.
(The sitting was suspended until voting time at 5.30 p.m.)
Mr President, on a point of order.
I should be grateful if the ashtrays could be removed again from outside the Chamber.
The President asked for them to be removed and they were removed.
People stopped smoking out there and they have now been returned.
I understand that somebody has ordered their return, against the President's wishes.
As I keep on having asthma attacks, I hope they will be removed again.
We will certainly try to have that put right, Mrs Lynne.
Vote
(Parliament approved the Commission proposal)
Procedure without debate (Rule 114):
Report (A5-0146/2000) by Mrs Hulthén, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the amendment to the Montreal Protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer (COM(1999) 392 - C5-0186/1999 - 1999/0157(CNS)).
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0151/2000) by Mr MacCormick, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the request for waiver of the immunity of Andreas Brie.
(Parliament adopted the decision)
Report (A5-0158/2000) by Mr Zimeray, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the request for waiver of the immunity of Johann Kronberger.
(Parliament adopted the decision)
Report (A5-0161/2000) by Ms Hulthén, on behalf of the Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council regulation on substances that deplete the ozone layer (C5-0156/2000 - 1998/0228(COD)).
(Parliament adopted the joint text)
Recommendation for second reading (A5-0148/2000) by Mrs McKenna, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council decision setting up a Community framework for cooperation in the field of accidental or deliberate marine pollution (12612/1/1999 REV1 - C5-0101/2000 - 1998/0350(COD))
Bolkestein, Commission.
Mr President, as regards the Commission's position on the amendments tabled by Parliament, I should like to confirm what my colleague, Mrs Wallström, said during the debate held in this House this morning.
The Commission can accept in full Amendments Nos 16, 19 and 22.
The Commission can accept in part Amendments Nos 6, 17, 24 and 25.
The Commission cannot accept the remaining amendments.
(The President declared the common position approved as amended)
Report (A5-0143/2000) by Ms Thors, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: The development of the Market for Digital Television in the European Union - Report in the context of Directive 95/47/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the use of standards for the transmission of television signals (COM(1999) 540 - C5-0114/2000 - 2000/2074(COS)).
Mr President, one part-session follows another and, as far as I am concerned, they are all starting to look alike.
Last time, I declared an interest in the radio and television broadcasting sector.
I must now repeat this statement with regard to this report.
I shall not therefore take part in any votes on the matter.
What is more, I shall have to repeat this same declaration in relation to the following report, by Mr van Velzen, unless you would care to take note of my statement on the subject as of now.
Mr President, I do not want to delay the House, but colleagues may recall that on 14 February there was some discussion at the opening of the part-session regarding a broadcast on the Today programme and Mr Kirkhope, who is a Member of this House.
I should like to read the following apology which was broadcast by the BBC last Monday: "On February 14 2000, the BBC broadcast a report about a new Register of Members' interests in the European Parliament, making particular reference to the interests declared by the Conservative Chief Whip, Mr Timothy Kirkhope.
The report, which was later referred to on BBC News, contained a number of inaccuracies.
Mr Kirkhope has not turned himself into a political consultant and has not and does not lobby the European Parliament.
In addition, the BBC report implied that he will for a fee advise on how to handle things in the European Parliament which the BBC accepts is not the case.
The BBC is happy to make this clear and has apologised to Mr Kirkhope for the errors."
It must be said that is not really appropriate in the middle of voting time.
Mr President, it is very relevant indeed because this broadcast followed a week in which the BBC spent a very large sum of public money lobbying the European Parliament about the very report we have just voted on.
Mr President, just for the benefit of Members regarding the last statement made by Mr McMillan-Scott.
If they do not come from the United Kingdom the words "BBC" do not stand for Blair's Broadcasting Corporation, but many of us seem to think it does.
Colleagues, let us try to address ourselves to the business in hand.
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0145/2000) by Mr van Velzen, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: Towards a new framework for Electronic Communications infrastructure and associated services - the 1999 Communications Review 8COM(1999) 539 - C5-0141/2000 - 2000/2085(COS))
Mr President, due to a financial interest I cannot participate in the next vote.
On Amendment No 10
Mr President, I would like to clarify something in connection with Amendment No 10, tabled by Mr van Velzen, Mrs Ridruejo and Mr Chichester.
In the German text it says in the fourth line: "... considers it important to clarify the following concepts" .
Now I recall that this very sentence was the object of debate in the opinion of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, drafted by Mrs Ridruejo.
We agreed on the sentence: "...considers it to be important to reinforce" , not "clarify" .
I just wanted to clarify whether this is a translation error or has something crept in that should not be there?
Could this be clarified please?
There is a second point I would like to raise.
I will own up to the fact that I have omitted to table a motion for a split vote, on behalf of my group.
However, if it were to be possible to apply for a split vote for Amendment No 8, then I would do so orally herewith, because although the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance endorses the first half of the amendment, it most definitely does not endorse the second part!
If you cannot accept a split vote then we will have no choice but to reject the entire amendment.
I am afraid we cannot have a split vote.
It is out of time.
Could Mr van Velzen perhaps comment on whether Amendment No 10 now says: "considers it important to deepen..." or "to clarify the following concepts" ?
Mr President, I have adopted the approved resolution from the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport.
That is the starting point and it should be mentioned here.
So this means that I have to point out that the text should read: to clarify.
(Parliament adopted the resolution) President.
That concludes the vote.
Mr President, I make this point of order now, whilst everybody is leaving.
I hope that, as well as recording exactly what Mr McMillan-Scott said within his brief explanation of the BBC apology, that two Members - one of the British Labour delegation and one of the British Liberal delegation - who made similar allegations following the broadcast actually now write to Mr Kirkhope and apologise to him personally.
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Report McCormick (A5-0151/2000)
Mr President, I voted against the request to remove Mr Andreas Brie' s immunity, not only because I agree with the responsible Committee' s report, but also because, in voting this way, I wish to stress that I am in favour of amending the regulation on the immunity of the Members of the European Parliament.
In my opinion, there should be a common regulation which applies irrespectively of the State of origin of the various Members.
Parliament' s duties are becoming increasingly more significant and require more care and control to ensure that parliamentary immunity is only removed in cases where a genuine crime has been committed.
Therefore, the entire institution of the immunity of Members of the European Parliament must be reformed.
Report Zimeray (A5-0158/2000)
Mr President, I voted against the application to withdraw parliamentary immunity.
In my opinion, Mr Zimeray should continue to enjoy parliamentary immunity.
Our fellow Member committed a road traffic offence, which is a culpable offence but not a crime.
In Italy, this type of offence does not merit withdrawal of parliamentary immunity.
I fail to understand why a State employee, a worker or an office worker would not lose his job over such matter while a Member of Parliament would lose his parliamentary immunity.
Report Hulthén (A5-0161/2000)
Mr President, I voted for this report because it is important for us to intervene wherever anything harms our environment.
It is my opinion that, in this report, Parliament has been able to marry the requirements of the industry, which needs time to reorganise itself, with the requirements of public health.
I refer to the fact that it is essential not to place the citizens in the situation where they have to change all the equipment they use because a potential source of harm to the environment has been found, caused by the emission into the environment of substances produced by the machines - often common appliances such as refrigerators and cars - that they use.
I therefore feel that it is right for the European Parliament to intervene in this matter.
- I warmly welcome my colleague Anneli Hulthén's recommendation for tighter controls on substances depleting the ozone layer.
This will introduce new controls to the agreement reached at Montreal in 1987 and will provide a higher degree of control of trade in ozone-depleting substances.
When thousands of people from Britain hit the beaches and slap on their suntan lotion to sunbathe this summer, there will be something different in the air.
There will be a measure to prevent the hole in the ozone from becoming any larger.
People will therefore be better protected from getting scorched or going blind from glaring sunlight through an ever-depleting ozone layer.
Tighter controls on substances destroying the ozone layer is just one element of a broader environmental strategy that is needed to save our planet.
Britain's Labour Government has been leading the fight to protect our citizens and to clean up our planet.
At Kyoto, Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott managed to secure an agreement to cut global emissions.
Britain is already well on the way to achieving its target of cutting carbon dioxide emissions by 20% by 2010.
This target has now been raised to 60-70% by 2050.
Strong, coherent action is urgently required at local, national and European levels to clean up our air, land and sea.
Our citizens want to see concrete action, not just hot air from politicians.
This is our chance to continue our battle for a safer, cleaner world.
Report McKenna (A5-0148/2000)
Mr President, when I was 21 years old, I used to travel in cruise ships which went from New York to the Bahamas and back.
One starry, very romantic evening, I was standing with a girl towards the stern of the ship, stargazing as one does when one is 21 years old, when a stern porthole opened and all the ship' s waste was thrown out into the sea.
Despite the fact that it was evening, the seagulls immediately arrived to feast on the refuse.
Twice as much harm was done on that occasion by dumping waste in the sea: it affected both the sea and yours truly.
I therefore support this report which will prevent the dumping of waste in the sea.
- It is astonishing that the Commission did not accept Parliaments' amendments at first reading.
We must insist that the build-up of hazardous wastes is put high on the OSPAR agenda.
Hazardous substances are dangerously toxic, the contamination persisting and building up in rivers, lakes and seas.
I urge the governments involved to push for a halt on the release of new substances and to continue the phase-out of existing hazardous substances, putting in place a substitutes plan.
Chemicals which potentially disrupt the endocrine, or hormonal system must be completely banned.
Governments have already taken steps to ban some "endocrine disrupters".
OSPAR provides another opportunity for governments to operate the precautionary principle based on the known problems of letting industry rush ahead with the use of "dirty" chemicals.
In the case of the weapons industry, I am astonished at the continuing refusal of European Ministers to consider discussions on how to deal with the 1 million tonnes of hazardous chemical and radioactive munitions dumped in the Beaufort Dyke.
The Irish Minister for the Marine, Frank Fahey, must place this topic on the OSPAR agenda as a matter of extreme importance.
The dumping of toxic used weapons is seriously dangerous and should be taken up at OSPAR.
Minister Fahey must also produce a report on the munitions dumps around the Irish coast.
This report can be used at OSPAR as a platform for discussing hazardous waste of all types.
The Irish Government must now prove its commitment to protection of the Irish people and the marine environment.
We need to demand answers from BNFL on the high level of technetium-99 lobster samples.
A lobster sample taken in May 1997 measured an alarming 52 000 Bq/kg of Tc-99 which was then hidden within the reported average radiation levels of 18 500 Bq/kg.
These concerns were raised during the OSPAR convention in July 1998 and were buried with bland assurances.
The UK Environment Minister, Mr Michael Meacher, has clearly stated that "BNFL is unable to explain the high measurement" of Tc-99.
Levels of radioactive contamination from Sellafield in the Irish Sea are continually increasing.
What will it take to stop the poisoning of the seas by Sellafield?
How long will the health of Irish and UK people remain in the hands of BNFL?
Results from vegetable plots near Sellafield where seaweed is used as fertiliser have been published in the Scottish Environment Protection Agency report: "Radioactivity in Food and the Environment 1997".
The results show spinach has been found with a staggering 8 400 Bq/kg which is almost 7 times higher than the EU intervention level following a nuclear accident.
Levels of radiation are measured in Bq/kg.
The EU intervention level for food following a nuclear accident is 1 250 Bq/kg.
.
(FR) During the debate I highlighted the disturbing gap between the extremely mild nature of the text on which we were required to vote and the particularly harsh reality affecting the victims of the Erika disaster, which caused such extensive damage.
By rights this tragedy should have had the effect of seriously reorienting Community procedure.
This was, unfortunately, not the case, and the procedure stands.
It is limited to proposing the exchange of information, which is no doubt highly useful, for the period 2000-2006.
On the key issues, we are still waiting.
Indeed, the victims are becoming aware that the principle of 'polluter pays' is still not truly recognised and that the compensation system set up in 1992 is extremely unsatisfactory and even, bizarrely, lets the vessel operator off scot-free.
In a six-month period, the International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund (IOPCF) has not paid out 2 million in compensation.
Indeed, the IOPCF apparatus looks particularly perverse.
It is a compensation system with no liability, which sets a ceiling unrelated to the extent of actual damages suffered.
It is not fair that the State and local authorities should be required to a great extent to take the place of the polluter in meeting expenses.
This system benefits the oil companies and, as we have just seen, makes it possible for unacceptable pressure to be put on the victims, be they workers in the affected sectors or local authorities, forced to go to court in order to have their damages recognised.
This system must be renegotiated and must be supplemented by a strict legal framework, similar to the one which the United States provided for itself long ago.
This time the necessary debates and the necessary action must not be postponed.
The victims of the Erika disaster want their ordeal to serve to prevent the recurrence of this sort of disaster in future.
Fortunately, this House adopted the amendment confirming the principle of 'polluter pays' .
This is a small step in the right direction.
Report Thors (A5-0143/2000)
Mr President, I voted for the Thors report because I feel that it is right for the European Union to intervene in the regulation of digital television.
I fervently hope that the regulation of digital television and new transmission systems will take into account the fact that there always has to be competition between the public and private sectors.
The public sector, public television and public telecommunications activities must always be facilitated, promoted and supported, but not excessively so, for that would result in a distortion of competition.
It would be better to give pensioners a sum of money to buy a new digital television than to give money to public entities which enjoy an unfair advantage in competition with private companies.
.
Major changes to European culture that will happen as a result of digital technology are welcome.
However, continued good public service broadcasting is essential.
Guaranteed access to public service and public interest content will be a vital guarantor of universality.
It will also be a key driver of digital take-up, extending its appeal.
For public services to be universally available it is necessary to ensure that whichever digital system people may use they can be guaranteed access to the information that is essential to a well-informed society.
Public interest considerations suggest there will be a need for access to this content through all major delivery platforms, whatever access regime is finally decided upon.
"Must access" rules will be needed to ensure universal availability to public service content on other major distribution systems, and to memory in receivers where that forms a significant gateway.
"Due prominence" rules will ensure that public service content and channels can be easily found on proprietary electronic programme guides.
Digital TV is the only convergent technology without basic interoperability.
Regulatory measures will be required to promote interoperability between the networks and devices that will be used to access digital TV and interactive services.
Interoperability can be achieved through declaration and licensing of those key standards, interfaces and authoring tools necessary to reach the end user.
This will promote interoperability without undermining innovation.
Third parties will need access to this information at the same time as the gateway owners' own services.
It is important to get the right balance between the EU and Member State levels.
It is right that the regulatory framework for infrastructure should be established at EU level and implemented nationally.
National regulatory authorities will need the freedom to apply infrastructure regulation according to specific national circumstances, but be ready to justify this at the EU level.
Content issues will affect infrastructure regulation.
Where this occurs, the Member State should be free to set its own priorities.
As we are already in a world of television without frontiers, it is important in the context of Ireland that public service broadcasting, both North and South, recognises all the cultural divisions that have agreed to parity of esteem under the Good Friday agreement, which had such a strong democratic mandate.
Report Van Velzen (A5-0145/2000)
The Finnish delegation of the PPE-DE Group voted in favour of Mr van Velzen' s report and supports him with regard to its content, although it contains one point that we cannot accept, and that concerns the distribution of the UMTS spectrum via auction, which should not be regulated at Community level, as he proposes.
Arguments can be presented in favour of both spectrum auctions and so-called beauty contests.
The fact is that the astronomical prices that result from spectrum auctions always end up with consumers having to foot the bill.
Beauty contests are, in many respects, more consumer-oriented and more of an alternative that supports the freeing up of the market.
On all the other points Mr van Velzen has our full support.
Mr President, although I voted for the van Veltzen report, I feel that it is a communication on electronic communications that actually communicates very little.
I have read it with great care and it appears to be written in genuine 'Brussels Spout' for the officialese is extremely difficult to understand.
While we are on the subject, I would like to inform you that my mother, who is 85 years old, is still walking round Rome without a mobile phone, which is one of the issues covered by this resolution.
In addition to regulating the market, the European Union must facilitate access to these forms of communication for the elderly and the less well-off, but especially for elderly people who live on their own.
Even mobile phones and progress can serve to take away some of the loneliness from the lives of elderly people.
I hope that this will happen.
.
(FR) I voted against this text which does no more than set the stage for a new round of deregulation in the telecommunications sector, without the least consideration for public services or the services of general economic interest even though they are provided for in the Treaty of Amsterdam.
In the absence of any framework directive to protect these public services which are essential to regional planning and to citizens' equal access to these services, I reject any further liberalisation.
Moreover, the reports drawn up within Parliament on the implementation of opening the telecommunications sector up to competition revealed that, in virtually all countries, even the meagre, restricted universal telecommunications service could not be guaranteed.
At the same time, the profits of major multinationals in the telecommunications sector are soaring, while subscriptions and local communications are becoming an increasing drain on the budgets of the poorest individuals.
The report does not introduce cheap and simple access, guaranteed to everybody, wherever they are, to Internet services as part of the provision of a universal service, thus showing that we are light years away from what a modern public service ought to be, in the age of the e-economy.
It is high time, however, that we put this fine European idea into practice.
In pursuing the interests of untrammelled competition, the European Parliament does itself no credit.
That concludes the explanations of vote.
Question Time (Commission)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0487/2000).
We will examine questions to the Commission.
Mr President, I raised this point of order last month and I now have to raise it again.
Each of the questions is dated, presumably with the date when they were submitted, yet they are completely out of order.
The first was submitted on 16 May, the second on 4 May, the third on 24 May, the fourth on 11 May and the fifth on 24 May.
Is there any rule regulating how they are put in order, or some secret method of getting your question to the top of the list?
Mr Purvis, the President of this Parliament and, by delegation, her office, are responsible for the order of questions.
In any event, we are in contact with them and I hope that, in writing, or next month orally, I will be able to reply in full to your question.
It falls within the competence of the Presidency of Parliament.
First Part
Question No 29 by (H-0452/00):
Subject: Political intervention in Georgia's problems Georgia, the newly independent state, is encountering serious difficulties in consolidating democracy and raising its citizens' standards of living.
Its attempts are being hindered by the problem of the breakaway of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and the wave of refugees mainly taken in by Abkhazia.
In its resolutions, Parliament has condemned this situation and has asked the Commission and the Council to support the Council of Europe' s initiative to set up confidence-building measures in the area.
Does the Commission have any strategy for this sensitive region?
Does it intend to operate a policy designed to safeguard peace and security in the region?
The Commission's first priority is to encourage Georgia and its neighbours Armenia and Azerbaijan to work towards peaceful settlement of the conflicts in the region.
We also believe that Georgia will not reap the full dividends of peace without greater efforts to improve public finances, reinforce its democratic institutions and the rule of law and fight corruption.
In future our support will be specifically targeted on these structural objectives.
Since independence the European Community has provided aid and assistance to Georgia of more than EUR 300 million in grants alone.
The Commission's strategy is set out in detail in the communication on relations with the south Caucasian states of 6 June 1999 which was endorsed by the General Affairs Council in June 1999.
The work of the Community complements that of the UN, the OSCE and the Council of Europe.
Commissioner, I should like to thank you for your reply on behalf of my fellow member, Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, and put the following question to you: can you cite a few specific measures and actions which you have taken for the refugees?
I remember from my time as chairman of the representation for relations with Transcaucasia that we had thousands of refugees from Abkhazia who were kept in wretched conditions in Tiflida.
Now these refugees have been joined by more refugees from the crisis in Chechnya.
Have you, the Commission, done anything?
What you say about structural sectors and encouragement to improve the rule of law in Georgia is all well and good, but what is being done about the refugees?
As I am sure you understand, this problem is seriously hampering the political situation in Georgia.
I very much agree that the refugee issue is a burning problem.
This is true for the whole region and one of the main ideas of the Commission through ECHO, working very closely with UNHCR, is precisely to make sure that our approach covers all the different aspects in the region, not to focus on just one activity but to try to broaden the scope.
We are one of the main contributors to the work concerning refugees in the whole region.
When I visited the area neighbouring Chechnya a few months ago the issue of the total number of people moving around was exactly one of the problems we brought up afterwards with UNHCR, and we are in constant contact with UNHCR on this.
Also the International Organization for Migration is involved with our support.
People are greatly concerned at what they hear about the present situation in Georgia.
Democratic rights, employment rights, religious rights are all under very severe pressure.
I welcome what he has said and the amount of money that has been given through the EU to Georgia but surely the situation as referred to by the previous speaker of the refugees is one very serious problem indeed.
Is there nothing more that he and this Union can do to help this new state?
Basically I will have to repeat what I have just said.
Humanitarian activity is in many ways easier for us to organise, and this covers the first part of the problem.
Where things really get difficult is when it comes to creating lasting structural changes and this is where the effort, as I mentioned in my first reply, will be concentrated - on what I would call governance issues.
This is something that necessitates a close political dialogue with society, and that is the long-term perspective that we are working towards in Georgia.
Question No 30 by (H-0437/00):
Subject: Withdrawal of Cuba's application to sign up to the new EU-ACP agreement Cuba's recent withdrawal of its application to become party to the new convention between the European Union and the ACP countries, which will be signed in Fiji in June this year, indicates a considerable change of attitude on the part of the Cuban authorities.
How does the Commission view this withdrawal and how does it intend to handle relations between Cuba and the Union in the light of the new situation?
Does the Commission consider that Cuba can maintain its observer status under the new agreement?
Would the Commission have been in favour of Cuba's signing up to the convention?
Through a verbal note dated 2 May 2000 addressed to the President of the EU/ACP Council of Ministers, Cuba communicated its unilateral decision to withdraw its application to be a signatory to the new ACP/EU Partnership Agreement.
Furthermore, on 20 April 2000 Cuba also unilaterally cancelled a European Union troika to Cuba that was to take place at the end of April and could have provided a useful opportunity for dialogue.
As is clearly stated in the common position of the European Union on Cuba, Europe's policy towards Cuba gives priority to a constructive dialogue.
Cuba's decision to withdraw arrived at a time when discussions within the Commission and at Council level on its application had not yet been concluded.
Therefore, neither the Commission nor the Council took a decision on the desirability of Cuba signing the new ACP/EU Partnership Agreement.
The European Union's future relations with Cuba will continue to be guided, as in the past, by the common position.
The European Union aims at promoting pluralist democracy and respect for human rights, as well as assisting Cuba's integration into the world economy and contributing to the improvement of the living standards of the Cuban people.
Regarding Cuba's future status relating to the new ACP/EU Agreement, the Commission would like to mention that Cuba's application for observer status referred to and was granted only with respect to the negotiations for a post-Lomé Agreement which have now been completed.
Thank you, Commissioner, for your reply, which is rather diplomatic and does not fundamentally answer my question.
It is often said that in politics what is not possible is false.
We all know the Member States' common position with regard to Cuba; we all know that Cuba is not associated to the European Union by means of an institutional agreement.
Let us get to the point.
Please tell me, as far as the Commission' s responsibilities are concerned, what budgetary allocations, and for what projects, is the Commission considering in relation to Cuba in this 2000 budget, and what are the estimates for cooperation presented by the Commission in its preliminary draft for 2001.
Is it legal or not for Cuba to continue to be an observer, not in the negotiation, but in the future agreement which will enter into force when it is ratified by the Member States?
Could Cuba obtain, in this new agreement, the observer status which it has had during the negotiations?
I certainly did not try to reply in a diplomatic fashion, but in a clear fashion.
I can relate to the question concerning the money and the kind of activity we foresee taking place in Cuba.
Generally speaking, we are expecting the level of funding to continue more or less as it is, which means that the actual annual spending is expected to be around EUR 20 million.
Until now, about half of that has been ECHO-funded activities in the form of budget support in kind for the health sector in Cuba.
There is no humanitarian crisis in Cuba as a basis for carrying out ongoing ECHO activity, which is the reason why we are planning to phase out the humanitarian assistance as such and at the same time enlarge the activities that relate more directly to transformation processes in Cuban society.
This we have announced and we are in the process of identifying more relevant activities than those that have been carried out so far by ECHO.
However, this year we are taking care to create some bridging financing in order to facilitate a gradual shift from one activity to another.
On the issue of Cuba becoming an observer to the convention in general, this is not foreseen, and in any case, Cuba has to make up its own mind what kind of relations it would like to try to establish.
It is not our decision, and we have not been involved in any decision-making concerning what Cuba wants to do.
This decision has been entirely their own.
When I stress this, it is not a diplomatic way of covering myself, it is simply the way it is.
Question No 31 by (H-0482/00):
Subject: Withdrawal of Cuba's application to sign up to the new EU-ACP agreement Cuba's recent withdrawal of its application to become party to the new convention between the European Union and the ACP countries, which will be signed in Fiji in June this year, indicates a considerable change of attitude on the part of the Cuban authorities.
How does the Commission view this withdrawal and how does it intend to handle relations between Cuba and the Union in the light of the new situation?
Does the Commission consider that Cuba can maintain its observer status under the new agreement?
Would the Commission have been in favour of Cuba's signing up to the convention?
I am pleased to note that the honourable Member values the initiative, announced by the Commission in its report of the 14 March, whereby an analysis is to be carried out of the way in which the new partnership agreement between the ACP countries and the European Union is affecting the regions on the very periphery of the Union.
I can confirm that the Commission is in the process of preparing to implement this analysis.
The results of the analysis should be available round about the middle of 2001.
Thank you very much, Commissioner, for your reply to the question of my colleague, Mr Fruteau, who has asked me to convey his apologies, since he is unable to get to Strasbourg until tonight as a result of force majeure.
I am also very grateful for your reply myself.
I note that we share the Commission' s concern about the fact that an agreement between the ACP countries and the European Union, which is so positive for other reasons, nevertheless has an impact in those outermost regions which have similar production and are geographically close to the ACP countries.
Having seen that the Commission is concerned about this and having received a very satisfactory response, does the Commission nevertheless intend to implement any measure to lessen the impact of this presumably negative effect before the final date indicated?
Does it intend to implement any urgent measure?
The analysis is expected to be fully completed in a year from now.
It is not clear from the outset that the new EU/ACP Agreement will have an adverse impact.
There also elements in it that are for the benefit of these outer peripheral regions, but it is true that they are in a sense caught in between two regimes.
We will follow this very closely.
As things stand, we do not have a basis for specifying what measures we would decide upon, but we are following this issue closely.
Commissioner, the Commission will have to present the European Council in Feira with a report on the development of a statute for the outermost regions, in accordance with Article 299(2) of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
In the Commission report of 14 March this year, (COM(2000) 147), the Commission refers specifically to the development of some kind of cooperation system between the outermost regions and the ACP countries.
Specifically, the Spanish and Portuguese outermost regions of the Canaries, the Azores and Madeira are close to the archipelago of Cape Verde, and they all belong to the same geographical area, Macaronesia.
My question to Commissioner Nielson is whether the report or the Commission' s proposals to the European Council at Feira consider the possibility of implementing some kind of programme which integrates the action of the outermost regions in relation to this region of Cape Verde, by means of Interreg III for example.
One of the benefits under the new agreement for the peripheral regions is that they will have better access to the ACP markets.
So, in a sense the relationship and regional relations between neighbours will be able to work both ways.
We want to have a thorough analysis of the situation before we come up with specific proposals.
Question No 32 by (H-0444/00):
Subject: Concerted efforts in industrial restructuring process Globalisation of the economy is accelerating the structural transformation of European industry which is necessary to cope with the changes in competitive conditions.
In some cases, however - e.g. Renault's actions in Belgium and, most recently, the conduct of ABB Alstoms Powers - it is clear that restructuring takes place with no regard for workers' fundamental right to influence decisions.
This indicates not only that there are shortcomings with the common rules on information and consultation of workers but also that the European Union has a poor strategy for forestalling and handling the consequences of industrial restructuring.
In the light of the Gyllenhammar report, what are the Commission's views on establishing a code of conduct for managing industrial restructuring and setting up a European Observatory on Industrial Change, in line with the proposal by the European Metalworkers' Federation?
Mr President, the Gyllenhammer report on industrial restructuring makes two separate proposals: the first concerns action by companies with over one thousand employees, which can voluntarily draft a basic report at regular intervals on how they intend to restructure, and the second concerns the European Observatory on Industrial Change.
As far as the first proposal is concerned, we are already in contact with the Federation of European Employers, so that we can promote this plan within the framework of the social agenda in all companies at European level.
As far as the Observatory is concerned, the Commission has understood and stresses the importance of the Observatory, especially at a time of constant mergers and structural change in whole sectors of the economy.
This issue has already been included in the social dialogue and we are awaiting the common position of the social partners on 15 June.
I must point out that the Commission' s approach is not to proceed with yet another new structure, yet another new centre or institute, but to set up a section within the framework of existing structures, such as Dublin, Bilbao or Seville, which will deal with industrial restructuring.
Finally, as regards mergers and acquisitions, which generally create problems and huge job losses, we have already been in written and verbal contact with Mr Monti, the Commissioner responsible, and the Directorate-General responsible, so that the Commission can monitor application of the legislation for the Workers' Committee to the maximum and can check if all the provisions of the law have been complied with before mergers take place and major decisions are taken.
As you know, competition legislation in particular does not take account of these repercussions, which are unquantifiable, but we are making an effort and the Commission has been at the disposal of employees and employers alike, so that the best possible preparations can be made and we do not have thousands of people on the streets with no provision made for them.
I want to thank the Commissioner for her answer.
Restructuring must not be prevented.
Industrial restructuring is necessary, but developments in Europe in recent years have revealed a number of examples of restructuring' s having been carried out badly by companies, for example Michelin, ABB, Rover etc.
The Gyllenhammar report makes the very point that restructuring is needed and that we have to find a framework to enable us to handle it properly in the future.
The Gyllenhammar report has now been around for a couple of years.
It puts forward one or two concrete proposals, for example for a supervisory centre and for a special responsibility on the part of the major companies to provide information in time.
I wonder in what way the Commission is going to make use of the proposals made in the Gyllenhammar report a couple of years ago.
How, very precisely, are you going to make use of these in the dialogue with employers and employees?
Mr President, of course the Gyllenhammer report is both known and of use to the Commission; that is our aim within the framework of the social agenda.
Allow me to say first of all, in connection with one of the basic aspects of the report concerning companies operating with over one thousand employees, that it is not easy for the Commission to communicate directly with industries and companies throughout Europe.
These are matters governed by subsidiarity, matters for national federations of employers, which is why the dialogue is taking such a long time.
I think that we will be able to use some of the more important aspects of the Gyllenhammer report within the framework of the social agenda.
However, I must stress, Mrs Andersson, that these measures mainly concern preparing workers or companies for major structural changes so that we can avoid job losses and major social problems.
The Commission' s main task is to complete and apply the strategy for employment, the aim of which is to channel all these human resources into new jobs.
In other words, how we intend to address structural unemployment and how the people hit by the impact of industrial restructuring can find new jobs in the new sectors being created which, as you know, are mainly services and the information society.
Question No 33 by (H-0473/00):
Subject: New agenda for social policy The European Commission has announced its intention to bring forward in June a new social policy for the new economy which takes globalisation into account.
Will the Commission outline the main elements of that policy, and will that policy include any new measures aimed at tackling poverty and the issue of homelessness in the Community?
Second part
Questions to Mr Busquin
Mr President, I must say in reply to Mr Crowley, as he will have heard umpteen times before, that housing policy and policies to combat homelessness are purely national issues.
However, having been given a specific remit at Lisbon, the Commission is drawing up a social agenda which endeavours to take an overall approach to the problem.
Social exclusion is a particularly complicated problem which cannot be addressed through education, health or social security policy or through employment strategies.
However, we should point out that, in the housing policy sector, any endeavour on the part of the European Commission comes, it must be said, as added value to action taken by national governments.
Thus, in view of forthcoming preparations for the social exclusion programme and the social agenda, the Commission has already funded pre-preparatory action, especially in the sectors which interest you, the homeless living in railway stations, homes for the elderly, a new social housing policy and social housing.
Each of these plans has been drafted by non-governmental organisations and cover all the Member States.
Our aim with the new social exclusion programme, which is orientated towards political collaboration between non-governmental organisations or between local governments, is to implement joint innovative programmes and joint studies and draw up statistics, analyses and proposals for policies which will help the Member States to learn from one another and apply more integrated policies.
I wish to thank the Commissioner for her response.
However, since the Delors White Paper on social exclusion, since Commissioner Flynn, your predecessor in the present job, we have had studies, theses, information and strategies coming out of our ears on how to tackle the problem.
I agree with you, with regard to the proposals laid down in the Lisbon Summit, that maybe now is the time for you and us in Parliament to be innovative ourselves to catch the Member States on the back foot and to present them with an imaginative and innovative plan to tackle social exclusion, because we have achieved the big picture.
We have achieved huge growth in employment and economic terms; we have looked at new innovative ways of creating jobs, of educating people and so on and yet still 20% of our population in Europe are lagging way behind and do not have the opportunity of benefiting from that growing economy or of having any quality of life.
Maybe we could be innovative.
Commissioner, you have us as your partners to drive that forward.
I agree.
It was noted at Lisbon that a large section of the population of Europe, 18% to be exact, lives below the poverty line, with housing and myriad other problems.
Obviously, and I repeat, the housing problem is a complicated issue, it differs from one Member State to another and it depends on numerous parameters, from the employment rate to the land development policy in individual Member States and from the organised social system to social benefits; it is not therefore an issue which can be addressed by national polices.
The European Commission can play an important role here, as you said, by making innovative efforts, by supporting innovative polices and by helping the Member States to learn from each other' s experience.
And that is what we intend to do in the exclusion programme, which we hope will be implemented mainly by non-governmental organisations which already have a great deal of experience in this sector and have a decisive contribution to make.
I certainly accept that there is a place for social policy in these more extreme situations.
However, there is a risk of taking it too far.
Would the Commissioner not agree that the most important thing for the European economy, in order to provide the social benefits that we would all like to have, is for it to be allowed to develop without millstones round its neck of excessive social commitments and problems?
If we are to compete in the global economy, as this question asks, there should be a measured level of social support and policy and not an extreme binding of our businesses and our economies by social requirements.
Clearly, the European Commission has stated its position on the need for a balance between competition and social cohesion.
However, I should like to remind you that in countries with a very high growth rate and a highly competitive environment, such as the United States of America, or in countries in Europe such as Great Britain, there are also high levels of poverty, a significant number of excluded people and acute social problems.
Obviously, therefore, competitiveness alone or development alone cannot solve social problems, which are particularly complicated, given that the weakest in society cannot always reap the rewards of economic development.
This is why we need a social policy in order to redistribute wealth and allow the weakest sections of society to integrate.
And that is what we are constantly trying to achieve: maintaining social cohesion with no loss of competitiveness.
Question No 34 by (H-0507/00):
Subject: Implementation of the Fifth Framework Programme On 11 October last year, Commissioners Schreyer and Busquin promised in separate letters to provide regular information to the European Parliament on the implementation of the Fifth Framework Programme.
This was a welcome step.
However, only one further item of correspondence has been received.
On a related subject, provision has been made for a mid term review of the Fifth Framework Programme.
However, if this review is not undertaken by the end of 2000, it will lose much of its value.
Could the Commission reaffirm its commitment to provide information on the implementation of the Fifth Framework Programme?
Does the Commission believe it is still worthwhile completing outstanding projects from the Third and Fourth Framework Programmes?
Could the Commission say when it is likely to produce a mid-term review of the Fifth Framework programme?
Questions to Mr Liikanen
In accordance with the undertakings made in the letters from my fellow Commissioners, Mrs Schreyer, Mr Liikanen and myself last October, the Commission plans to continue to inform Parliament on a regular basis regarding the implementation of the Fifth Framework Programme and of its budget, as it has already done on several occasions, in October and December 1999 and then in January and April 2000.
The Commission confirms that, pursuant to contractual arrangements, all outstanding projects from the Third and Fourth Framework Programmes must be completed properly.
The Commission shall, furthermore, ensure that these projects produce the best results possible and thereby fulfil the scientific and technological expectations for which the Community funding was granted.
As regards the mid-term review of the Fifth Framework Programme, the Commission will adhere strictly to the terms of Article 6 of the decision on the programme.
The Commission plans to present a mid-term appreciation of the framework programme and its progress this autumn.
I believe this is what Mrs Gill would like to see.
Indeed, the Commission will take into account the results of this mid-term review of the fifth programme, as well as the results of the independent assessment of the last five years, in formulating the strategic guidelines for the future, i.e. for the preparation of the sixth programme.
I should like to thank the Commissioner for that answer because I share his view that Parliament should be involved in the evaluation of problems relating to any execution of the Fifth Framework Programme or any previous programme as well.
We need to have a framework for the future as to how we operate because I am concerned about the financial burden of the previous framework programmes.
Whilst I accept the need for the continuation of the Fourth Framework Programme, I find it a bit odd that six years later we are still dealing with payments that need to be settled for the Third Framework Programme.
Has the Commission given thought to a policy of cancelling all commitments after two or three years if they have not paid?
I know from my Committee on Budgets role that Commissioner Patten has been pursuing various methods of removing some of the huge backlog of outstanding payments within the field of external relations.
Does the Commission believe that these policies could be applied to the research budget?
Finally, how does the Commission propose to improve the implementation of the research budget in the forthcoming Sixth Framework Programme?
.
(FR) I understand Mrs Gill' s concern and I share her feeling that the Third Framework Programme should no longer be impacting on the budget at this stage.
That being said, even if the amounts in question are minimal, they are still covered under contractual liability.
Furthermore, procedures have been revised since the Fourth Framework Programme.
At the time, we were bound by the procedures legally adopted for the Third and Fourth Framework Programmes.
The Fifth Framework Programme quite rightly took some of the previous difficulties into account.
Nonetheless, previous legal undertakings must be respected, even though, I believe, quite negligible sums are involved, at least for the Third Framework Programme.
Indeed, as far as the Sixth Framework Programme is concerned, we shall be having a discussion about the matter of procedures.
Following discussions with Mr Liikanen, we believe that these matters of procedure must be reviewed in the light of previous experience.
The Fifth Framework Programme has, I believe, already solved the problem of procedure on the point you raise.
Question No 35 by (H-0445/00):
Subject: Export refunds Having noted the answer to my previous question (H-0280/00), that 'the Commission simply proposes to adapt the calculation system used in order to take into account the price differences on the world market and in the Community for the cereals used as raw materials in relation to Export Refunds, does the Commission agree that the proposals to change the methodology for calculating the level of export refund rates affecting spirit drinks producers should be accompanied by a detailed explanation as to how this is to be achieved along with supporting justification?
Does the Commission agree that it is essential that this information be made available to the Community' s spirits drinks industry, giving them time to respond before any decisions are taken at Commission Management Committee level?
Does the Commission acknowledge that a change in methodology might be used as a cloak for bringing about a substantial reduction in the level of refund rates and that such a reduction would be unreasonable unless accompanied by a detailed justification of the rate reduction achieved by a change in methodology?
First of all, the background for problems in the export fund is budgetary.
We have had the decisions for Agenda 2000 since Berlin 1999.
It has meant tighter constraints and ceilings for budgetary spending and for that reason an adaptation has been necessary.
On 20 March, the Agriculture Council endorsed the Commission's approach on specific measures for savings in export funds for foodstuffs.
These specific measures are designed to replace the across-the-board cuts currently in place.
The Council asked the Commission to take into consideration the observations made by Member States during the debate on this approach.
These observations also covered the question of spirits.
As far as spirits are concerned, no withdrawal from the list of goods eligible for refunds is foreseen.
The Commission's proposal provides for adaptations of the current method used to calculate the price differences between the EU and the world market in cereals used in processing spirits.
The intention is to continue to promote the consumption of EU cereals as laid down in Protocol 19 to the UK Accession Act.
According to the procedure decided by the Council, the detailed proposal and the best way of adapting this calculation method will now be discussed in the management committees with the Member States.
In the course of this discussion the Commission will supply detailed information justifying its approach.
As far as informing the industry is concerned, details of the new calculations have already been forwarded to them.
In fact there was a meeting with representatives of industry and Member States today when specific measures were examined.
Unfortunately, I do not yet have a report from the meeting.
Acknowledging the general objective of budget savings, the Commission proposal will indeed reduce the refunds for spirits as was clearly indicated to the Council.
The Commission will closely follow the situation of the markets, the development of exports and the repercussions on industrial competitiveness and will consider any necessary adaptation of policy.
I am grateful to Commissioner Liikanen for a characteristically thorough answer to each of the points which I raised in my question.
I am grateful for the assurances about communication with the industry as well as with governments.
That is very important.
I should like to underline, however, that although this is an issue about the spirits industry in the Community as a whole, the fact is, as we all know, that by far the major exporter is the Scotch whisky industry.
Commissioner Liikanen will be well aware that production, particularly of malt whisky, for export is concentrated in the peripheral parts of Scotland: in the islands and in the glens of Strathspey and in other remote parts.
These parts are suffering very heavily for a variety of reasons, agriculturally and in other ways at the moment.
I do not suppose that it is the intention of the Commission to make life impossible in these places but a combination of measures might well have that effect by accident.
I ask him to direct his attention to that.
We are very well aware that whisky is a very important product in some areas of Scotland.
I will pay attention to the issues which were raised by the honourable Member.
Question No 36 by (H-0448/00):
Subject: Prospects for creating incentives for developing gas-fuelled cars The new rules on motor vehicle exhaust gases come into force in 2006, covering hydrocarbons including methane.
Gas-fuelled cars emit lower levels of most hydrocarbons, but more methane.
Methane emissions from gas-fuelled cars are negligible compared with the reduction in CO2 emissions achieved by replacing petrol with natural gas (or biogas), but gas-fuelled cars will not meet the new requirements.
Does the Commission consider it appropriate to grant derogations from the rules already adopted on exhaust gases so that gas-fuelled light vehicles may continue to be sold after 2006, or does it take the view that new rules should be introduced that are adapted so that gas-fuelled cars have no greater difficulty than petrol-fuelled cars in satisfying the exhaust gas requirements (whilst of course not emitting greater quantities of the regulated substances than petrol-fuelled cars, e.g. along the lines of a principle similar to the EEV levels for heavy vehicles)?
The potential of gas vehicles to emit a lower level of regulated pollutants than petrol diesel vehicles is well known.
However, gas vehicles emit high levels of methane.
Emissions of methane cannot be ignored in the context of the EU's climate change policy.
Because of their methane emissions, gas fuelled passenger cars or light commercial vehicles seem today to have difficulty achieving 2006 emission limits for total hydrocarbons - that is methane plus non-methane hydrocarbons.
Further technical developments in catalytic reduction of methane may be possible but the efficiency and cost of such catalysts are not fully known.
Derogations are not provided for in the European system for type approval.
So in this respect the Commission would agree that further technical evaluation should be carried out to determine if an amendment to the 2006 total hydrocarbons limit is necessary, to split it into methane and non-methane components for gas vehicles.
The Commission is presently studying the possible enhanced environmentally-friendly vehicle requirement for light duty vehicles to address traditional pollutants and perhaps also global warming potential.
Like heavy duty vehicles the EEV concept aims at being both technology- and fuel-neutral to encourage best available technology wherever possible.
I should like to thank the Commission for its answer.
The problem with this issue is that it is difficult to develop new types of alternative fuels and vehicles because we have already built ourselves into a traditional system based on petrol-driven engines.
At the same time, there are developments under way involving vehicles and also filling stations.
There are also a number of quite well-developed networks.
The main advantage here is that the cars can be run on both petrol and biogas.
However, the fact that methane emissions are over the limit threatens to put a stop to the project and, in that way, to technical development.
My question to the Commission is: How can we promote further development and help those who are still trying to invent new systems to progress a little further along the road, instead of stopping them in their tracks and concentrating on possible methane emissions to the exclusion of everything else?
- Thank you for the question.
This issue is very technical in character and I am ready to raise this in the Commission and in the technical discussions with the motor vehicles emission group, where we can determine the appropriate course of action in this area.
I will be happy to inform the honourable Member of the outcome at a later date.
Question No 37 by (H-0467/00):
Subject: Release of financial resources for implementation of the Europe initiative The Commission's initiative for an information society for all, eEurope, is very ambitious.
It is tremendously important that vigorous efforts be made to take Europe into the information society.
Reducing inequality in terms of the use of modern technology is most probably this project's most important aim.
But it would seem rather difficult to implement such an ambitious project as eEurope if it is not allocated its own financial resources.
Will the Commission propose that financial resources be released for implementation of the eEurope initiative?
Mr President, first I want to express my gratitude for this question.
I have today been able to witness a discussion about eEurope which is really one of the top initiatives of the Commission at the moment.
The question of how much Community funding we can channel into this programme was discussed in preparing the draft action plan which was presented to the Council and Parliament two weeks ago.
So far we have decided that the Commission will try to reallocate existing funds as far as possible to e-Europe priorities.
For my part, that includes particularly the Fifth Framework Programme for Research and Development, especially information science and technology programmes and TED/Telecom.
They are particular actions which specifically try to strengthen the networks between research centres and regions in Europe which we want to finance from the research budget.
On the other hand, with the Commissioner responsible for structural funds we have drawn the attention of the Member Countries and the regions to the fact that information projects should be given high priority in those areas.
I wrote a letter with Mr Barnier to all regions of Europe on that issue.
We emphasised that in the knowledge-based society, investments in the infrastructure of eEurope are totally essential to guarantee the growth of jobs and also to have more efficient policies of cohesion because the digital economy information society means the death of distance.
So if the infrastructure is there, the importance of distance will be less.
Outside this issue, it is very much a question of the Member States.
What we want to do there is to agree at the European level on the objectives, in particular how to connect schools, how to increase the literacy of young people because the Internet comes to homes through children.
There the question is how to make this essential issue a priority for the Member States.
We are trying to combine efforts at the European level and the national level so that they will reinforce each other and so that Europe can really become a fully competitive information society and, at the same time, an information society which includes everyone.
I would thank the Commissioner for his answer.
I am delighted with this, and my feeling is that we think the same way on this question, which was framed before we had seen the preliminary budget.
I agree that the Commission' s draft budget provides openings which might make that document particularly interesting.
There are a number of areas I should like to draw attention to, in addition to those of regional, research and development policy, etc that the Commissioner himself mentioned.
One important area is that of educational initiatives, and it is perhaps especially important to prepare for the enlargement of the Union towards the East.
This is an incredibly important question when it comes to creating solidarity in Europe, not only among the present Member States but also among the candidate States, which are otherwise at great risk of falling behind in this context.
There is also, of course, the risk of rifts of this kind opening up within the European Union.
Where Parliament is concerned, we have used our Budget guidelines in order very clearly to designate this area as being one of high priority.
For this reason, I should like quite simply to put this question to the Commissioner: could we set up a very specific dialogue between the Commission and Parliament so as to try to come up with these resources no later than in next year' s budget?
Where the candidate States are concerned, I was delighted, a few weeks ago in Warsaw, to be able to participate in a major conference on the information society in which all the candidate States also took part and in which there was a great demand for cooperation between the EU and the candidate States.
We decided at that conference that we must try to adjust the Union' s action plan to the candidate States, too, and try to accumulate experience with a view to combating the threat of discrepancies arising between different countries.
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to participate in discussions with Parliament with a view to strengthening the basis of the Union' s action plan.
I really do believe that this is a major priority for us now, and time flies.
We need to act quickly in order to be able to create a special European information society, broadly based in the sense of including everyone and excluding no one.
Commissioner, you said in your answer to Mr Färm that the Member States have a great responsibility in the implementation process with regard to eEurope.
The only problem they have, however, is not financing and its rechannelling, but the fact that national authorities as well need to be altogether more active in the implementation of the eEurope initiative.
You said today, when dealing with Mr van Velzen' s report, that subscriber line differentiation is, in your opinion, a very important part of the eEurope initiative.
Now, however, the telecommunications regulatory bodies in the British Isles, at least, have had huge problems establishing competition in local networks, although last Thursday we received a slightly more positive message from them.
How, then, does the Commission intend to persuade national regulatory authorities, too, to take a more active role and intervene in the market if they need to?
Mr President, Ms Kauppi is right when she says that subscriber line differentiation is a very important issue.
Only in that way can we increase competition at the last mile, which is from the centres to people' s homes, and, ultimately, that alone will be important when Internet charges are determined.
The Commission' s view was a three-stage plan of operation.
Firstly, we made a recommendation regarding a procedure to be followed in order to differentiate between subscriber lines.
Secondly, using the tools of competition policy, we shall investigate abuse of a dominant position in local networks.
Thirdly, we said that subscriber line differentiation will be a part of the new legislation.
At present, we are putting together a package on the new legislation.
The issue currently being considered is whether subscriber line differentiation could be introduced separately alongside the package and a prompt reading requested for it.
It always takes time to debate a whole package of measures of this size.
We could perhaps adopt a faster procedure when debating special matters.
The Commission has not yet taken a decision, but serious consideration is being given to such a procedure.
Mr President, Commissioner, the auctions held in Great Britain have given the national coffers an enormous boost.
Do you think it would be possible to draw up a voluntary agreement, in conjunction with the Economics and Finance Council, with a view to agreeing a form of words covering both auctions and beauty contests, and then in future, spend a certain amount of the proceeds on the e-commerce sector?
I have in mind a voluntary agreement, according to which 30% or 50% of the funds would be used for research, training and further education, and for new infrastructure.
I believe that in view of the fact that in Great Britain, the proceeds were approximately ten times higher than expected, people are now willing to think again about this revenue.
I believe now would be an opportune moment for the Commission to put forward proposals.
I would like to thank Mr Rübig for a very interesting idea, but I have followed the debate in those countries which have been going for auctions.
I have had the feeling that they already have very many ideas on how to spend the money.
The possibility of a solution at European level as to how this particular part of finance should be used, when only some countries are going for auctions, while others are using beauty contests, may be very difficult.
The issue of auctions will be carefully monitored.
We will monitor carefully in the context of the existing directives how the purpose of transparency, economic efficiency and affordability will be applied.
I am sure we will come back to this issue later.
Question No 38 by (H-0477/00):
Subject: Defence industries Given the importance of the defence industries as a driving force for technological research and job creation, particularly in SMUs, would the Commission indicate what action it has taken to follow up its previous communication on the future of the European Defence Industry and whether it will be publishing a new communication?
I want to thank Mr Titley for a question which is high on the preparatory agenda in the Commission at the moment.
We recognise that the competitiveness of the European defence industry is vital to our political and economic interests and also an additional element in the credibility of the European security and defence policy.
In addition, we must remember that the defence industry acts as a catalyst for growth and innovation in other industries, ranging from the high-tech, such as aerospace and information technology, to the more traditional industries, such as steel and shipbuilding.
The Commission's task is to promote the defence industry's competitiveness through exercising its competencies for policies such as the single market and external trade.
In December 1997, the Commission launched its work in this field by adopting a communication entitled "Implementing European strategy in the field of defence-related industries".
This document presented a 14-point action plan and at the same time encouraged the Council to adopt a common position on a European armaments policy.
However, we have not so far been able to make as much progress in implementing this strategy as we had hoped.
That is why at the moment the Commission is reflecting on how to revitalise this process in order to identify the immediate priorities for the Commission action to match the recent political and industrial progress.
This will allow us to assess the merits of a follow-up communication, refining and updating the earlier plan in order to take account of new subjects in the light of the recent changes and at the same time to accelerate some key measures presented in the 1997 paper.
I went through this 14-point action plan and I can really say that many of them are as typical today as they were in 1997.
Moreover, a number of important topics that were addressed only partially or not at all in the early action plan now deserve more attention.
These include security of supply, the offset practices in defence sales and also the treatment of intellectual property rights.
I thank the Commissioner for his reply.
In the last Commission this was a priority, it was an agenda being driven forward by Commissioner Bangemann, supported by Commissioner van den Broek.
Do I get the impression that this Commission has really lost interest in pursuing this initiative and that the Commission as a whole would prefer not to take this forward?
It seems to me ironic, at a time when we are reconsidering our defence capacity, that we seem to have lost impetus on the restructuring of the defence industry.
In particular, is the Commission, despite its role as guardian of the Treaty, afraid to take on Member State governments over Article 296 in order to enforce the fact that many defence items should be subject to the single market?
Will the Commissioner reassure me that he intends to take the initiative in this area and not run away from it?
A few months ago I launched internal discussions in the Commission amongst the commissioners who have competence in this field, from the external sector to internal markets.
We are analysing what points of the action plan it is most important to tackle soon.
I hope that come the autumn we will be ready to report on what particular actions we are going to take.
This will be an important issue, and I agree with the honourable Member that after the recent changes, especially in the Helsinki Summit, these issues are even more important today.
Secondly, the political atmosphere in Europe is such that they do not actually create contradictory positions between the Member States.
Thirdly, the consultation which has taken place - and continues to take place - in the industry also reinforces the understanding that we need to use normal internal market instruments where possible.
That can create more competition, cut costs, make European companies more competitive and, at the same time, save defence budgets.
Since the time allocated to Questions to Commissioner Liikanen has elapsed, Questions Nos 39, 40 and 41 will be replied to in writing.
Questions to Mrs Reding
Question No 42 by (H-0438/00):
Subject: Legal basis for sport The European Union does not have competence in the sphere of sport because it is not included in the Treaty.
Can the Commission supply information about the negotiations for the inclusion of an article or a protocol in the Treaty?
Without a legal basis, how can we ensure that a budget is allocated specifically to sport each year, and avoid having to use other budget lines to develop measures in the field of sport?
It must be pointed out that, to date, the matter of including sport in the Treaty establishing the European Community, at the Intergovernmental Conference, has not been raised by any Member State or by the European Commission.
These are the parties with legal competence to do so, pursuant to Article 48 of the Treaty on European Union.
The Commission wishes to inform the honourable Member that, on the occasion of an informal meeting of Ministers for Sport, on 10 May in Lisbon, a number of delegations indicated that they were in favour of including sport in the Treaties establishing the European Community, while others were opposed to the idea.
There is a lack of agreement between Member States, even among Sports Ministers.
Mr President, I would nonetheless like to inform you of the comments made by Mr Lionel Jospin, the French Prime Minister, when making a governmental statement on the objectives of the forthcoming French Presidency.
Before the French National Assembly, he mentioned a statement which might be adopted at the European Council in Nice in order to assert the special nature and social role of sport within Community law.
Finally, the Commission has taken note of the declarations by sports organisations requesting some reference to sport in the Treaty.
The Commission has also noted that these requests differ as to the nature of the precise reference, in the sports world too, and we have acknowledged the autonomy of sports federations.
There is a lack of agreement.
Lacking a legal basis, it is clearly not possible to assign a specific budget line for sport.
On the other hand, the Commission is aware of the role played by sports organisations on the European social scene.
This is why many Community programmes are open for such organisations to take part.
In my own area of activity, for example, I can tell you that the relationship between Youth and Sport will be one of the areas focussed on in the forthcoming national and European youth conferences which are being held now in Member States and which, during the French Presidency, will be held in Paris.
What is more, next year, sport will be a priority objective in the Youth Programme.
I know that one of the themes adopted in the new Community Action Programme against discrimination is the elimination of obstacles due to discrimination impeding access to sport.
Even without a legal basis, then, we have continued to concern ourselves with sport and to invest in sport, which is an element of society with a very important social role.
Commissioner, I believe that we all agree on the importance of sport, its specific characteristics, its social function and the many areas in which we use it in the fight against racism and xenophobia.
It serves to bring people together because of the enjoyment it gives, of course, but also because of its educational role in relation to our young people.
Since we are very clear about this, both in Parliament as well as in the Commission - as the Commissioner has demonstrated on many occasions in her work in favour of sport - I would like her to continue working and convincing people so that sport may be included in one way or another in the Treaties and, thereby, we will be able to work for sport, in this Parliament and in the Commission, and we will have specific budgets for it.
Commissioner, you give a very full response.
I would have liked such a response to the written question which I sent to you.
Your answer simply referred me to the Commission's opinion on the IGC.
It is not acceptable for a Member of Parliament to take time to write a question and then to get a response from your services which is two lines long.
I can read documents.
I wanted your personal view on Mrs Zabell's question about legal issues.
We have a tradition with the Treaty of Amsterdam of using protocols to protect specific characteristics.
We could perhaps look at the potential of a protocol to protect the specific characteristic of sport in Europe.
There are many areas now where we have legal challenges, as you rightly know, in the sport domain, particularly in the commercial sector.
We could have a protocol that would allow us to give a political direction to authorities to take proper account of the specific nature and structure of sport in Europe.
Would you be prepared to back such a protocol and do you see a way for us to try and protect the specific nature of sport without, as Mrs Zabell asked, having a particular legal competence?
I should like, firstly, to apologise to the honourable Member if she finds that the written answer was not full enough.
I shall ensure that answers to written questions are more complete in future.
As far as the legal basis is concerned, obviously, since sport is not included as such in the Treaty, the Treaty must be interpreted rather broadly in order to find some legal basis.
Let me give you a concrete example.
In order to initiate a Community action in the context of the anti-doping campaign, we used inter alia the basis of texts relating to health, but there, too, the Member states, on the initiative of Sports Ministers, formed a committee to look into the best legal basis for the Commission' s anti-doping campaign.
As regards sport as a social activity, the Sports Ministers also set up a working party to investigate how they could reach agreement among themselves, because they do not necessarily always agree: there are some Member States that wish to promote sport, and others that do not wish to get involved, for reasons of subsidiarity.
We set up the working party among Sports Ministers in order to reconcile these conflicting points of view, because what we all want, in the end, is to restore the credibility of sport, to prioritise the idea of fair play, to allow young people to receive training in sport and, above all, to prevent abuses such as the sale of children, and damaging their health and bodies in sport, not to mention the economic abuses.
This, then, is a problem which, as you can see, we are tackling unremittingly.
Ladies and gentlemen, you have to be aware that the Member States must agree unanimously in order to introduce even a protocol, and that this is even truer in the case of an amendment to the Treaty.
If you wish to achieve something, then you must lobby your own governments.
As the author is not present, Question No 43 lapses.
As they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 44 and 45 will be taken together.
Question No 44 by (H-0504/00):
Subject: CONNECT initiative The CONNECT initiative was launched in 1999 at the European Parliament's instigation.
Ninety-one of the 517 projects submitted have been co-financed by the Commission.
What is the Commission's assessment of the initiative's first year of operation?
Does the Commission consider that the CONNECT objectives and activities are sufficiently well incorporated into the new education and culture programmes?
If not, how can the discontinuation of the initiative with effect from 2002 be justified?
Question No 45 by (H-0505/00):
Subject: Future of the CONNECT initiative (education, culture and new technologies) The CONNECT initiative was launched in 1999, at the European Parliament' s instigation.
Since then, 91 of the 267 projects submitted have been co-financed by the Commission.
The latter has also created a CONNECT page on the Internet which is proving very useful and which gives the projects a high profile.
All of this demonstrated that the Commission has worked professionally and energetically and that the CONNECT initiative is achieving the objectives which the European Parliament set for it.
These innovative pilot schemes must therefore continue to be comprehensively monitored so that the sound practices they embody and the results they achieve can be maintained and extended.
How does the Commission intend to perform such monitoring in order to ensure that the excellent results achieved so far are maintained and improved?
We are not currently in a position to assess the results of the 91 projects cofinanced by the Commission, since the projects only started at the beginning of the year.
It is obvious that an assessment can only be made once some progress has been made in the projects.
So please allow me a little time, until autumn, before making an initial assessment of the progress made in the projects.
The Socrates, Leonardo and Youth for Europe programmes have taken account of the objectives of the Connect initiative, i.e. stepping up liaison and synergy between the fields of education, training, culture and innovation, with the involvement of new technologies, through their joint actions.
As part of these three programmes, the Commission has provided for the possibility of financing projects in the above fields in order to encourage and strengthen synergy.
The Commission therefore considers it too early in the day to plan the renewal of the Connect initiative for 2002 before we have checked the results.
So, let us give it some time and let the projects develop.
At the opportune moment, during autumn, we shall then consider the best plan of action in view of the experience gained.
Furthermore, the implementation of joint actions in 2001 will demonstrate promoters' interest in submitting projects.
I am very grateful for your reply, Commissioner, which, furthermore, contains reasonable arguments, and I am glad to see that the decision to remove CONNECT is not irreversible.
I must tell you that we have the opportunity to renew a budget line which is very successful and viable because, with a truly modest amount of money - as you have said - almost a hundred very interesting and innovative projects are being carried out.
My supplementary question is as follows: Do you not believe that, even if only provisionally, CONNECT should be renewed as a coordination programme for the other programmes?
Do you not believe that, if we remove CONNECT, it could be interpreted as a new milestone in the tendency for the issues within your competence to lose importance.
I am beginning to suspect that this is what the Council intends: to see to it that all educational and cultural fields should lose importance.
Let me tell the honourable Member that I have absolutely no intention of getting rid of the essence of CONNECT.
I feel the content of CONNECT is extremely important, whatever it is called.
Indeed, to give you a specific example, I have just informed the French Presidency, which is planning to organise a major conference on the subject of "Learning about the history of Europe" , that there is a CONNECT project to do with learning about citizenship and European identity through history.
As you can see, it all hangs together.
The French Presidency has tabled this conference, which I feel is of the utmost importance, without thinking of CONNECT directly, but it is up to us to make the connection with the projects underway, because the content is of interest and because the content also points the way to the future.
In future, if we wish to make progress, we must add the development of new technologies to our list of priorities.
Commissioner, I would like to offer a brief reminder.
CONNECT saw the light of day with the 1999 budget, as a preparatory action covering 1999 to 2002.
In fact, it was my baby.
I am therefore rather surprised - if your words have been translated properly - that no assessment has been carried out until now, because CONNECT should have begun and did begin, I am sure, at the beginning of 1999.
I am also sure, Commissioner, that there is currently not a single official or agent of the Commission dealing with the operation of the CONNECT programme, nor a single spokesperson for those organisations which are currently implementing projects.
I would be grateful if you could tell me how this situation can be reconciled with the reply that you have given.
Mr President, the Commission launched the CONNECT initiative in 1999 and since then, 91 of the 267 projects submitted have been cofinanced.
The Commission intends to make the most of the results and to disseminate them within the Member States.
In March 2000, the Commission therefore held an initial meeting with the project coordinators, which provided practical information on the projects as well as establishing contact between the coordinators in their respective areas of operation, since this too is extremely significant for future developments.
We do not want people working individually in their own exclusive areas, we want networks to be set up between coordinators, so that there will be follow-up.
We have already taken part in several European meetings organised by the coordinators to provide better guidelines for the projects.
The fact is, it is all well and good to draw up the initial plan for a project but, once it is underway, it often becomes clear that it must be redirected.
At that point, we redirect it if necessary, follow it up and assist in disseminating the contents of the project.
The Commission envisaged holding two other meetings in the near future in order to be able to monitor that the projects were being conducted properly, and to promote the implementation of the projects in national educational and cultural policy.
Finally, thanks to the scheduled interim reports which have been requested from the coordinators, we shall then be able to carry out an overall assessment in the autumn and to inform Parliament of the results of these initiatives and of any follow-up which may be required.
You may rest assured that Parliament will be consulted in deciding the nature of this follow-up.
Commissioner, I am grateful for your reply, but I still require some information.
Am I right in thinking that right now there is not a single official or agent of the Commission dealing with the operation of this programme?
Mrs Anastassopoulos is in charge of these files.
You surely do not imagine that there are 91 projects cofinanced by the Commission without a single official to deal with them.
This would be somewhat unrealistic, especially since - as I said - the essence of the CONNECT initiative is, I feel, most important.
That is why I have notified the French Presidency, urging it to include the groundwork already achieved in the CONNECT action in its own projects in future.
If I said as much to the French Presidency, it was not to put an end to it, but to continue along the same path.
Question No 46 by (H-0506/00):
Subject: European radio broadcasting Further to the public hearing on radio held on 24 May 2000, does the Commission intend to redefine the audiovisual sector in Community policies to include radio?
Does it propose to carry out a detailed study of the radio-broadcasting sector in Europe and, if so, when?
Does it consider it expedient to create an appropriate statutory framework for the introduction of digital technology in European radio and does it consider that the argument put forward in its reply to my Question No 67.
H-0037/00 that Community action should be taken only in sectors displaying market failure is contrary to the principle of preventive action on which many Community policies are based?
Does the Commission not consider that the introduction of a new technology such as digital technology is a commercial risk requiring Community support and that, therefore, radio broadcasting should be included in the MEDIA PLUS programme?
A public hearing on radio was held on 24 May 2000.
The question was: does the Commission intend to redefine the audiovisual sector in Community policies so as to include radio?
Does it propose to carry out a detailed study of the radio-broadcasting sector in Europe and, if so, when?
Does it consider it expedient to create an appropriate statutory framework and how does digital technology fit into the picture?
The honourable Member knows very well that the Commission welcomes the discussions held on 24 May 2000 because they confirmed the public support that radio enjoys.
We all know how popular local radio stations are in our Member States and so it is important to consolidate radio.
The meeting also helped to demonstrate that there is no confusion about the definition of the audiovisual sector and that radio has always been an integral and important part of the audiovisual scene, both culturally and financially.
But at the same conference, expert opinion indicated that a possible market failure may manifest itself in the period 2010 to 2015; and it is precisely this timescale which makes the approach of technological neutrality, which I have proposed to the Commission, the most appropriate one.
Given the rate at which technologies develop, we foresee that TV will enter the digital age first, followed only afterwards by radio.
The MEDIA PLUS programme is not intended to reduce commercial risk related to the introduction of digital technology in any sector, including the TV sector, and that is why MEDIA PLUS is totally unadapted to radio broadcasting.
Commissioner, your answer was most helpful.
Whether or not MEDIA PLUS also covers commercial risks is indeed an issue.
Of course, its justification is that it is supporting television so that it can introduce the new, digital technology.
The question is: why have you not found a way to support radio?
I tabled a question on a previous occasion to which you replied that radio probably has no problem.
However, at the public hearing which we held, all the interested parties stated that there is a problem.
And it is precisely the problem which you mentioned, i.e. that it is difficult for radio to introduce digital technology when it has no specific audience to address.
So there is a problem here.
It is not a question of commercial risk, it is a question of helping the whole sector to convert to the new technology.
Consequently, the question remains.
Do you intend to do anything, if not under MEDIA PLUS, then somewhere else, under some other programme, or are you leaving it until later, until you have seen how television does?
I should like to inform the honourable Member that MEDIA PLUS has no industrial aspect whatsoever.
It is aid for the distribution of European films beyond national frontiers.
This is not a problem that arises for radio which, generally speaking, is not transnational and therefore has no European dimension.
The problem which radio is probably going to face by 2010-2015, if you listen to the experts, is to do with the technological transition and infrastructure.
Many details in connection with this have not yet been clarified, for example, the reallocation of radio frequencies.
Would it be possible to reduce prices?
Member States have not yet agreed what course to adopt, whether it be one involving terrestrial or satellite systems.
As you can see, there are still a great many problems to be solved at Member State level.
I do not rule out the possibility that one day we may realise the need for a technological directive and for industrial aid in the transition to digital.
For the moment, however, we have not yet decided on this together with the Member States because we are still a very long way off and there are still preliminary matters to be resolved.
Let me reiterate, however, Mr Papayannakis, that even for the transition to digital in the television sector, the only aid allocated is for training workers in the sector in digital technology, but this is very marginal: of the EUR 400 million allocated, only 50 million, and then only a small part of this 50 million.
Otherwise, MEDIA PLUS focuses on the promotion and distribution of European films, particularly in cinemas.
In this way, even then, the television aspect is not greatly affected.
If you have firm convictions and you want to make further arrangements for television and radio, then we should have to discuss this among ourselves and I should also have to discuss it with the Member States in order to determine whether there is a need for legislation on the subject.
Since the time allocated to Questions to the Commission has elapsed, Questions Nos 47 to 82 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes Questions to the Commission.
(The sitting was suspended at 7.44 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)
Historical liabilities from JRC nuclear activities
The next item is the report (A5-0159/2000), by Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on historical liabilities resulting from nuclear activities carried out at the JRC under the Euratom Treaty - Decommissioning of obsolete nuclear installations and waste management [COM(1999)114 - C5-0214/1999 - 1999/2169(COS)]
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the dismantling of obsolete nuclear installations and the correct treatment and final destination of the resulting radioactive waste are an issue of great industrial and environmental relevance within the debate on the future of the energy supply necessary for the world' s sustainable development.
Fortunately, we now have the necessary scientific and technological knowledge to ensure that these operations are carried out in conditions which are safe for the workers involved and for the public in general, and it is the role of the public authorities to supply the appropriate resources and ensure that the legislation in force in this field is respected.
To this end we should welcome the Commission' s document on the historical liabilities from the Joint Research Centre installations.
This document establishes the financial and technical bases for the dismantling of obsolete nuclear installations and for the closing of others which are still operating, as well as for the final storage of the radioactive waste already generated and waste resulting from the proposed process.
The Commission' s document has been considerably improved and supplemented after its passage through this Parliament' s Industry Committee, and also as a result of the rigorous reports of the Committees on Budgets and the Environment.
In particular, I will mention six points in relation to which our parliamentary work has made particularly significant contributions.
Firstly, Parliament considers that a programme of this scope and duration cannot be left to the whim of each year' s budget.
Therefore, we ask the Commission and the Council to immediately begin a tripartite dialogue on this issue during which the three institutions will set a specific, stable and sufficient budgetary action line.
Of course, the expenditure incurred cannot in any way jeopardise the funds destined for research within the successive framework programmes.
Given that this point, Commissioner, is, if you will pardon the expression, the weakest in the document, and recognising that with in the current financial perspective there is no easy solution to it, I would ask you to make a clear statement about this in your speech.
Secondly, the Member States that are affected must fully participate in the development of the programme, since this will be implemented subject to the respective legislation on nuclear safety and radiological protection.
Thirdly, all the operations must be carried out in a totally transparent manner, in such a way that the workers who participate in them, and the populations in neighbouring areas, are fully and reliably informed and, of course, listened to.
Fourthly, the experience gained and the technological advances which stem from these operations must be taken advantage of in similar situations in the applicant countries, who should be persuaded to participate in them by means of the PHARE and TACIS programmes.
Fifthly, Parliament will monitor the programme in detail by means of receiving an exhaustive and accurate annual report.
Sixthly, a committee of external independent experts will advise the Joint Research Centre and assess the technical quality and safety guarantees of the programme during its development.
I would not like to conclude without acknowledging the loyal cooperation of the staff of the Joint Research Centre, who have constantly gone out of their way to provide the information requested of them, as well as the valuable contributions of the various Members of Parliament with whom I have maintained useful and constructive exchanges of view, in particular Mrs McNally, Mrs Ahern, Mrs Maes and Mrs Buitenweg.
Despite the fact that any issue relating to the nuclear industry is inevitably controversial and hindered by excessive emotion, the fact that the final agreement on the text which the Industry Committee has communicated to Parliament has been unanimous, provides a measure of the maturity and responsibility of this House when it comes to supporting an objective which is both desirable and urgent: a definitive, safe and clean solution with regard to the nuclear installations which have come to the end of their useful life.
Madam President, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, I would for once prefer not to talk about the level of finance requested but about the financing method which has been put forward.
Indeed, the Commission is proposing a very strange method of financing the estimated needs.
Instead of setting aside funds within a budget line, it suggests finding the necessary finance from money which was originally intended for other purposes but which was not actually spent.
As the rapporteur, with whom I worked extremely well, has already remarked himself, this is an extremely peculiar financing method, and I can think of at least three reasons why this is so.
Firstly, the safety of current and future generations cannot be made dependent on the fact that there may be some money left over somewhere.
Secondly, it is giving the Commission a very ambiguous message.
Indeed, the budget authority decides on how much money should be spent on certain matters, but hopes at the same time that some money will be left over for something as important as decommissioning nuclear plants.
Finally, this financing method is also at odds with the principle of transparency.
Indeed, it is not made clear how much money is reserved for decommissioning activities.
The rapporteur claims in his report that the nuclear plants in question have been operated for decades with a view to providing direct support to the nuclear industry, which has been able to make use of the results free of charge.
Is it a coincidence that there is little transparency in such a contentious area of policy?
The Committee on Budgets has rejected this working method.
As already indicated, it proposed to convene a trialogue and to include the solution which emerges from this exercise in the budget procedure for 2001.
Moreover, this trialogue can also serve to plug a democratic hole.
Indeed, the budget instrument can serve as a big stick in order to secure a say in the programme content.
I hope that Parliament can support this proposal made by the Committee on Budgets.
Madam President, we should be delighted that the Commission is at last intending to deal in a general and in-depth way with the problem of the decommissioning of the obsolete nuclear installations of the Joint Research Centre and the management of radioactive waste.
We should also be concerned, however, at the conditions in which this initiative is being undertaken, very late in the day, on the basis of partial information and in the utmost confusion regarding the funding of this action programme, despite its urgent and important nature.
Not only are there no budget provisions, but the regulations in force mean that financing arrangements are particularly uncertain.
There were no provisions, even though all this was anticipated long ago.
We have been aware, ever since the nuclear installations were built, that one day they would have to be decommissioned and that this would not be a simple matter.
So the fact that there are no provisions is indicative of the fact that no one wanted to make provisions for this so as not to undermine the pro-nuclear dogma.
The Commission communication provides an opportunity for us to prioritise as a matter for concern the issue of the decommissioning of nuclear installations, a matter of the utmost topicality of direct concern to the European Union, its Member States and the candidate countries, not just the JRC and the Commission, an already highly topical matter which is going to become ever more urgent in years to come.
This is why we consider it so important that Parliament should be kept fully informed in order to have all the facts at its disposal when debating the matter.
The Commission communication makes the pertinent comment that the Euratom Treaty, signed in 1957, envisaged the establishment and rapid growth of the nuclear sector.
The time has now come, however, to decommission the installations in this sector.
Clearly, then, this Treaty and the role assigned to the EAEC have now also proved to be truly obsolete.
While the European Union must respond, above all, to the problem of historical liabilities deriving from nuclear activities, then we consider it a matter of urgency to re-evaluate the Euratom Treaty and the role of the EAEC in the course of the negotiations currently in progress within the context of the Intergovernmental Conference.
Madam President, I would like to thank my colleague, Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca, for drafting an excellent report.
The dismantling of obsolete reactors and the disposal of spent fuel are essential to the future of Europe' s nuclear research and energy sector.
Nuclear power is currently the most important and versatile form of energy production and will remain so far into the future.
For example, in addition to normal production, many modern plants can utilise the plutonium that would have been used for nuclear weapons prior to decommissioning.
Serious research into renewable energy sources is possible when we have another form of cheap energy at our disposal.
Assurance of nuclear safety is one of the most important preconditions of the Union' s enlargement eastwards.
Both the candidate countries and the Union have to work hard, via the TACIS and PHARE programmes, for example, to make sure that obsolete and disused nuclear plants can be made environmentally safe in a sustainable way.
This, however, must be done in a controlled way.
Calls for the dismantling of plants in Eastern Europe which are obsolete but which are in working order may lead to an uncontrollable downward spiral in the energy sector.
Nobody wants to drive the countries of Eastern Europe into a situation where they are completely dependent on imported energy.
We must invest more in the disposal of radioactive waste.
For example, several years of effort have been made in Finland to solve the problem of disposal.
A sustainable model for a solution already exists.
I hope that the political will to grapple with this issue as swiftly as possible will be found elsewhere in Europe.
Madam President, I extend my thanks to Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca for the way in which he undertook his role as rapporteur and the way in which he involved those of us who were shadows on behalf of our groups.
It was an exemplary way of setting about proceeding on what is a very difficult issue.
Of course with hindsight this is something which should have been considered long ago.
However, the European Commission and the Joint Research Centre have listened to the comments made by the European Parliament about this matter of concern.
I accept that they are trying their very best to put forward a solution which enables them - who know as well as anyone else the seriousness of the situation - to tackle this problem.
The methodology, however, is quite inadequate and can only be very temporary.
We have this historical liability but, colleagues, this is not something that can possibly be funded from current research.
This is not current research.
We would be stealing money from research programmes which are badly needed and a top priority for the European Union if we financed the decommissioning from that budget That would be a completely incorrect use of research funds.
These installations are the property and liability of the whole of the European Community, not uniquely of the research programmes.
Conclusion 9 spells that out most clearly, and I fully support it.
The traditional budgetary procedure is inadequate and inappropriate for the reasons that have been stated by colleagues.
Not least, it is far too uncertain for a very important task like this.
The trialogue is urgently needed.
I support Amendment No 20 which says that the present situation, the present conclusion, is adequate for this year only.
That means that we must have a trialogue meeting called within days after the passing of Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca's report.
We must ask the chair of our committee, the Commission and the Council to get together before the summer so that a solution can be found for next year's budget.
This work must be done in the safest possible conditions.
We cannot have any corners cut in an area where it would actually be dangerous to do so.
It must be done properly and properly financed; no cutting down on the amount of cooling time.
Certainly not!
We face a time-bomb in the Joint Research Centre: the imminent loss of very many skilled people who have the knowledge from their time at the Joint Research Centre.
Those people are getting older and will retire.
We have to have emergency measures to ensure that people with the appropriate skills are brought into the workforce at the Joint Research Centre.
Of course we must look at the historical liabilities, but I urge colleagues to support Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca's report.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report on this extremely complex issue.
Mr President, the nuclear plants in the joint research centres date back to the 60s and were intended to provide direct support to the European nuclear industry.
These installations, therefore, should not be considered research installations in the sense that is understood today.
It should not, therefore, be the case that the Fifth Framework Programme should single-handedly carry the cost of decommissioning.
But the proposed alternative, namely to dip into budget lines which have not been used over the year, demonstrates how little insight there is into the budget discipline.
It begs the question how seriously we take ourselves if, every year, we need to look for any left-over funding in order to clean up the nuclear legacy.
And how seriously will the electorate take us if we deal with public health and taxpayers' money in this way?
My group will therefore support Amendment No 12 in order, in consultation with the Council and Commission, to reach a final budget decision for 2001 onwards.
In addition, my group is of the opinion that we should not only find a budget for installations which are out of action.
We should already make provision for the future decommissioning of plants which are still in operation at the moment.
Mr President, my group is concerned that in a number of Member States, notably Italy where most plants are located, legislation on the storage of nuclear waste is still in its infancy.
This can lead to complications during decommissioning activities and can also result in additional financial problems.
Also, it goes to show once again that the drafting of minimum safety standards with regard to the design, construction, operation and decommissioning of nuclear reactors within the European Union is a matter of extreme urgency.
I have also suggested including this in the Euratom Treaty at the forthcoming IGC negotiations in Nice.
Madam President, the issue of the decommissioning of nuclear waste is a very serious one.
I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca, for his conscientious approach and his efforts to reach agreement on an issue of such sensitivity for our citizens.
Agreement is not consensus, as political groups and indeed Member States differ strongly on nuclear matters.
Nevertheless we can agree on the necessity of dealing with decommissioning and the safe handling of nuclear waste as an urgent requirement.
Nuclear power is not sustainable and should not be promoted, as it still is under the outdated Euratom Treaty which goes back, as has been said, to 1957, and which aggressively promotes nuclear power but does not adequately protect the public health of our citizens.
It is not subject to the democratic control of the European Parliament because it is not part of the treaties of the European Union.
However, the European Parliament has a budgetary role, which is why the Commission's budgetary proposals are not acceptable.
We can only accept it for the year 2000 pending a more correct budgetary solution in 2001.
On nuclear waste it is important to emphasise that no solution has been found.
Only certain Member States create nuclear waste, and these are the states that should therefore pay for dealing with it.
Finally, I should like to congratulate the rapporteur for proposing to convene a trialogue so that the European Parliament can play an appropriate role in managing in a sound manner, as Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca has indicated, our terrible legacy of nuclear waste which future generations will have to deal with and which, with its dreadful effects, can devastate all life on earth.
There are obsolete nuclear power plants all over the EU, not just the ones that we are considering with the JRC.
This has important implications for the future, so that we can deal soundly with the situation.
I thank the Commission for its proposals in general and, in particular, Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca, for the way he has involved colleagues in trying to find a solution to this problem.
This report, on which I congratulate the rapporteur, is one further chapter in the debate on nuclear safety during which public concern about the safety of old and run-down installations, particularly in the new applicant countries of central and eastern Europe is highlighted.
In the absence of appropriate assurances on safety, the relevance of the nuclear industry to a changing world economy and environment is likely to continue to be a controversial issue.
There is a growing unease even with the safest and most modern facilities about our increasing dependence on nuclear energy.
Already we have examples of new installations not being commissioned and a re-examination of policy by some Member States.
With regard to European policy and its relevance to Member States, I believe we should introduce a period of reflection before embarking on further dependence on nuclear energy.
We are living in a time of increasing awareness of the environment and public health.
On these issues, the public are seeking assurances beyond reasonable doubt.
This is their entitlement and in the light of the many failures and accidents in the nuclear industry, I am not satisfied that they can feel safe with what is happening.
The decision last week to close Chernobyl is belatedly welcome.
There is now no credible reason for any further delay in closing the Sellafield installation, which has one of the worst safety records in the industry.
The impact of Sellafield on public health and the environment is now a matter of fact.
The sordid history of management and attempts to conceal serious accidents are a matter that cannot be taken lightly particularly in Ireland where our people are exposed to serious risks with no redress as far as decisions on safety are concerned.
Madam President, for years, the nuclear industry has been able, at no extra cost, to draw on the knowledge and results which nuclear plants have provided within the framework of the Joint Research Centre (JRC).
Now that these plants have reached the end of their working life, we are left with the legacy of decommissioning these plants.
Recital C of the resolution of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy states that Europe boasts a high level of expertise when it comes to decommissioning nuclear plants.
The European Commission communication, however, shows that this does not go much beyond managing old nuclear plants and storing radioactive waste.
A problem in this respect is the fact that the total decommissioning process takes up several decades.
It will therefore be some time before we have learned from practical experience how to decommission old nuclear plants.
In addition, there is no solution in sight as to how to solve the problem of radioactive waste.
It will be evident that this state of affairs also has a bearing on finances.
The European Commission suggests transferring the funds of the R&D budget, which might not be spent, to a new heading intended for decommissioning.
This raises the suspicion that decommissioning is seen as unimportant.
In my opinion, this is a gross underestimation of the cost of decommissioning.
It also implies that the price charged for electricity generated by nuclear energy is too low.
If you ask me, it would, in summary, seem more appropriate if industry and the Member States, which have also enjoyed the fruits of the JRC, were to carry the cost of decommissioning.
Madam President, I recently visited the JRC at Ispra and it served to remind me firstly of the great amount of good work across the wide range of research activity that is carried out there and, secondly, of the historical legacy from the site's origins as a nuclear research facility.
In particular, I saw the need to open up stores of waste which were deemed fit some decades ago and met the requirements of the time, but now do not meet our current high standards.
We must bear in mind that times change and the standards change with them.
I note that the procedure proposed by the Commission for the financing of the decommissioning and waste management work on the research reactors has a familiar ring to it.
It sounds rather like the Tomlinson procedure which was adopted for financing Parliament's building in Brussels.
That was by transferring unexpended funds in odds and ends of budget lines on a year-by-year basis.
So, perhaps colleagues should be cautious before we criticise this proposal.
I recognise the widespread view that funds should not be taken from research lines under the Fifth Framework and that research money should not be used for this purpose.
I see a certain irony in such thoughts coming from those people who also demand the internalisation of external costs, i.e. the inclusion of decommissioning costs in the overall cost structure, when the procedure now put before us is pretty much the same thing.
I support the proposal for a trialogue.
It seems the sensible approach.
The work must be done and has to be paid for somehow.
I am very sorry to hear colleagues propagating ancient myths like "no solution has been found for dealing with nuclear waste".
I am afraid Mrs Ahern has lost contact with the facts in this matter because she is quite wrong in her statement, and we should not let such myths distract us from the issue at hand.
Madam President, perestroika and glasnost used to signify change in a rigid structure.
I think there are times when we could use a little more perestroika and glasnost in the structures of our administration, particularly where the Joint Research Centre is concerned.
A report was compiled in 1998 investigating the Joint Research Centre.
This report also contains remarks regarding the nuclear sector, ranging from the question of whether the personnel are qualified to whether our own European safety standards are being observed.
The ghost of this report haunts our corridors precisely because it has not been published.
That is not the way to go about things.
If our aim is to develop a strategy for handling nuclear material then we must lay all our cards on the table.
People could not therefore be more justified in demanding that the aforementioned 1998 report at last be published, and that it be made clear what lessons were drawn from it as regards the handling of nuclear material at the Joint Research Centre.
We are indeed prepared, on the basis of a clear analysis and a clear inventory, to develop a strategy aimed at the degradation of dangerous waste accumulated over the years.
But first we must have clarity.
Glasnost and perestroika are what we need when it comes to handling nuclear material in our own installations.
Madam President, first of all I should like to thank my fellow Member, Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca, for his efforts, particularly with regard to consultation: he took a good number of our proposals and amendments into consideration.
The JRC' s nuclear activities present us, however, with a twofold problem: that of reducing this type of activity, on the agenda now more than at the time the JRC was set up under the aegis of Euratom, and the problem of the historical liabilities from nuclear activities involving the matter of decommissioning, at an estimated cost of more than EUR 500 million, all told, though there is every possibility that this gross figure has been underestimated, as is generally the case in nuclear matters.
Moreover, although four JRC sites are concerned (Ispra, Karlsruhe, Vienna and Petten), there are still six of the fifteen Member States (Ireland, Luxembourg, Denmark, Greece, Portugal and Austria) that do not benefit from this research.
This whole business has a past history, a historical context which, as the very title of the report indicates, merits serious analysis, both of the origin of the research and of the transfers effected from various countries to the JRC.
This is why, in the first place, we are not in favour of dealing with the problem of cost as a side issue.
Using appropriations that have not been used may prove an incentive not to use all research appropriations in order to be able to invest them in decommissioning.
Secondly, a serious reassessment must be made of the research appropriations and the cost of research in relation to decommissioning and of the consequent impact on the cost of nuclear energy, which must also be re-evaluated.
Thirdly, we are therefore in favour of Kathalijne Buitenweg' s proposal to set up a specific budget line and to determine this by a trialogue.
We should like, however, to draw the Commission' s attention to the fact that problems exist not only in terms of the budget, but there are also technical problems, and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy has useful points to make in this trialogue.
Decommissioning operations are not compatible with the principle of annual budget payments and all the countries have appropriate internal procedures.
The objective of the trialogue is therefore to reach an agreement between the three institutions on an appropriate regulation which will serve as a legal basis for financing the operations.
Only on this condition, which must lead us to make proposals for the 2001 budget, will we accept the interim measures for the current budget.
Madam President, I would like to congratulate Mr Vidal-Quadras on his excellent report, and point out that the Joint Research Centres at which decommissioning of installations and management of nuclear waste are planned, in particular the Ispra centre, are located in densely populated areas, and the environmental characteristics and quality of life of these areas must not be jeopardised in any way.
We must therefore not only carry out the operations in the strictest observance of the current safety rules but we must also be able to reassure the local population that the operations will be of the highest quality, and they must therefore be based on the greatest respect for the quality of the whole of the environment and human life.
The Commission can no longer shirk its responsibilities, which are now being diluted in the internal debate between the Commissioners on how to finance the operations, but it must guarantee definite, substantial, appropriate, continued financial support for the decommissioning and management programme, ensuring the success of the entire operation in the medium term.
As Parliament has already stated, the deactivation of obsolete installations and waste management will have to be financed from dedicated funds, not from capital intended to fund research.
At the moment, Europe is having to expand its research and technological development capacities, particularly but not exclusively in the field of the new technologies we have discussed today, but also with a view to closing the gap between Europe and its competitors, the greatest of which are the United States and Japan.
I am also concerned by the uncertainty which clouds the action programme, in terms of the final storage of the waste.
As we are aware, the rules and regulations which apply are the responsibility of the Member States on whose territory the Joint Research Centres lie, but the legislation in some States, particularly in Italy, on the final storage of waste is still at the preparation stage.
The absence of national regulations and the uncertainty regarding the actual volume of waste may create fresh financial problems which will have to be taken into consideration.
Madam President, first of all I should like to join all the others who have congratulated Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca on his report, which is comprehensive, moderate and intelligent, and I think this is worth emphasising.
I should also like to thank the Commission for issuing this communication very promptly.
The problem before us today has been at the forefront of the discussions we have had during debates on the Fifth Framework Programme.
What we must be aware of - and many of you are unaware of this - is that for a long time this problem has effectively deadlocked any agreement on the Fifth Framework Programme because the Council wanted both to reduce the appropriations for the JRC while at the same time paying all the costs of decommissioning, as it were.
Today, we are clearly in a situation where the Commission has come up with a budgetary instrument to at last start decommissioning and, in spite of everything, to undertake the necessary action on waste, but in a climate of great uncertainty, as the Commission knows well.
So, as we have been quite rightly saying again and again, what we have to do is organise a trialogue as quickly as possible and find a legal basis, i.e. a regulation that makes it possible to provide multiannual financing for a concerted programme in this area.
Not only does it need to be done, but it needs to be done quickly.
This matter, Madam President, must be added to the current budgetary trialogue negotiations and I should like you to draw the attention of the President of Parliament, Mrs Fontaine, to this.
I should also like the chairman of the parliamentary Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy to make his fellow chairman on the Committee on Budgets aware of this.
Discussions have to start now, not in three or four months' time.
To conclude, I should like to make a historical point regarding Euratom.
People have criticised and are still criticising the Euratom Treaty.
We should be aware that the Euratom Treaty was the first example of a treaty offering protection to the public.
It is thanks to the 1957 Euratom Treaty that we in Europe have the highest level of nuclear supervision and protection in the world.
It warrants praise rather than brickbats.
What is obsolete about it is the fact that there is a treaty specifically for nuclear energy.
What we need to do tomorrow is incorporate this treaty, as it stands, into the European Community Treaty.
Madam President, this week, Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca has reaped the benefits of the dialogue, as have we.
I hope that he will promote this dialogue at every given opportunity.
In any event, I would like to thank him for his report.
We are talking about the management of the nuclear legacy, Commissioner, but legacy usually implies a gain and you can refuse it if you so wish.
This legacy, however, cannot be refused.
We are lumbered with it and will have to deal with it in some way or another.
As one of the old opponents of nuclear energy, precisely because of those unresolved issues, I am not speaking with a sense of satisfaction but more with a sense of: "You see, we told you so all along" .
We are lumbered with this legacy and it is not fair, really, to saddle future generations with problems.
I would, however, like to make one comment regarding the report.
If Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca says that possible lasting solutions have not yet been implemented, I cannot agree with him, because I do not consider the storage of this waste a solution.
From this point of view, I also beg to differ with Mr Chichester.
I think that a genuine solution has not been found or cannot be found.
As far as the Euratom Treaty is concerned, I would go along with what you are saying, Mr Desama, but I would press for a critical overhaul of the Euratom Treaty, maybe on the Commissioner' s initiative.
In that way, we could see how an incorporated treaty would have to be reviewed, as I find your proposal highly interesting from this point of view.
I would also argue for a programme for decommissioning which is not modelled on too narrow-minded views and for our, as from now, taking into consideration the problems of our future partner countries, as we will have to deal with their legacies from the past too.
Finally, I would like to expressly ask the Commissioner whether he would be prepared to publish the internal audit report of 28 April 1998, because, at the end of the day, there is little precise information available.
I would, therefore, also ask whether the NIRAS [Belgian Institute for Radioactive Waste and Fissionable Materials] report on cost development could be published, for example.
In my opinion, it is absolutely vital to achieve this transparency which our fellow delegates are pressing for, so that, in future, we can have nuclear energy pay for its legacy.
Madam President, the Commission has undertaken a courageous initiative and I would like to express my support for the excellent Vidal-Quadras report on the need to deal transparently with the problems raised by the historical liabilities resulting from nuclear research carried out at the Joint Research Centre - the need to decommission obsolete installations and manage radioactive waste.
I would stress certain points which have been already been touched upon several times, starting with the premise that essential health and environmental obligations must always take precedence over economic objectives, although these cannot be disregarded.
It must be recognised that, for some time, the comparison between the cost of the different sources of energy has been distorted by underestimation of the cost of decommissioning the installations and waste management.
Therefore, the cost of decommissioning nuclear installations must not be taken solely from European Union resources but must also be the responsibility of the Member States which are involved in the construction of installations.
In terms of the budget, the cost must not be taken from the research heading but a separate line should be created, as has been suggested.
Europe must use this undertaking to gain fresh experience which will allow it to tackle the extremely serious issues regarding the ex-Soviet Union and the countries of the East which are candidates for enlargement.
These territories contain many nuclear power stations which will have to be closed or decommissioned in forthcoming years.
We must avoid the repetition of tragedies such as Chernobyl, the consequences of which have still not all become manifest, particularly with a view to the future lives of the communities affected by that disaster.
Madam President, I too congratulate Mr Vidal-Quadras on his report on the decommissioning of nuclear installations and waste management.
However, it has to be said that the current situation of the Joint Research Centres, particularly the situation of the Ispra site, is the result of a past policy which did not take the problem of the disposal of nuclear waste into due account.
The issue of the safe disposal of the waste is, to say the least, worrying.
We need a specific and - in my opinion - short or medium-term project to promote the safety of the citizens who live in those territories and the surrounding environment.
It might be useful, in this regard, to capitalise on the experiences of the other countries of the Union, for example, England, Germany and France, where, although the disposal issue has not been completely resolved, it has been targeted for some time now.
In a country such as Italy, in particular, where there is no specific legislation, we will have to rely on the abilities of the Ispra research scientists for the disposal of radioactive waste from that site.
I tabled two questions on the Ispra issue but I did not receive satisfactory responses.
I, too, call for the 1998 Commission internal audit report to be made public so that a comprehensive, exhaustive assessment of the issue can be made.
I feel that there is a need for Parliament' s voice of democracy to be genuinely heeded in this case, so that we can guarantee to the local communities that they will not be in any danger.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I should like to thank Parliament and in particular its Vice-President, Mr Vidal-Quadras, for this high-quality report.
I should also like to pay tribute to the sense of responsibility displayed by the Members of Parliament today in relation to a complex problem.
Finally, I should like to express my pleasure at the support which Parliament is offering the Commission' s initiative to launch this action programme in difficult overall circumstances, as you have highlighted.
Before getting to the heart of the matter, I should like to respond to three Members of Parliament, Mr Lang, Mrs Maes and Mr Mantovani, on the matter of the internal audit report for the Joint Research Centre of 28 April 1998.
With reference to this subject, I shall simply say that this is no more than a draft report which has not been accepted by both sides, which may be surprising given that it is now the year 2000 and the report dates back to 1998, but I am only noting the fact.
As to the report then, I shall simply say that it concerns the problem before us today and much more, since it concerns all the activities of the Joint Research Centre.
A number of points raised in this report have already been answered.
Having said that, I share your wish for transparency and I would like to inform you that this draft report and the subsequent exchange of letters have been officially conveyed to the chairmen of the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.
I can only suggest that you familiarise yourselves with these documents, and I shall remain available to discuss the matter.
I consider transparency to be absolutely crucial and I share your feeling on this.
The documents are available and we are available to discuss them.
Let me remind you, however, that this is a draft audit report which has not been subject to examination by both parties.
I shall now come to the report before the House this evening.
All these problems, as you have pointed out, are due to the infrastructure and installations built under the Euratom Treaty in the early 1960s, in the face of the European Atomic Energy Community, in order to further the development of nuclear energy.
Most of these installations have now been shut down and have become obsolete, and they have been maintained in a secure state pending decommissioning.
It must be stressed that they are currently being kept in a secure state with a view to decommissioning in future.
It is, indeed, generally accepted that this delaying strategy, which has also been implemented by many Member States, is in fact extremely costly and that faster decommissioning would make it possible to manage the sites and the waste generated, as well as the available resources, better.
The Commission therefore decided to initiate an action programme to tackle, in a general and in-depth fashion, the decommissioning of obsolete installations and the management of the waste generated since the 1960s.
Indeed, I attach particular importance to the Community' s assuming the responsibilities arising as a result of the nuclear activities carried out in the Joint Research Centre at the start of the Euratom Treaty.
The ultimate objective of the action programme is to enable the land and buildings concerned to be reassigned for non-nuclear use, level 3 of the recommendations of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
This is a process which must, as you have pointed out, respect the environment and the health of the population, but one which will extend over around fifteen years at a cost which may be in excess of some EUR 230 million.
Indeed, this sum applied only to installations already shut down.
Initial calculations of the costs of the future decommissioning of installations still being used for research suggest additional costs of EUR 220 million.
Implementation of this action programme has already started.
It is being carried out under the supervision of the Joint Research Centre, which is providing its experience and the personnel necessary, and with the assistance of a committee of independent experts from the Member States.
When I say independent, I mean not only independent of the Joint Research Centre but also independent of industrial interests, since this is a problem that has been mentioned.
I now come to the most sensitive and problematic aspect of the matter: financing.
The solution which the Commission adopted initially, as you mentioned, was to use the appropriations from heading 3 that remained at the end of the year by means of a transfer subject to the budgetary authority.
As the Committee on Budgets pointed out, however, this is not really an appropriate solution, and I am willing to acknowledge this, for a long-term programme.
The fact remains that this proved to be the only way to get the programme under way after twenty years of waiting and two refusals by the Council and the European Parliament to finance these operations form the research budget, which I find perfectly understandable.
So this initial solution was adopted as a pragmatic option.
I accept that Parliament, in its capacity as budgetary authority, was unhappy with this, but I thank the House for its understanding and for authorising, as I said in December, this initial step forward.
Obviously, from a personal point of view, I would prefer a much more structural solution, as you stressed in your report, and in your proposal to convene a trialogue you are sending out a clear message: the matter is specific and sensitive enough to warrant being examined by experts from the three institutions.
Indeed, I share Mr Desama' s opinion in requesting that this trialogue should be convened as quickly as possible.
This is what we want, and, I think, what Parliament wants too.
We have every reason to adopt a pragmatic and responsible approach.
This is the approach Parliament favours and which I myself favour, and the Commission is already looking into the options which might be put before the trialogue in order to avoid the pitfalls inherent in this type of activity.
This may lead us to investigate an approach which bypasses the constraints of annual budgetary payments, as you pointed out.
Moreover, in the preliminary draft budget 2001, the Commission has already made proposals in line with the concerns expressed by Parliament, particularly regarding specific budget lines.
I think this is a matter to be discussed in the trialogue but also with the Committee on Budgets to ensure that the budget for 2001 can already include the first "positive transactions" on the subject.
Finally, I noted a number of requests from Members of Parliament, particularly the legitimate request for greater transparency.
Let me tell you, to this end, that the Internet site requested is already operational.
This is not a problem.
Any citizen who so wishes can find information on the subject.
Generally speaking, the necessary internal arrangements have already been made in the Joint Research Centre so that it can fulfil its role as the awarding authority fully and effectively and can assume total control of the external firms carrying out the main body of the work.
Finally, we are left with the legitimate question of what is to become of the installations that are still operating.
Mrs Plooij van-Gorsel spoke of this.
The Commission does not wish to dodge the issue, as it specified in its communication.
The Commission also mentioned that the solutions adopted by Member States are not easy to apply at Community level.
I should therefore be very much in favour of the trialogue tackling this question too: not just the matter of the installations already shut down but also that of the installations still operating, which will probably present a problem at some point in future.
Whatever the case, I must thank Parliament for its interest and for its responsible proposals.
Thank you, Commissioner.
I think our President will have taken note of the joint requests from the Commission and Members of Parliament that a trialogue should be convened in short order, and I shall not fail to alert her to the fact.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Restrictions for products subject to excise duties (Sweden)
The next item is the report (A5-0160/2000) by Mr Maaten, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the proposal for a Council directive amending Council directive 92/12/EEC of 25 February 1992 as regards temporary quantitative restrictions for products subject to excise duties brought into Sweden from other Member States [COM(2000)295 - C5-0260/2000 - 2000/0118(CNS)]
Madam President, I would first of all like to make it clear that I am all for the further completion of the internal market, that is to say the removal of obstacles facing EU citizens in the area of free movement of goods, services and capital.
I also welcome Commissioner Bolkestein' s dynamic approach in this respect.
This development results in great economic expansion and has led to more prosperity in Europe.
Also, the free movement of goods within the Union has become something which both citizens and industry take for granted.
There will undoubtedly be Swedish consumers who will benefit, and also find pleasure, from the Commission proposal once beer, wine and spirits, ranging from whisky and brandy to lesser products such as gammeldansk, shellfish in brine and Beerenburg, are more readily available.
There is, therefore, no doubt in my mind as to the general benefits of the internal market.
Despite this, I also have the impression that it is unsatisfactory to treat alcohol only as an issue which concerns the internal market or agricultural policy, as has often been the case.
This is clearly an issue which also has major public health implications.
The main focus in the discussion on the internal market' s further liberalisation and completion is the economic goal of banishing unfair competition.
The aspect of a high level of public health and consumer protection, as expressly included in Article 95 (3) of the Treaty, is sometimes overlooked although it forms an essential part of the European treaties.
The European Community will need to carve itself a role in the increasing cooperation between Member States in collating data and exchanging expertise and best practices.
Across the Union, we will also need to take into consideration the less attractive aspects of alcohol use, which also, unfortunately, exist.
This is also in line with the pledge which the European Union made with regard to the World Health Organisation.
Last year, all Member States agreed to back the second European alcohol action plan drafted by the WHO.
It means that, by the year 2005, all European countries must have drafted a tax policy which contributes to a reduction in alcohol-related accidents.
The action plan also underlines the huge need for a higher minimum tax for alcohol in the EU as part of a general health strategy.
I understand that the Swedish Presidency will be organising a conference on this subject in Stockholm in early 2001.
It is therefore difficult to overlook the significance of the fiscal aspect in this connection.
It has transpired that not only the fiscal instrument greatly impacts on total consumption, but that the tax level in a particular Member State also has a bearing on the neighbouring countries.
Sweden is greatly affected by the excise level in Denmark which, in turn, is greatly influenced by Germany.
In the United Kingdom, people cross the Channel to France on a massive scale to stock up on alcohol.
The Commission has now levelled criticism at Sweden because the excise on wine is apparently too high in comparison with the excise on beer.
Beer is produced in Sweden.
But it is, of course, interesting in this connection to note that seven or so wine-producing EU Member States still apply a zero tax rate to wine.
In principle, fiscal measures are a matter governed by national sovereignty.
But in order for the internal market to operate most effectively, Member States should strive for a higher degree of coordination in prescribing excise levels for alcoholic beverages.
Mr President, the general benefits to be had from the internal market are beyond dispute.
It is nonetheless unsatisfactory to treat alcohol only as an issue which concerns the internal market because it quite clearly has major social and public health implications, as well as implications for consumer protection.
The government should not act as a moralist and the moderate use of alcohol poses no problem whatsoever, of course.
It even has beneficial effects on health.
But the use of alcohol which leads to fatalities on the roads, violence within the family and such like is not just a Swedish phenomenon by a long chalk.
Public health and consumer protection should form an integral part of the European agenda, and it is encouraging that the European Parliament seems to be heading in this direction.
The step-by-step abolition of restrictions, as proposed by the European Commission, gives the Swedish authorities the time to introduce alternative measures in order to address the problem of alcohol.
Madam President, the Scandinavian countries present us with a difficult problem with their repeated requests for derogations known as "Nordic derogations" regarding the importation of products subject to excise duties, particularly wine and beer.
In this way, Sweden enjoys a derogation to this fundamental right, which we prize and which is one of the major rights acquired under the single market, enjoyed by the citizens of the Community, to carry goods bought for their own personal consumption from one point within the Community to another, without having to pay additional taxes.
This derogation, which concerns alcoholic drinks and tobacco products, was extended until 30 June this year back in 1996, and will, according to the Commission' s proposal, have to be extended once again until 2003.
If this were not to be the case, then, in exactly 17 days, European citizens resident in Sweden would find themselves on an equal footing with citizens in the majority of Member States, who can purchase alcohol and tobacco in another Member State up to a value of EUR 175, which is considered a reasonable amount if you have to prove that the goods are for personal use.
I deplore this new derogation but, inasmuch as Finland and Denmark have been granted derogations until 2003, all we can do is go along with this new derogation granted to Sweden on the basis of the arrangements entered into with Finland.
I do so, if I may say, with a heavy heart, because these continued derogations are not calculated - as events show - to solve the problem of alcoholism which these countries use as a reason not to reduce their exorbitant excise duties, particularly on wine and beer.
These excise duties are the only reason why their citizens adopt a policy of importing from other Member States in order to achieve what I would call the citizens' 'legitimate defence' against high taxation levels.
Your problem, Mr Maaten, will not be solved by abolishing the zero tax rate on wine.
In addition, Sweden has a monopoly on importing and a virtual monopoly on distribution, resulting in an price policy which penalises consumers, an area of activity in which Commissioner Monti could well let off some steam more usefully than in the matter of taxes on savings, for example.
Matters being what they are, I should nonetheless like to ask the Commission the following questions.
You base your proposal on Article 93, but you do not say a word about the problem of the harmonisation of excise duties to assist the operation of the single market.
Why not?
Apparently Commissioner Bolkestein was opposed to extending this derogation.
Why have you changed your mind?
What expectations do you have of Finland and Sweden in relation to the harmonisation of indirect taxes by 2003?
Are you so reticent to intervene with respect to the level of excise duties in Sweden because, by rights, you ought to be making the same recommendations to the United Kingdom and Ireland, which are not covered by derogations, but which also implement a policy of exorbitant excise duties in order to prevent their peoples consuming wine, most of all, but also beer, in moderation, which is scientifically proven to have a preventative effect with regard to diseases which cost a lot in terms of social security.
I could continue, Madam President, but my speaking time is running out.
I shall conclude by saying that the solution to the problem of alcoholism in Scandinavia does not involve derogations to cater for the monopoly, but rather by reducing excise duties, particularly on wine and beer, by abolishing monopolies, and by means of an information and education policy which favours the moderate consumption of wine and beer, to make it beneficial to health and quality of life.
Madam President, this matter concerns the phasing-out of Sweden' s derogation from the internal market' s rules concerning imports of alcohol and tobacco.
It may appear as an insignificant detail, given the number of rules governing the internal market, but Swedish alcohol policy has proved itself to be successful in combating harm caused by alcohol.
The policy is founded partly (not solely, but partly) upon high taxes, which entail high consumer prices.
It is also founded upon a State monopoly on sales and upon active efforts to protect certain areas, such as road use, from all forms of alcohol consumption.
In spite of the fact that Sweden belongs to the so-called vodka belt, with its special pattern of consumption, and in spite of the presence of illicit distilling and smuggling, the low overall consumption of alcohol means less overall harm caused by alcohol and lower social costs due to alcohol, if we include everything from accidents on and off the road to alcohol-related illnesses and deaths.
This policy will, of course, become more difficult to implement without the protection of import restrictions, which is the reason why Sweden has wished either to retain the derogation on a permanent basis or, as the Swedish Government has now agreed with the Commission, at least to be given a number of additional years in which to phase out the derogation.
Quite simply, time is needed to prepare new features of alcohol policy which may reduce the risks entailed in the abolition of import restrictions.
In the long run, it would probably not, in fact, be possible to isolate Sweden from the rest of Europe in this area.
We are now already seeing a lot of private imports from Denmark and Germany, which is likely to increase further now that the Öresund Bridge is being opened and is creating a fixed land link to the European continent and now that the Danish Government is announcing reduced alcohol taxes as a result of competition in Germany.
There is also alarming intelligence about illicit distilling, smuggling etc.
Even if taxes on alcohol are decided at national level, which ought to remain the case, it would probably be impossible, in the long term, to maintain such large differences as there are today in the level of tax between neighbouring countries without this creating problems.
One of the consequences of the high taxes in Sweden is to create difficulties for Swedish producers and vendors of beer, wine and spirits, as well as for the serious hotel and restaurant trade.
Against that background, I see it as indispensable for Sweden now gradually to reduce its taxes on alcohol.
It is not certain that there is a need to go right down to those levels which prevail on the European continent, but it will probably become necessary to take a few steps in that direction.
In quite a few EU countries, no tax at all is paid on beer and wine, something which is also controversial from a public health point of view.
In these countries, these products ought perhaps to be taxed instead.
I am nonetheless pleased that the rapporteur, Mr Maaten, is taking the problem of public health seriously and does not, like so many others, see alcohol merely as a problem for the internal market.
Excessive alcohol consumption is a public health problem to which attention also needs to be paid at European level.
For the Scandinavian countries, there is, of course, the risk that a sudden change in the patterns of consumption might lead to many people' s also adopting European patterns of beer and wine consumption on top of the old tradition of schnapps drinking, with serious health problems as a consequence.
The two forthcoming holders of the presidency, France and Sweden, have indicated that they intend jointly to take up this issue and to propose common public health initiatives which will also deal with the role of alcohol, a development I find gratifying and an important initiative.
How, then, is the Swedish Government to deal with the problem, now that the borders are gradually being opened so as to permit imports of larger quantities of alcohol than ever before, and at the same time as taxes are likely to be reduced?
I believe in a vigorous long-term campaign to provide information, influence attitudes and promote education in schools, within the health care sector and among road users, and I believe especially in the public education carried out by national campaigning organisations etc.
All this is necessary and needs to be worked out energetically and with a view to the long term.
Against this background, I therefore agree with the rapporteur' s conclusion to the effect that Parliament ought to approve the agreement between the Swedish Government and the Commission which came about at the request of the ECOFIN ministers.
According to this, Sweden should be given time, between now and the end of 2003, to reduce import restrictions to the level which otherwise applies within the internal market.
In that way, we should in fact achieve the double aim of, firstly, adapting to the rules of the internal market and, secondly, preventing any harm this might entail by obtaining the time to provide Sweden with a more aggressive alcohol policy.
Madam President, Sweden has a different alcohol policy from the rest of Europe.
Social policy on alcohol springs from a history of serious heavy drinking.
For a long time, this policy successfully held its own against influence from outside.
That is not the case today.
Globalisation, an increasingly mobile population and EU membership have caused conditions to change.
The current derogation regarding imports of alcohol and tobacco into Sweden was not going to last forever.
The new agreement now in the offing between the Swedish Government and the EU would involve a gradual increase in import quotas.
This is a good compromise which would give Sweden the opportunity to adapt to the new situation.
Mr Maaten has prepared a good report.
It is no panegyric to the view that alcohol is merely an agricultural matter, a view expressed in certain parts of Europe.
On the contrary, Mr Maaten makes it perfectly clear that alcohol must also begin to be dealt with as a public health issue.
Sweden' s alcohol policy has led to a situation in which both total consumption and alcohol-related illnesses have been kept at low levels.
At the same time, the system, with its monopoly on sales and very high taxes, has been put under heavy pressure in a Europe with open borders.
At present, a large proportion of the alcohol consumed in Sweden consists of smuggled and illicitly distilled spirits.
Border trade between Sweden and its neighbours is flourishing.
The increase in import quotas will give Sweden a chance progressively to adjust both its alcohol policy and level of tax in accordance with the policy that is being pursued in other European countries.
Lower taxes are required in Sweden, but higher taxes may also perhaps be required in some other EU countries.
Sweden cannot conduct an alcohol policy with the aid of border controls and of tax levels higher than those of our neighbours.
Now is the time to find new solutions.
I believe that what is required is cooperation with other countries, together with a future alcohol policy characterised by a proactive information strategy.
What is required is a sensible alcohol policy marked by social responsibility and increased responsibility on the part of the individual.
A greater European input is needed in Sweden, but perhaps also a greater Swedish input in Europe.
Madam President, it does feel a little odd to be debating Swedish alcohol policy today in the European Parliament, for that of course is really what this report is about.
Before the referendum on EU membership, the Swedish Government solemnly promised that Swedish alcohol policy would be maintained unaltered.
Now, the Social Democratic Government, together with the Left Party and the Moderates, has given an informal promise, as the Commission' s text puts it, to approve the Commission' s proposal gradually to abolish the restrictions on imports of alcohol and tobacco so that these no longer exist by the year 2003.
In the long term, phasing out the rules on imports means phasing out Swedish alcohol policy.
Doing so will, in fact, put a big strain on alcohol policy which is based entirely upon high prices for consumers, that is to say a high tax on alcohol.
Four parties in the Swedish Parliament oppose the Commission' s and the Government' s line: the Christian Democrats, the Liberals (whom we have just heard speak), the Centre Party and the Greens.
These parties are demanding that the Government should stand for, and argue in favour of, keeping the Swedish derogation for as long as the Council has not unanimously taken another decision.
It is extremely important to clarify the EU' s own policy on this question.
What ought the Court of Justice of the European Communities to have said?
As Mr Maaten is very carefully intimating, this is not merely a question of the internal market but also a health issue.
Alcohol and tobacco are the factors which cause, for example, the greatest health problems within the EU, major costs to society and great suffering to individuals.
Article 152 and Article 95.3 of the Treaties talk of how important it is to have a high level of protection, and Article 30 in actual fact permits restrictions on imports, partly on the grounds of people' s health.
Sweden has chosen another method, a successful method where alcohol policy is concerned.
We have less harm caused by alcohol than most countries in the world, and very low alcohol consumption compared with other EU countries.
I do not know whether it is cause for laughter or for tears, but it is certainly worth noting that, as recently as last year, the Member States approved another European action plan for alcohol, prepared by the World Health Organisation.
According to this plan, States should impose more tax on alcohol, and there should also be higher minimum taxes on alcohol within the EU.
This is recommended as a part of public health strategy.
Why dismantle Sweden' s alcohol policy when the EU' s public health strategy points in the same direction with a view to reducing the harm caused by alcohol?
Madam President, Mr Maaten' s report states that alcohol is the second most important health factor within the EU after tobacco and that alcohol abuse is growing and giving rise to more and more illness, together with growing social and economic problems in a whole range of EU countries.
The report also indicates that, thanks largely to its responsible alcohol policy, Sweden has a lower level of alcohol consumption and fewer alcohol-related illnesses than other Member States.
Sweden' s positive experiences in these areas ought therefore, of course, to be made use of by the EU.
Alcohol issues ought to be dealt with in the way that, for example, tobacco and drug issues are now beginning to be dealt with.
Instead of Sweden' s now being forced to phase out its approach to health policy in order to adapt to the EU, it ought to be the opposite way around: namely, the EU should model its policy on Sweden' s and try to get to grips with the growing alcohol problems.
In this area, I should like to see a convergence policy whereby countries with major and growing alcohol problems adopt the much more successful Swedish model.
I am therefore going to vote against the Commission' s proposal, recommended by Mr Maaten in a move quite out of keeping with his otherwise excellent report.
I want to conclude by noting that the Swedish Government has now given in to a market imperative able to dispense with the approach focused upon health policy.
I hear that many of my fellow MEPs are adopting the same view, namely that Sweden should, for example, give in, even if there are reasons in terms of health policy for taking an entirely different direction.
I do not share that view.
I think there are good reasons why the EU should reconsider its alcohol policy, and the Swedish experience is important in that context.
Therefore, Swedish policy ought not now to be discontinued but, instead, used constructively to the EU' s advantage and benefit.
Madam President, on the other hand, the Italian Radical Members do not support the proposal to allow this system of excessive taxation and monopolies to continue for a further three years.
I would argue that excessively high taxes and restrictive monopolies are, in any case, in themselves a bad thing, but they are even worse when camouflaged and justified by the alleged morality of policies protecting the common good.
But if we examine the data presented, we see that, in proposing to allow this special system to continue for another three years, the rapporteur is clearly saying that 30% of alcoholic drinks consumed in Sweden are produced illegally - which means that they are also sold illegally and that the profits are the profits of crime and mafia activity - and that another 20% is introduced illegally from abroad.
This is the situation of alcoholic drink consumption in Sweden!
However, he tells us that this policy seems to work, for the mortality rate is lower than in other countries, and cites the results of a study carried out by DG-V in October 1998.
However, it is a shame that, if we were to examine this study closely, we would find a marginal note, which is not really insignificant, which says that a large number of alcohol-related deaths are not reported as such (hidden population), the real figure being estimated at between 5 000 and 6 000 deaths per year due to alcohol.'
These figures are over three times as high as the official figures.
Let us take care, then!
Let us state the figures clearly as they are: the figures demonstrate de facto Prohibition - Prohibition through taxes - a form of Prohibition which, like all Prohibition, fails.
We have the same problem in Italy with the tobacco monopoly: an entire section of Puglia, the region of Southern Italy which is directly opposite Albania, is overrun with criminal bands which commit murder on a daily basis for the sake of the black market in tobacco.
It is the same problem.
The figures should be quoted in their entirety and so should documents, especially when one professes to be liberal and comes from an allegedly liberal group.
Madam President, I am concerned about the delay which Sweden has now negotiated for itself.
I think that deadlines are there to be kept to.
I think that we should all abide by the same rules in the internal market, and I therefore intend to vote accordingly.
The Swedish Government knew that this derogation was to expire after six months, but all too little has been done to overcome the alcohol abuse which exists.
I am particularly concerned about young people' s drinking habits and the easy access to illegal alcohol.
Swedish alcohol policy is now in pieces.
At the same time, what we have in Sweden is a government which, having yielded to public pressure, has tried to meet the public' s demands for easier access to alcohol.
The Swedish alcohol monopoly now opens on Saturdays and at more locations.
In many ways, accessibility has also increased due to the larger number of premises serving alcoholic drinks.
Above all, however, it is illegal sales of spirits, beer and wine which have increased at the expense of Swedish jobs, tax revenue and supervision.
All too little is being done about outright abuse, at the same time as the ordinary drinker has continued to be over-protected and not to have anything like equal rights to import alcohol following visits on holiday to, for example, Denmark or France.
I am concerned about this inability to get to grips with the real problems.
Today, perhaps not more than 30 per cent of sales in Sweden take place via the channels controlled by the politicians.
The rest are illegal and may, for example, involve gangland operations, illicit distilling or smuggling by private individuals who, as the politicians see it, are bringing more than their ration into the country.
That is why I am saying that Swedish alcohol policy, which involves charging high prices for alcohol and making it difficult to obtain, has foundered.
I would say to Göran Färm that there has been ample time to do something about this situation.
The catalogue of initiatives he mentions should have been embarked upon a long, long time ago.
What is more, a lot can be done in the way of providing information and disseminating knowledge.
The Swedish Social Democratic Government' s bargaining on this issue shows, however, that there has been no concern about, or belief in, people.
Instead, it is only the tax base to which close attention has been given.
Madam President, what entitles the EU to undermine Sweden' s alcohol policy and its campaign against drugs?
What makes imports of alcohol into more of a trade issue than a public health issue?
In the 1994 referendum on Swedish membership of the EU, Swedish citizens were told that the derogations could be extended beyond the year 2000.
The temperance movement and many citizens, including myself, were satisfied with that.
On 13 March of this year, Mr Guterres, Prime Minister of Portugal (the country currently holding the Presidency of the Union) described the EU' s cultural diversity as a form of wealth.
He talked of there not being a single, general opinion, but 15 different arenas.
Through the Commissioner responsible, Mr Bolkestein, the European Union should now nonetheless normalise the conditions which enable the Member States to continue to pursue national, democratically determined alcohol policies.
Mr Bolkestein and the Commission maintain that the internal market functions in such a way as to require that every citizen be given the so-called right day in and day out to bring 210 litres of alcohol across national borders.
For a family with three older children, this corresponds to 7 metric tons of alcohol per week.
Should that be a so-called right?
Is that a level consistent with moderate consumption?
There is no question of Sweden' s being a nanny State.
It is about a one-nation mentality and of taking the issue of alcohol and drug abuse seriously in terms of an integrated view of society.
In the light of this issue and of the disquiet felt during Euro 2000 on the subjects of hooliganism and alcohol abuse, the Commission' s decision and the actions of Sweden' s Social Democratic Government appear absurd to say the least.
Madam President, I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Maaten.
The Commission proposal reflects the compromise which has been reached between Sweden and the Commission regarding prolonging the possibility of applying restrictions to products subject to excise duties which may be brought into Sweden by travellers from other Member States.
This arrangement would normally have expired at the end of this month.
Sweden has requested more time to adapt its alcohol policy.
This has also been stressed by Mr Färm who said that we need time to adapt our policy.
Well, the European Commission is prepared to give Sweden until the end of the year 2003 at the latest.
I believe that the compromise which has been reached is fair and reasonable.
It guarantees that the restrictions for travellers will disappear once and for all by the end of the year 2003, as I have already mentioned.
But at the same time, it provides for a short, further period of adjustment.
The gradual liberalisation during the transitional period underlines Sweden' s commitment to finally do away with derogations and will ensure that Swedish citizens will finally be able to benefit from the unified market in the same way as other EU citizens.
I am also delighted that Mr Maaten' s report supports the Commission proposal.
But the Commission cannot accept the tabled amendments, although it very much understands the reasons which have led to their tabling.
The Commission is of the opinion that it is not advisable to make reference to general issues, such as the connection between alcohol policy and health policy or the need to aim for more coordination of excise levels on alcohol, within the context of a proposal on derogations applied by one Member State.
These derogations from fundamental principles of the internal market have been granted in order to allow Sweden to adapt its alcohol policy.
As such, - and I would also address Mr Sacrédeus here - we are dealing here with fundamental principles of the common internal market.
Whatever the justification was for Sweden enjoying this derogation since joining the Community - and if I could once again address Mr Sacrédeus - as far as I can remember, no exceptions which were to apply forever were made at the time.
The derogation was supposed to lapse at the end of this month, and this has always been provided for.
But as I have said before, Sweden was granted a few more years to adapt its alcohol policy.
But - once again - this exception was certainly not meant to last forever.
I repeat: whatever the justification was for this derogation, the Commission is of the opinion that the transitional period will have been sufficiently long, namely nine years from Sweden' s accession to the EU until the end of 2003, and that it is now time to establish a definite expiry date for this derogation from the principles of the free movement of goods and persons.
Maybe you will allow me, by way of concluding, to address a few points which have been raised by Members of Parliament this evening.
I would especially like to stress once again that the public health aspect which Mr Maaten mentioned is, of course, important.
All countries, all EU Member States have alcohol-related problems, and know about alcohol-related problems, and all EU Member States are adopting an anti-alcohol policy.
It is only natural and very sensible that Sweden should do the same, but this should be possible without prejudicing the rules for the free movement of goods which, as has been mentioned before, is one of the European Union' s cornerstones.
So once again, it is very understandable that that health policy is pursued in Sweden.
Mr Färm and Mrs Carlsson have already clarified the way in which it should be pursued.
It is important to take measures in the form of information campaigns, information in schools and vis-à-vis the public, as happens elsewhere in the Community.
This is the first point which I wanted to raise.
The second point concerns the harmonisation of excise duty on alcohol products.
Could I inform you that, as the Members of this House are aware, the Commission does not have any instruments at its disposal to impose a specific excise policy?
The Commission might wish it had, but it has not.
What the Commission can do, however, is to ensure that the minimum tariff, which is the only rule which pertains to the whole of the European Union, is maintained.
Furthermore, the Commission will, as it is required to do, be drawing up a report either at the end of this year or at the beginning of next year which will outline the state of affairs within the EU with regard to excise.
This report will thus be available around the beginning of next year, and the Commission will naturally make some recommendations in this report because, after all, the huge discrepancies in excise levels between Member States lead to distortions within the internal market, something which the Commission does not like to see.
So the report will contain recommendations, but the Commission does not have instruments at its disposal.
I would recommend Parliament to adopt Mr Maaten' s report without amendments.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.
Exchange of information with third countries
The next item is the report (A5-0142/2000) by Mr Berenguer Fuster, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directives 85/611/EEC, 92/49/EEC, 92/96/EEC and 93/22/EEC as regards exchange of information with third countries [(COM(1999) 748 - C5-0011/2000 - 2000/0014 (COD)].
Madam President, we must bear in mind that the powers of investigation and control available to the supervisory authorities in the financial field are incomparably greater than those which exist in other fields.
In the financial field - to a large extent because there is public concern about credit and savings, including, therefore, companies which use the securities market - there is a public interest in safeguarding the interests of huge numbers of third-party savers who put their confidence in companies which manage other people' s money while the real owners of that money have no capacity to intervene in that management.
The protection of the interests of third parties justifies a high degree of intervention by the public authorities, which leads, amongst other things, to very great powers which provide the authorities with information about the internal affairs of companies.
There is no doubt whatsoever that, if the data obtained as a result of the exercise of these authorities were to be made known to third parties, this could not only cause irreparable damage to the bodies under investigation, but could also cause serious fluctuations, and ultimately changes, in the market.
Therefore, as a counterbalance to such broad powers of investigation, the authorities are obliged to keep the information secret.
That duty of secrecy, taken to the extreme, could hinder certain objectives pursued by the control authorities, which, ultimately, consist of ensuring that the markets behave properly.
There is no doubt that one of the areas in which the phenomenon of globalisation has had the most obvious effect is the financial field, in which the large companies use the securities market.
Today large companies operate in many countries, but there are no supranational supervisory authorities and furthermore the Community authorities find it difficult to carry out their work outside their own borders.
Ultimately, we are talking about issues which involve sovereignty.
To sum up, the problem is that the authority supervising the activities of a certain country cannot itself access the data relating to the activity of that company, its parent company or its subsidiaries in other countries because its powers of supervision do not extend beyond the borders of the country to which it belongs.
In order to resolve this problem cooperation is needed between the authorities of the various countries.
This cooperation, amongst other things, has to take the form of an exchange of the data obtained.
The problem is that this exchange generally involves a degree of non-compliance with the obligation to secrecy.
It is therefore necessary for the regulations to provide for a way to overcome this conflict between the obligation to secrecy and the exchange of information, and to seek balanced solutions to the problem.
With regard to the European regulations, after the previous unstable regulation which furthermore was different for the different sectors, in 1998 the first banking sector directive was amended to allow Member States to reach agreements on the exchange of information with third countries, on the condition that the information exchanged was subject to guarantees of professional secrecy at least equivalent to those in force in the European Union.
Now, by means of this directive, the corresponding amendments are being made to the other financial sector directives, in the same way that they were made in the case of the banking sector directive.
Just as we agreed with the 1998 amendment, and for the same reasons, we are going to support these amendments in the terms proposed by the Commission.
A final comment.
We are currently awaiting a report by the European Parliament on the review of the SLIM initiative aimed at simplifying the legislation on the internal market.
What has happened in this field may be very significant and it may have very beneficial consequences.
If we want to simplify the legislation, it will also be necessary to reduce the number of regulations and rationalise the initiatives.
We should consequently ask the question why, when the banking sector directive was amended in 1998, the directives on insurance and collective investment, that is to say the ones that are now being amended, were not amended at the same time.
The simplification and coherence of the legislation may perhaps have required this.
Madam President, I am delighted to at least have the opportunity of contributing to this debate on behalf of the PPE, and firstly to congratulate Mr Berenguer Fuster for the work that he has done in relation to this report.
I recognise that his report is quite brief, but that belies the amount of work that has had to be undertaken because the issue that we are considering is a complex one as he made clear in the course of his remarks.
We are dealing in essence with the compromise between access to confidential information, information which comes into the hands of a whole range of regulatory authorities, and the use that is subsequently made of that information.
We know that the information is in general gathered as a result of the obligations that rest with companies from the whole of the inspection regime.
We have a range of regulators now, across the whole of the European Union, but we very often have a whole range of regulators within Member States themselves, and the dilemma of how information is in fact used is one that is not just a dilemma for the Community and its exchange of information with regulators beyond the Community itself.
We often have that dilemma within Member States.
I certainly have had first-hand experience of government in the United Kingdom where I can remember very many instances where the government has been on the point of granting a contract to a particular company only to find out that another branch of government is actually engaged in starting legal proceedings for one reason or another against that very company.
This is often described as the left arm of government not knowing what the right arm is doing, but what it is really about is the willingness on the part of the regulatory authorities within Member States, but also within the European Union and beyond, to exchange information whilst at the same time respecting confidentiality.
That brings me to the second brief point that I wish to make this evening which is about the need for the consolidation of regulatory authorities themselves.
That is a process that has been undertaken within the United Kingdom.
Recently, Howard Davies, who heads the new Financial Services Authority in the UK, was speaking to our Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee and outlining what that experience has been.
It has not been a wholly easy experience, but I think that people are broadly of the view that the consolidation of regulatory authorities within the United Kingdom has been a success.
It is something that could be commended to other authorities within the European Union, not least because it would lead to a common approach to the use of the information that is made available by this process, to the advantage of investors throughout the whole of the European Union itself.
.
I thank the rapporteur, Mr Berenguer Fuster, very much indeed for his report and for the helpful coordination and cooperation.
The approach of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has facilitated prompt adoption of the proposal.
The aim of the proposal is to amend several financial services directives, to align them with rules already in force in the banking area in order to improve the exchange of information with third countries.
The proposal is also a response to international recommendations on the exchange of confidential information.
It is necessary to improve supervision of financial conglomerates.
This is an aspect which was stressed by Mr Berenguer Fuster this evening and also Mr Evans.
I fully agree with both of them that confidentiality of that information is absolutely essential.
The measure proposed will allow European securities and insurance regulators to exchange, on a cross-sectoral basis, confidential supervisory information with third country competent authorities.
It also allows European securities and insurance regulators to exchange supervisory information with third country bodies, such as clearing and settlement systems, auditors, etc. which by virtue of their functions help to strengthen the stability of the financial system.
The proposal makes clear that information is exchanged for supervisory purposes and it provides for protection of the confidentiality - the important point mentioned - of the information exchanged.
Mr Evans has spoken of the consolidation of regulatory authorities.
That indeed is what happens in the United Kingdom.
The Financial Services Authority, headed by Mr Howard Davies, is indeed a consolidation of regulatory authorities.
That example is followed by Sweden, or perhaps it is the other way around.
In other words, both in London and in Stockholm there is a consolidated regulatory apparatus.
Within the FSA in London there is a unit working with banking.
There is another unit working with insurance undertakings and there is a third unit working with the stock exchange.
They are under one roof, but under that one roof there are still distinct entities.
Mr Evans implies that they are cooperating - and indeed they are cooperating - but cooperation means more than being under one roof.
Mr Evans would like the Commission to exhort other Member States to follow the British example or the Swedish example.
Opinions differ very much indeed.
We are dealing here with a very sensitive question.
In some countries there is consolidated regulation but in other countries there are three separate entities, for example in the Netherlands and other Member States.
They say: we cooperate, so what is the worry?
I am not saying that there is no reason to be worried.
A report was recently produced by a committee under the chairmanship of Mr Brouwer, who is the second in command of the Bank of the Netherlands.
It was welcomed by ECOFIN.
It is available on the Internet so anybody can take cognisance of it.
The report says that basically, as far as banks and insurance companies are concerned, the institutional framework is adequate but it leaves aside the matter of how to deal with systemic crises.
Nor does it deal with stock exchanges.
But thinking does not stop.
If it did we would be in a very bad position.
Everybody knows what has happened in other parts of the world in the way of systemic crises.
Also, everybody knows that the alliances between various stock exchanges are the order of the day.
So we must give this further attention and see whether the rise of conglomerates leads to the need for further supervision.
Certainly in the case of stock markets, whether we should leave everything to national supervisory instances or whether there should be something at European level is a valid question.
This thinking has not led to any firm conclusions but it is continuing.
If developments are favourable then I look forward to engaging in a dialogue with this Parliament on these very matters.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Imports of beer into Finland
The next item is the report (A5­0144/2000) by Mrs Lulling, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs,
I. on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directives 69/169/EEC and 92/12/EEC as regards temporary quantitative restrictions on beer imports into Finland [COM(2000)76 - C5­0137/2000 - 2000/0038(CNS)],
II. on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EEC) No 918/83 as regards a temporary derogation for duty-free imports of beer into Finland [COM(2000)76 - C5­0138/2000 - 2000/0039(CNS)]
Madam President, Commissioner, in its 1995 accession treaty Finland obtained a derogation until 31 December 1996 to restrict beer imports from other Member States.
This derogation is an exemption to the fundamental right of Community citizens to carry goods purchased for their own consumption from one point in the Community to another without having to pay further duties.
Finland obtained an extension of this derogation until 2003.
At the same time, in order to comply with European legislation in force in the context of customs union, Finland was required to increase the quantity of beer that could be imported tax free from third countries from 2 to 15 litres.
Now, in the face of the massive amount of importation carried out by its citizens from Estonia and Russia, which primarily affects the livelihood of the many SMBs retailing beer in border regions, Finland has requested that the limit for residents' beer imports from these two countries be reduced from 15 to 6 litres.
Finland also mentions problems to do with health, public order and loss of income.
In the meantime, such imports account for some 10% of Finland' s beer retail market.
The reason for this is simply the vast price difference resulting from the exorbitant taxes on alcohol in Finland.
The Finnish population' s response to this situation is a perfect illustration of the truth of La Palice' s maxim according to which too much tax kills tax, because citizens react against what they consider to be excessive taxes.
In comparison with other Member States, Finnish excise duties on alcohol are the highest, and for beer, for example, they are 17 times those in Spain and 44% higher than those in Ireland which, in the hit-parade of excise duties, comes in second position behind Finland, which is the champion of the European Union, though, admittedly, it is beaten by Norway, which is not a member.
It is true that, due to Finland' s geographical position, imports by private individuals from other Member States are much less, and this is not, for example, the case in the United Kingdom and Denmark in particular, which have much higher excise duties on alcohol than their neighbouring Member States.
Given the seriousness of the situation, I recommended in my report that we should agree to this new 6 litre limit for beer from Russia and Estonia, but only until 2003 and not until 2006, principally due to the fact that Estonia is an accession candidate and that the traffic in goods, even the illegal traffic, will not cease after 2006 unless Finland decides to impose less stringent taxes on alcohol products, especially beer and wine.
The majority in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs did not agree with me on this.
I persisted, and I even tabled an amendment, principally due to the review of the derogation on imports for personal use from other Member States.
The amendment of the directive in question, which was referred to us at the same time, effectively envisages gradual liberalisation from the 15 litres currently allowed up to 64 litres in 2003, and then, as of 1 January 2004, the general regulations will come into force.
This represents definite progress in relation to the current situation which may continue until 2003.
There was a great deal of controversy in committee regarding the problem of alcoholism.
I still claim that the problem of alcoholism, especially the Scandinavian style of consuming alcohol for the purpose of getting drunk, cannot be solved by excessive taxation, quite the contrary, because it makes alcohol a luxury product, a sort of status symbol.
I therefore dare to recommend that Finland take advantage of this new derogation period in order to reduce its high rates of taxation, particularly on alcoholic drinks such as beer and wine.
The real alcoholism and health problems which result can only be combated by information and education.
High taxes do not stop serious drinkers from drinking, they just penalise the great majority that consume beer, wine and other alcoholic beverages in moderation, which is very well known and scientifically proven to have beneficial effects for health and for the prevention of diseases such as cancer, Alzheimer' s and cardiovascular illness.
Let us put an end to hypocrisy, and let us give up on solutions that do not work.
Obviously, we all know that we cannot, and do not, wish to challenge the prerogative of Member States, in matters of fiscal policy, to set their own excise duty rates as they see fit.
We at least hope, though, that Finland may be persuaded that reducing the gaps between its own excise duties and those implemented by the other Member States and neighbouring third countries would be the best means of preventing an increase in the cross-border trade which presents a problem, and that such a policy would have much more chance of success than maintaining and intensifying restrictions on quantities.
Commissioner, I deplore the Commission' s reticence on this subject, especially given that you use Article 93 of the Treaty as a legal basis, and this deals specifically with the harmonisation of indirect duties and taxes.
Make of it what you will!
Madam President, Commissioner, representatives of the Council, it is often said that Parliament is far removed from the people and that what we speak about here does not interest the people in our home countries.
Ladies and gentlemen, for once we have a report to discuss that is guaranteed to interest consumers, at least in my home country of Finland.
Before we joined the European Union we Finns were promised that the EU would mean a more open policy on alcohol, that it would bring down the astronomically high prices of alcoholic beverages due to heavy taxation and that it would free up the retail market as well as break up the state monopoly on alcohol.
I quite agree with what Mrs Lulling said, that the alcohol problem cannot be resolved by restricting imports, nor can it be resolved by keeping prices high and the sale of alcohol in the hands of a monopoly.
Consumers have had to wait for reforms as regards the policy on alcohol, on account of the fact that the long transition periods and the various restrictions on imports have blocked healthy competition.
The report we now have to discuss is a giant step forward in the gradual opening up of the Finnish markets.
As a counterbalance to the opening up to EU imports, Finland, however, is asking for the right to reduce quotas on beer imported from non-member countries.
This restriction that is being sought is, in itself, justifiable, as long as the restriction is not a permanent one.
Also in connection with non-member countries, Finland must, in a determined manner, approach a situation where the market is as open as in other Member States.
The restrictions with regard to non-member countries should be lifted by the end of 2003, as the faster Finland is obligated to open up her market entirely, the more likely we will be able to see a real solution to the question of excise duty.
This is what everything hinges on at the end of the day.
Obviously, lifting the restrictions by the end of 2003 on imports from Estonia and Russia, for example, would, at present gross price levels, lead to an undesirable situation.
Opening up the market in respect of non-member countries more rapidly than scheduled, however, will increase pressure to lower taxes, and the faster taxation reaches a European average, the healthier the situation in the internal market will be.
Madam President, Finland' s special regulations governing beer imports are naturally of great importance both for public health and for commerce.
The problem is, of course, much more acute because of our proximity to third countries, that is to say Russia and Estonia.
Clearly, special rules are also required when it comes to customs relations with these third countries.
As we saw in the previous debate on Swedish alcohol policy, Finland, like Sweden and Norway, has a quite distinctive policy in this area, based partly on high taxes in the belief that high consumer prices will also lead to reduced consumption.
The fact is that, in Finland too, this policy has proved to be successful when it comes to combating the harm caused by alcohol.
In spite of the special pattern of consumption traditionally to be found in countries like Finland and Sweden and in spite of there being a good deal of smuggling and illicit distilling, the relatively low overall level of alcohol consumption does in fact lead to less harm and lower social costs as a result of alcohol.
Where this is concerned, I do in fact believe that there is convincing proof that the rapporteur, Mrs Lulling, is wrong when she states that high taxes do not lead to reduced consumption or that a restrictive policy would not be effective.
On the contrary, there is a good deal of research to show that it is in fact effective.
It is also now the case that the UN, for example, is recommending an alcohol policy based on the Scandinavian experience and is recommending other European countries too to go down the same road.
However, this more restrictive policy is naturally more difficult to implement without the protection of import restrictions.
That is the reason why Finland, in common with Sweden, has requested until the year 2003 to increase the quantities of beer imported from within the EU.
Quite simply, time is needed to prepare the new alcohol policy and incorporate new features which may reduce the possible risks involved in abolishing import restrictions.
For Finland, the problems it shares with Sweden are exacerbated by its proximity to non-EU neighbours, especially Russia and Estonia, for these countries have quite different cost levels and quite different levels of prices and taxes than is the norm within the European Union.
The proximity of southern Finland to Estonia and the enormous differences in prices and taxes have led to a situation in which Finland and the European Commission wish to retain the restrictions in connection with these countries for a further two years, that is to say until the year 2005, which I in actual fact think is reasonable.
However, the rapporteur, Mrs Lulling, felt unable to accept this and is instead demanding that the same time limit apply in regard to third countries as applies to the internal market.
Happily, the Committee nonetheless elected to follow the line taken by myself, the Finnish Government and the Commission who considered that these big differences in price and tax levels do in fact justify an additional two-year period of adjustment, as long as Estonia does not become a member of the EU before this period expires for, if it did, then it may only be right that the EU' s rules should also apply to Estonia.
Of course, the risks concerned relate, above all, to public health problems but also to problems involving the national production and sale of beer in border areas.
Mrs Lulling has, above all, chosen to use her report to argue the case for reduced taxes on alcohol in Finland.
I agree that high taxes are likely to be difficult to maintain in the longer term when more and more people are crossing borders and have the opportunity to import alcohol on a private basis.
As Commissioner Bolkestein noted earlier, it is, however, in spite of everything, an important principle that this type of tax is an issue for individual nation States and not a subject for formal harmonisation in the context of the internal market.
Nonetheless, it will now probably become necessary for the Finnish Government to begin adjusting tax levels downwards so as to avoid major problems when the restrictions on private imports of beer are gradually reduced to that level which is to apply to the rest of the internal market.
It is nonetheless a little sad that the rapporteur, who is of course a well-known champion of the interests of wine producers, does not take the public health problems at all seriously but, unlike Mr Maaten (the rapporteur on the issue of Sweden' s restrictions on alcohol), only sees this as a tax problem and as a problem concerning the internal market, for it is in fact obvious that low-price imports into Finland from Estonia and Russia have already led to undeniable social and public health problems.
It is therefore gratifying that the forthcoming presidencies will - as I understand it, during the coming year - in actual fact be taking up this issue in terms of public health initiatives concerning the role of alcohol.
However, a whole range of new methods will certainly be required.
Against this background, I nonetheless propose that we support the Committee' s proposal to approve the agreement between Finland and the EU.
Madam President, now that Finland has joined the European Union, she must apply the EU regulations regarding competition.
These include regulations on the importation of beer.
As representative of the ELDR Group, I wish to defend the abolition of competition distortion as well as the principle of free trade, which, however, must benefit the public.
I would approach the problem, however, from the angle of the principle of subsidiarity.
For a very long time in Finland, there has been a successful social policy in force where the aim has been to restrict alcohol consumption.
All the statistics relating to alcohol consumption speak in favour of continuing with this policy.
On the other hand, I will admit that consumption is not evenly spread.
In Finland there are groups of alcohol abusers, such as the young, for example.
It is alcohol consumption among these groups that we aim to influence.
One reason for keeping stringent restrictions on imports is, for example, the matter of public order.
An essential part of health policy has been high taxation and, at the same time, well-maintained border controls.
Finland' s geographical position is very different from all the other EU countries.
Beyond our frontiers are countries where prices are low.
If, for example, the general EUR 175 tax-free import limit were applied on imports from these countries, permitted imports would double in terms of litres.
That is why Finland needs an independent mechanism regarding what it itself perceives as reasonable import restrictions.
In this matter it is necessary to advance in stages towards lower taxation on alcohol and a gradual liberalisation of imports, but let us respect the conditions that now prevail in the Member State as it itself sees them.
Finland believes it justifiable to have a two-year extension to the restriction on imports from non-member countries.
We cannot therefore support the amendments that were reintroduced in plenary after having been voted down once in committee.
Madam President, Commissioner, Mrs Lulling has done a great job with this report, in my opinion, in the sense that she has endeavoured to adjust the restrictive approach of the Commission.
There is an initial point which needs to be cleared up: it is true that the free movement of goods and products within Community countries seriously hampers the creation of the single market.
And it makes no difference whether the products in question are beer, as in this case, or other products.
The discrimination between consumers who are citizens of other countries and Finnish consumers is clear and self-justifying.
The discrepancy between the restrictions imposed by countries such as Finland on importing beer for personal use and Community standards must therefore be eliminated, and eliminated immediately.
There are no grounds for setting the deadline stipulated of 2003, and there are even less grounds for setting the deadline of 2005 for importing for personal use from third countries.
On this point, we Radicals will support the amendments tabled by Mrs Lulling.
Neither are we convinced, Madam President, by the social or health reasons put forward in support of the derogation.
The bans, the high level of taxes and the public monopolies, which are as unacceptable as all other monopolies, generate smuggling and unlawful activities even though they might benefit the Treasury.
In the long term - and there is not even any need to cite the case of prohibition of alcohol in the United States, last century - they harm society and health rather than generating awareness in the consumer.
Information on smuggling in the Scandinavian countries of products which are in themselves harmless, such as beer or wine, must serve as a warning against political prohibition of alcohol, and against prohibition of other products as well, rather than being an example which some have maintained should be followed by the other countries of the European Union.
And that is not to mention the serious harm to individual freedom caused by all paternalistic excesses, whether they are engaged in by States or politicians.
Madam President, Finland is prepared to increase imports of beer from the internal market.
The derogation has been restricted in terms of time, and I thus support the Commission' s line here.
Finland' s alcohol policy has been a valid one, and we see evidence of this that goes unchallenged anywhere in the world.
Our problem is the enormous difference in taxation.
Hardly anywhere else does such a huge difference exist as is the case on the eastern border of our country.
The reason is obvious if you think about it for a moment.
A whole state collapsed over there and, at the same time, the price of vodka and beer likewise collapsed.
That is what happened over there, and we will not get carried away in the flood, whatever you tell us.
The cost of alcohol fell.
Besides, they concoct alcoholic beverages over there by mixing tap water and home-made spirits.
That makes for a pretty powerful brew.
You can buy that virtually for the price of the bottle alone.
What production could be so cheap that you could compete with that?
Besides, who will be bothered by this restriction on imports from the east?
It will not bother anyone, at least not the EU.
It is being said here that taxation cannot reduce the consumption of alcohol.
What sort of experience have you had in this regard?
Because we do have experience of it.
The first thing that the poor cut back on if prices rise is alcohol consumption.
There is research data on that.
Then you say that education helps.
I happen to come from a region where such education has been provided.
What happened?
Vodka continues to be drunk as before, and on top of that there is wine.
In other words, total consumption is increasing.
And we still have an additional problem.
We have high taxation, which I used to be in favour of.
If private citizens are allowed to bring in more foreign beer, tax revenue will fall.
Then we would be obligated to lower taxation in our own country with a consequent decrease in tax revenue, but in either case the consumption of alcohol will increase.
In other words, there is quite a significant double-edged problem.
I regard a gradual switch as being the correct approach and one where consideration is given to our country' s levels of taxation.
Excise duty on beer is very high in our country but, ladies and gentlemen, what we cannot eliminate is the price gap that exists between us and our neighbour to the east.
Our resources are insufficient for that.
This gap is so great that, as a result - as Mr Pesälä said - our special position is quite important for us.
And if it is removed, I will just say that our roads to the east will be soaked in vodka if all import restrictions are lifted.
That is the issue here.
Mr President, Commissioner, unlike my fellow MEP, Ms Kauppi, I think there are better ways of celebrating the first anniversary of the latest election to the European Parliament than by taking up the time of the Member of the Commission to discuss this minor issue as late as 11.00 p.m.
We could have dealt with this issue in a more appropriate way.
It is also obvious that this is mainly a fiscal problem.
To my fellow MEP, Ms Kauppi, I would say that it is quite right to identify matters of concern to liberals here, but what has Ms Kauppi' s party colleague, Finland' s finance minister, done to try to adapt conditions in Finland to take account of this or other tax issues?
It is, as has been said, in actual fact a fiscal problem.
I have referred in part to points of order.
I am very disappointed that the Court of Justice of the European Communities considered that a discriminatory time limit could be introduced for citizens from third countries.
My party, the Swedish People' s Party, was against this, but was unfortunately forced to give in when the Court in Luxembourg made its decision.
It is worth noting that, unlike a number of Swedish colleagues, the Finns were no doubt aware that our derogation for other alcoholic drinks from EU countries was a temporary derogation.
For my part, I nonetheless support the Commission' s proposal whereby the year 2006 would be the time limit where imports of beer were concerned.
I am also concerned that we should not relinquish future opportunities for transitional regulations in the negotiations with Estonia.
The Committee has introduced an addendum concerning Estonia, among other countries.
We have a similar problem in many border regions, and I would refer in this regard to Mr Paasilinna' s intervention.
It is a question of not making a hasty decision.
I would also refer to the difficult situation where competition between transport operators in the Baltic is concerned.
The situation is very unequal, and there is a risk of its deteriorating further.
Madam President, Finland has had a period of transition to adapt regulations for imports of alcohol to EU levels.
This is being done by 2004, according to the deadline fixed in respect of the Internal Market.
In asking for extra time for harmonising exports from non-member countries, however, Finland has been keen to ensure that imports from the Internal Market, considered a priority, are harmonised in a controlled way.
The European Court of Justice and the Commission accept this order of priorities, and I thus hope for understanding on the part of Parliament as well.
In my opinion, the picture created in Mrs Lulling' s report of the situation in Finland is a false one.
Commissioner, you can surely ascertain that from what we Finns have been saying here in our speeches.
The essential problem regarding imports from non-member countries is that an EU-wide restriction on imports has been imposed on strong alcoholic beverages and wines among products liable to excise duty, but, for some reason or other, there is no such restriction on beer.
Therefore, as regards the importation of beer, the general euro limit has to be observed, which is products to the value of EUR 175.
At Russian prices, as we have heard, this means more than 200 litres of the best European beer.
That is double what a citizen of the EU can bring in from another EU country.
At what limit the importation of beer from non-member countries should be set is not as important as attending to the issue of imports from non-member countries according to a timetable only after the Internal Market has started functioning.
The border between Finland and Russia is quite exceptional in the EU.
I would point out that no other EU country faces such a wide price differential on its borders as Finland - and the problems resulting from this price differential will not be resolved at any level of excise duty.
Recent information, for example from research carried out in France, shows that alcohol causes serious public health problems in all EU countries.
I also understand that Sweden and France are planning an EU policy, when they hold the presidency, aiming at preventing health problems caused by alcohol throughout the EU.
Knowing the high social costs of alcohol-related problems, the harmonisation of excise duty should preferably come about at the average rate for Europe, not its lowest.
Excise duty is not fiscal in nature, simply a policy to provide revenue for the state, but clearly it is an instrument which will lead to healthier lifestyles, aided by a market economy.
Madam President, may I start by saying that, with this proposal, the Commission is meeting a request made by Finland which is aiming to combat increasing levels of beer imports from neighbouring third countries, such as Russia or Estonia, where beer is much cheaper.
Finland has also agreed to gradually increase the quantities of beer which travellers coming from other Member States can bring into that country without paying excise duties.
In this way, Finland is bracing itself for 2004 when travellers will be able to bring alcoholic beverages for their own use from other Member States for free, in line with the internal market principles.
Despite the large number of amendments tabled, I am delighted that Mrs Lulling' s report largely supports the Commission proposals.
Although the Commission very much understands the motives behind the tabled amendments, it is unable to accept them.
A number of these amendments concern the level of the tariffs applied by Finland.
As I explained earlier this evening, as Community legislation stands at present, stipulating only minimum excise tariffs, it is up to Finland - and Finland alone - to decide whether the adaptation of its alcohol policy should also entail a reduction in the tax level.
In any event, the Commission will be dealing with the level of tariffs in its wider context in a report which will be presented either at the end of this year or the beginning of next year.
That report will also take into account the Treaty' s general objectives, such as health policy.
Neither is it necessary in this proposal to draw attention to the fact that Finland has so far failed to fulfil its obligation to liberalise the intra-Community restrictions in stages.
This obligation is already embodied in the existing text of the directive, and the Commission has reminded Finland of this obligation in its general report of 24 May last on the application of the restrictions in the Scandinavian Member States, a copy of which has also been sent to the European Parliament.
With regard to the restrictions on imports from third countries, I would like to note that it is the first time that Finland is requesting a derogation.
Before, these restrictions were automatically incorporated into the restrictions within the Union.
Concerning the situation in Estonia, I would point out that the excise tariffs which apply to beer in that country are already somewhat higher than the minimum tariffs laid down in Community law.
Finally, the proposed date of implementation, i.e. 1 April of this year, will have to be changed by the Council upon receipt of the recommendations from Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee.
This change will not require a change in the proposal.
The new date will most likely be 1 July of this year.
This concludes my comments.
I would once again like to express my thanks to the rapporteur.
.
(FR) Madam President, since I am entitled to do so, I should like to respond, as I cannot let some of the observations and even complaints, directed at me in my capacity as rapporteur by Mr Färm, go without comment.
I shall refrain from commenting on his own rather contradictory statement.
If the policy of high excise duties, at 17 times higher than the Community minimum for beer, had indeed been successful, then what need would there be to request further restrictions?
It has been clearly demonstrated that this policy is not successful.
Why else would Finland be complaining about the increasing amounts imported from Russia and Estonia in spite of the exorbitant excise duties.
So I would advise Mr Färm, who has unfortunately left the building, to check back over his reasoning and try to come up with something better, since he is subject to rather a lot of contradictions.
He even suggested that I had reduced excise duties.
That would be a fine thing, if only I could.
(The President asked the speaker to conclude) I have the right to reply, and I shall finish soon.
As I was saying, I mean to make the most of my right to speak.
Mr Färm also criticised me for defending wine producers.
I am proud that I did though!
Must I remind you that wine is an agricultural product and a foodstuff which, consumed in moderation, has therapeutic and preventative properties, and I would like to see those citizens that get drunk on beer and vodka on Friday and Saturday drinking a couple of glasses of wine every day instead.
It would be much better for their health.
I should like to see these citizens in a position to purchase these two glasses of wine, for this is not possible due to the excessive excise duties applied by this country.
It would even be good for the social security department in Finland.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Statistics for trade between Member States
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Mr Beysen (A5-0153/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the Common Position adopted by the Council on 28 February 2000 with a view to the adoption of a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3330/91 on the statistics relating to the trading of goods between Member States, with specific reference to a simplified application of the nomenclature of products [(14100/1/1999 - C5 - 0134/2000 - 1997/0162 (COD)]
Madam President, the entry into force of the internal market and the lifting of border controls have led to the abolition of VAT declarations along with the statistics which used to be kept by customs offices.
Intrastat, the statistical collection system on the transport of goods, is met with little appreciation by industry, as the latter is weighed down by the red-tape involved.
Indeed, not only does industry need to provide data on the products in question, it is also required to provide information which does not fall within the remit of the companies directly involved in the transaction but within that of the transport companies which they use.
The basic regulation stipulates that providers of statistical information shall make use of the combined nomenclature, which comprises more than 10 500 entries, in order to classify goods.
This combined nomenclature is a tariff and statistics nomenclature which is used for the trade between Member States and that with third countries.
Within the framework of the SLIM Initiative, the simplification of Intrastat has been set up as a trial project.
The SLIM Intrastat working party has proposed to simplify this nomenclature and better tailor it to the real needs of the user without adversely affecting the link with the nomenclature for the transport of goods with third countries, or the connection with other statistical nomenclatures.
In fact, this proposal was carried by representatives of professional organisations and by companies alike because they themselves have contributed to the effect of the recommendations.
Indeed, the simplification must first and foremost benefit small and medium-sized companies.
The number of codes is restricted and, as such, the classification and codification of goods by companies is simplified without them needing to take any special measures.
This proposal, along with all other measures to simplify the system, can only benefit industry.
The European Community could take the initiative here and propose at international level that the set-up of the harmonised system be reviewed and better tailored to the needs of international trade in the 21st century.
Finally, I would like to inform you that a tripartite consultation, held over the course of three meetings by the European Parliament delegation, finally led to a compromise during the meeting of the Conciliation Committee.
The report was adopted unanimously without amendments within the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
I would, accordingly, be indebted to the MEPs if they were to cast a unanimous vote on this tomorrow.
Madam President, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, I would like to very much welcome Mr Beysen's report and also to thank him for the very clear and concise way he has presented the text.
We entirely support his proposal to push this through without any amendments.
Why are we supporting this so strongly?
Anything in today's world that is going to simplify life for businesses without, as Mr Beysen points out, affecting some of the key business statistical information they need to plan their businesses has to be welcome.
As someone who has founded and started small businesses himself, it is a very frustrating thing when you are trying to manage a business to be asked to fill in statistical returns, taking resources from your business that you could well be using on developing new sales and moving your business forward.
Reading Mr Beysen's report, the history of this proposal is rather depressing.
I was not in the last Parliament, and it is clear that Parliament has put a lot of work into this, but it has taken three years to get to the point where we are now.
It may well be that Mr Beysen's report hides a deceptively complex set of variables that the Commission has had to deal with.
Nevertheless, it seems to me that if we are going to make serious progress on slimming down legislation, making the environment for small businesses better - and that after all is an aim of the Lisbon Summit, we have seen that - we must get better at approaching these sort of projects.
So, I would like you to assure us this evening that you are making a serious effort to move more quickly in this area; and also, given the benefits of new technology moving forward in this area, with many more business-to-business transactions being handled electronically, more business-to-government transactions being handled electronically, that you are planning to exploit that technology in such a way that statistics can in future be collected automatically.
Both more reliably and automatically and also, as Mr Beysen says, "internationally as well".
The final area, Commissioner, is to look at ways in which we can work with you as a Parliament to speed up the approval of the process.
Surely it should not be taking this amount of time to work on largely technical areas.
Mr Beysen was talking about the way that Parliament has been working internationally on some of these issues.
Surely we should be setting our own house in order first.
If you want a special committee within the Internal Market Committee to look at small business issues, simplification issues and statistical issues, then ask us to work with you and for heaven's sake let us not have to consider these proposals again when we had to wait three years to make serious inroads into what ought to be a comparatively simple area of progress.
Madam President, firstly, I would like, on behalf of my Group, to thank Mr Beysen, our vice-chairman in the Legal Affairs Committee, for having drafted the report so rapidly and for recommending that we adopt the common position in its unamended form.
One of the reasons we should take this advice is that it was hard enough to reach this modest compromise in the Council as it was, and we would not wish to jeopardise it.
That does not mean, however, that we can actually be satisfied with this compromise; it is only the first step along the way.
If you ask companies what they think of the EU internal market, more often than not you hear people say that they are positive about everything on the whole, that it is an OK thing as far as they are concerned.
There are two problem areas.
One concerns the disparities in VAT levels and the other relates to the statistics and numerous forms that have to be filled out.
We are well aware that business people like to whinge; it goes with the territory.
But when you hear these comments in Austria, of all places, a country that is more than a little resourceful when it comes to forms and bureaucratic requirements, and which found itself to be even more snowed under after joining the European Union, it really makes you think.
I can cite examples of companies that have to report the official registration number of lorries they are expecting to collect goods as much as three to four weeks prior to their anticipated arrival.
The next important step is to raise the simplification threshold to a minimum of EUR 200 000.
The Commission was asked to examine this step via the Council Decision.
We also know from past experience that, in principle, the Commission is very much in favour of taking this step.
Therefore, might I ask Commissioner Solbes Mira what initiatives we can expect the Commission to come up with and will there be another proposal to this effect?
Likewise, more simplification measures are called for within the framework of the SLIM 2 project.
Madam President, I would like thank all the speakers and especially Mr Beysen for his work.
In 1997, the Commission presented proposals for the simplification of the basic regulations for the Intrastat system, reducing the list of variables to be introduced into declarations and also simplifying the nomenclature of the products used for exchanges.
It is true that each time a simplification of this type is produced, we have a debate between, on the one hand, the necessary reduction in administrative charges to reduce the cost to companies and, on the other, the lack of information resulting from reducing this information.
At the time, the Council reached an agreement on the basis of the Commission' s proposals by amending them, and Parliament is reaching a solution which in our view is an intelligent and practical way to partially resolve this contradiction.
We are happy to accept Parliament' s proposal and we believe that the idea of reducing the number of products exchanged to ten, only indicating the country of origin or destination of the products and their value, may be a good way of resolving the difficulties which I referred to earlier.
You also ask us to analyse the change of threshold from EUR 100 000 to EUR 200 000, which would exclude a greater number of companies from the obligation to present statistical declarations.
As I said before, we consider the work of Parliament' s committee to be excellent and we therefore support and accept it totally.
I would like to congratulate them on their work.
However, you have raised a couple of issues.
Firstly, Mr Harbour asks how the process can be speeded up.
The Commission is not concern about the delay.
We are prepared to accelerate the process as far as possible and we are interested in reducing the cost to companies to a minimum.
Nevertheless, we must recognise that we have two problems which we must address in a different way.
Firstly, with regard to the selection of the ten most relevant products for the purposes of the declaration, that will have to be done by means of the normal comitology procedures.
However, we hope that excessive time will not be required in order to arrive at these results.
Secondly, the increase in the threshold from EUR 100 000 to EUR 200 000 is a problem which requires the necessary cooperation of the Member States, which is already under way, and as soon as we have the opinions of the different Member States, we will be able to make the specific proposal which will allow us to apply this increased exemption.
Lastly, Mrs Berger asks us which additional initiatives we are going to take.
You have said correctly that this is a first step for us.
We believe that it is essential to go further with this process of simplification.
I can therefore state that we are committed - as we have already said publicly - to continuing with the SLIM and Intrastat initiatives and, above all, with the Edicom actions in favour of companies, bearing in mind that the Council has approved the report on information needs which are essential for economic and monetary union.
I cannot give you a specific date for the new proposals, but I can assure you that we are working on them and that Parliament and the Council will receive the new proposals from the Commission as soon as we have the basic information from the Member States.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
(The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m.)