# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Mr President, item 6 of the Minutes where we modify the agenda for the week is accurate but probably rightly does not mention that voting time on Thursday has been brought forward to 11.30 a.m. because of the large number of amendments tabled to certain reports.
I rise, therefore, to question whether Rule 139(1) of our Rules of Procedure is being applied correctly.
As you know, we spend an enormous amount of time voting on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday lunchtimes.
We adopted a set of changes to the Rules of Procedure last year to try to rationalise our work.
In these changes we gave every Member the right to table an amendment as an individual at committee stage, but we limited the right to table amendments in plenary to 32 Members or a political group.
However, if you look at the amendments that have been tabled on Thursday, for instance to the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report, you will see that there are over 100 amendments which are tabled by individuals, supposedly in the name of their political group, but this may well not be the case.
I notice, for instance, that the EPP Group has over 100 amendments in its name but signed by 18 different Members, none of them the coordinator or leader of the group.
Over 20 of these amendments are contradictory, so they cannot possibly all be the position of the EPP Group.
Some are identical, tabled by different Members; and there is even a case of two identical amendments being tabled by the same Member.
Could the EPP Group please get its act together!
So much time is spent and wasted on voting as it is and this is a way to get around the rationalisation of the Rules of Procedure we adopted as a Parliament last year.
Amendments must either be tabled in the name of 32 Members or in the name of a political group and actually represent the position of that political group, not of the individual who happens to table them in the name of the group so as to circumvent the limitation on tabling rules in plenary.
I would ask the sessional services to verify in future that such amendments really are in the name of a group.
(Applause from the left)
Mr President, I should just like to let Mr Corbett know that within the EPP Group an amendment cannot be put before Parliament unless it has been voted in the Group and has the support of the Group.
He should be quite clear about that procedure within our Group.
Secondly, as he is aware, there is a process going on at the moment for reforming Parliament.
If he has any suggestions to put to the Bureau about the voting procedures, that would be the correct way to go about it.
Mr Corbett, I will pass on your comments to the President, and the Bureau will look into all our working procedures in May.
Mr President, I was present yesterday and I signed the register but my name does not appear in the Minutes.
I should like that to be corrected.
It shall be done, Mrs McNally.
Mr President, in the capacity of draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation on the granting of discharge for 1998, I would briefly like to mention that, last night, a partly joint committee meeting was held, involving the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Development and Cooperation, about the Rühle report.
During that meeting, agreement was reached, in principle, to adopt a compromise approach which was subsequently refined.
In practice, this means that the existing text will be replaced by a new joint compromise proposal, which will, in effect, lead to a delay in the proceedings and a reconsideration in June.
The political groups will undoubtedly submit this text some time this morning and the debate will be able to take place as normal, but it is useful for the Members to know that this debate actually took place last night and that, in actual fact, a new political situation has arisen in which the Members of the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Members of the Committee on Development and Cooperation once again agreed on what we consider to be a more positive approach.
Mr President, I should just like to say in reply to Mr van den Berg that the report on postponing discharge for the Structural Funds is ready and the vote will be taken on the premise that this is indeed merely a postponement and does not grant or refuse discharge and that everything which we worked on together yesterday will be taken into account in the final version, i.e. that we shall nonetheless debate and vote on Mrs Rühle' s report.
Mr President, I have a request; every member has a very precise timetable.
We agree on a great number of deadlines in the citizens' interest.
Today, yet again, the sitting has been brought forward, this time to 8.30 a.m.
I think it would be conducive to greater overall efficiency if we stuck to a basic programme and stopped changing arrangements at short notice.
Thank you for your understanding.
Mr Rübig, look upon it as an exceptional decision taken in response to specific requests from the Portuguese Presidency.
(The Minutes were approved)
Mr President, on a point of order.
It concerns a reference made yesterday by the President on the change of business which is taking place this week.
I am very concerned indeed about the reference that the President made as to who would be present from the Council when the President of Austria attends this Parliament tomorrow.
There was, and still is, concern among a lot of people that the change of business means that the Council will be absent on that important occasion.
I should like to have some assurances that the Council will be represented at a sufficiently senior level to offer the respect which this Parliament traditionally offers when these sorts of visits occur.
(Applause from the right)
I will pass on your comments to the President, Mr Kirkhope.
Vote on request for urgent procedure
.
Mr President, whilst the Council has made this request and we are quite happy to do what we can to ensure that things are speeded up, there is no need to vote on this urgency today.
It is planned for our agenda in May.
The way the finances are at present, there will be no problem in financing the High Representative in Bosnia-Herzegovina, whose money is guaranteed until the end of this year, as are also the substantial funds available for the UNMIK operation there.
We can leave this until next month.
(Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure)
1998 discharge, budgetary control
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
(A5-0087/2000) by Mr Stauner, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on postponement of discharge to the Commission in respect of implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1998 financial year [SEC(1999) 412 - C5-0006/1999 - 1999/2050(DEC)];
(A5-0089/2000) by Mrs Rühle, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control,
. on postponement of the decision concerning discharge to the Commission in respect of the financial management of the sixth, seventh and eighth European Development Funds for the 1998 financial year [COM(1999) 227 - C5-0003/1999 - 1999/2004(DEC)]
. on granting discharge to the European Foundation for Improvement of Living and Working Conditions (Dublin) for the 1998 financial year [C5-0150/2000 - 2000/2094(DEC)]
. on granting discharge to the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training (Thessaloniki) for the 1998 financial year [C5-0149/2000 - 2000/2093(DEC)]
. on the granting of discharge for the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1998 financial year
Section IV - Court of Justice
Section V - Court of Auditors
Section VI, Part B - Committee of the Regions
[SEC(1999) 414 - C5-0008/1999 - 1999/2166(DEC)]
. on postponement of the decision concerning discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1998 financial year
Section VI, Part A - Economic and Social Committee
[SEC(1999) 414 - C5-0008/1999];
(A5-0092/2000) by Mr Khanbhai, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on granting discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) for the 1998 financial year [C5-0153/2000 - 2000/2077(DEC)];
(A5-0097/2000) by Mr Kuhne, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on giving discharge in respect of implementation of the general budget for the 1998 financial year
Section I - European Parliament/Ombudsman Annex [SEC(1999) 414 - C5-0008/1999 - 1999/2051(DEC)];
(A5-0095/2000) by Mr Mulder, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on granting discharge to the Commission in respect of the decisions on clearance of accounts of the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF for the 1993, 1994 and 1995 financial years [C4-0128/1998 - C4-0372/1998 - C5-0167/2000 - 1997/2167(DEC)];
(A5-0079/2000) by Mr Casaca, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 723/1997 on the implementation of Member States' action programmes on control of EAGGF Guarantee Section expenditure [COM(1999) 169 - C4-0225/1999 - 1999/0091(CNS)].
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, "zero tolerance towards fraud and other forms of incorrect conduct is a precondition for regaining confidence in the European civil service" .
These are the words of Mr Kinnock, the vice-president of the Commission in charge of reform, in the Commission' s consultation paper dated 18 January 2000.
It was on this premise and with the noble claim that it would not repeat past mistakes - the last Commission having been brought down just under a year ago as the result of fraud and irregularities - that the Prodi Commission took office in September.
The Commission must be measured against this claim and its self-evident obligation, as guardian of the Treaties vis-à-vis third parties, to guarantee that their application begins at home.
It was against this yardstick that the Committee on Budgetary Control came to the conclusion, as the leading committee, that it would recommend that discharge be postponed until 15 May 2000 and would call on the Commission to adopt 17 measures.
These measures relate mainly to four areas which still require clarification or the oft-quoted fresh start.
Firstly, the error rate of over five per cent calculated by the Court of Auditors over several years must be cut considerably by 2001 and a positive declaration of assurance must be achieved by 2003.
Secondly, the particularly blatant cases of fraud and irregularity in connection with the Fléchard case, ECHO, MED and contracts awarded to visiting scientists must be fully clarified and dealt with in disciplinary terms.
Thirdly, Parliament must be given unrestricted access to information and documents for its control activities, as called for in the 1997 discharge resolution.
Fourthly: reports must be filed on the relevant disciplinary hearings and fundamental reforms implemented.
The Committee did not pass this resolution lightly and finally adopted the proposal submitted by a large majority of 19 votes to 1.
The fact that this motion was tabled in the form of a compromise between the four main groups demonstrates clearly that Parliament is pulling in the same direction on this extremely important issue and wishes to signal its unity over and above party political divisions and any national interests or chauvinism.
The Commission should agree to it if it wishes to retain its credibility in its handling of the taxes paid by European citizens and its democratic dealings with the elected representatives of the people of Europe.
I feel particularly strongly about the integrity and the ability of the European executive to act, especially in view of the imminent enlargement of the EU, because the Commission needs to have its hands free for political policy-making and must not be hampered by time-consuming and irritating justification campaigns.
Parliament takes the control function assigned to it in the European Treaties seriously.
All the cases of fraud and irregularity addressed in the resolution relate directly to the 1998 financial year, even though some originated much earlier.
All the measures called for must be carried out by the deadline set.
All the cases are awaiting a decision.
Clearly, the new Commission cannot be held directly responsible for the cases I have referred to, even if not all the members of the Commission are new.
But it is responsible for dealing with this legacy and it will only distinguish itself positively from its predecessors if it takes a ruthless approach and clears up every last one of these cases.
The Commission should also take a close look at how it treats officials who deserve the highest respect for their courageous sense of civic duty in dealing with irregularities.
Despite countless lofty announcements, there is as yet no real evidence of a fresh start.
Commissioner' s Kinnock' s reform paper, which is broad in scope if nothing else, sets off every single alarm bell in the area of financial control.
Decentralisation must not result in the total de facto abolition of internal financial control.
On the contrary, care must be taken to ensure that reforms concentrate on basics and that the principle of quality before quantity still applies.
My conclusion is this: "Words enough have been exchanged, let me at last see some action.
While you fashion compliments, something useful may happen."
You see, good old Goethe had the right words even in this situation.
In this sense, I see the motion for a resolution as a chance for the Commission to justify the trust which Parliament demonstrated in it and its President when I was nominated last September and which it reiterated in its discharge for the 1997 budgetary year.
The motion should also send out nothing more and nothing less than a clear signal of Parliament' s support to the President of the Commission, who unfortunately is not with us here today.
I should like to call on the President to grab this chance and to make use, where necessary, of the powers to issue directives granted to him.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we have a number of difficult decisions to take this week.
Controlling the Executive is one of Parliament' s main rights and that right centres on budgetary control.
However, it is difficult to grant discharge for a budget which is two years old and this problem is exacerbated by the fact that it was not the responsibility of the present Commission but of its predecessor, a Commission which resigned because it failed to take its responsibilities seriously enough.
Our yardstick must therefore be the central issue of what the new Commission' s attitude is towards responsibility.
A good example of this, in my view, is the discharge for the Development Funds.
Our Committee had confidential information on mismanagement and irregularities which amounted to suspicion of corruption.
In response to our questions, we received only inadequate information, for which we had to wait a long time.
The majority of the Committee therefore decided to suspend discharge in order to obtain more information.
In the meantime, however, we have good news to impart.
Together with representatives from the Commission and the parliamentary Committee on Development we have drawn up an action plan, which can be implemented by 15 May.
I am therefore able to correct my report in this respect, i.e. we shall replace my report with this specific action plan and propose that we suspend discharge until 15 May and we shall then grant discharge on 15 May on the basis of the Commission report on the action plan.
I think that this development clearly demonstrates the direction that we need to take.
The Commission and Parliament must work together and must create greater transparency in relation to the budget and its implementation.
Unfortunately, I was forced to include another postponement in my report, this time in relation to the Economic and Social Committee.
There are again problems with the Economic and Social Committee in relation to travel costs and mission expenses.
It took the Committee over 15 months to refer justified cases of suspicion of fraud to OLAF.
Discharge therefore had to be suspended pending the results of the OLAF investigation.
There is another problem with the Economic and Social Committee, the problem of buildings.
We are still paying rent for the Ardenne and Ravenstein buildings.
We are also paying rent for the Belliard building and Parliament must pay for its new building.
This means that European taxpayers are currently paying rent for three buildings.
We want to exert pressure here to ensure that the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions move into the Belliard building as quickly as possible.
However, we have not moved for a postponement in this area because we hope that a satisfactory solution can be found and that we can grant discharge for the buildings in the 1999 budget with no further pressure needed.
However, I should just like to say on the subject of buildings that better management is needed at European level.
There are similar problems with the European Court of Justice.
The Court of Auditors has drafted a special report on this subject, which will be reflected in the 1999 discharge procedure.
As rapporteur, I should like to suggest that we need better cooperation between the various institutions at European level as far as the management of buildings and rents is concerned and that we should learn from each other' s mistakes so that, here too, we use the European taxpayers' money in a responsible manner.
As a new Member, allow me to point out that there are serious shortcomings in this area.
As I have little time left, I should like to give a very succinct and concentrated presentation of the rest of my report.
We are able to propose that the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Auditors be granted discharge.
Both institutions gave highly satisfactory answers to the criticisms in my report and we have had prompt and comprehensive replies to our questions and comments.
We are also able to propose that the Dublin agency and the Thessaloniki agency be granted discharge.
However, we would like to see the contradictory procedure shortened for the agencies.
We welcome the fact that the agencies have decided to carry out an evaluation and we expect this evaluation to be submitted by December 2000.
Overall, as a new member, I should like to reiterate my belief that the procedure for the 1998 discharge represented an important step forward in reinforcing the taxpayers' confidence in the European institutions.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, over recent days, just before the debate on this report, certain areas of the media created the impression that we needed outsiders to open our eyes to shortcomings in our own institution, as if Parliament would operate double standards, by being intensely critical of the Commission, but turning a blind eye to its own shortcomings.
I should like to report quite unequivocally that neither applies.
My draft report was presented to the Committee in all language versions on 10 February this year and all the shortcomings reported in the press, such as the article in the European Voice about 10 days ago, have already been addressed in an open and critical manner in the report.
There has been no whitewash.
The report before Parliament today both contains a description of the shortcomings and lays down clear conditions for the attention of Parliament' s administration, including deadline commitments, which clearly show what needs to be done in order to rectify these shortcomings.
In addition, contrary to the Commission discharge procedure, we have no cause to complain that we did not receive certain documents.
Some were perhaps a little late in arriving, but they did all arrive.
That is another difference in the discharge procedures.
We here in Parliament certainly have cases of mismanagement in certain areas which need to be criticised and cleared up, but we have no legacy such as cases of fraud.
I say that in order to highlight an important difference, because interested parties have "let it drop" that, if Parliament is using the same yardstick, then it should come to the same conclusion and cannot postpone discharge for the Commission on the one hand and be prepared to discharge itself on the other.
I am all in favour of the same yardstick, but the same yardstick does not necessarily give the same results.
We should not sit down with the strategic far-sightedness of garden gnomes and say, now we must kow-tow to those who have given the impression that we should go around in sackcloth and ashes just so that our decision to postpone discharge of the Commission seems more credible.
Were we to do so, I can assure you that, within half an hour of the vote on Thursday, you would hear the sound, from Brussels to Strasbourg, of the champagne corks popping in many a Brussels office in which many people would be delighted if Parliament were to make the content of its own discharge the variable upon which the Commission discharge depended.
If we did that, there would not be a single Commission over the next 20 years which needed to fear Parliament' s discharge or, at most, its merciless opportunism!
I should like to come now to the question of where the shortcomings which we must clear up lie.
We must, for example, reverse the trend whereby the number of direct contracts has increased dramatically in comparison with the number of open competitions.
This refers mainly to the fixtures and fittings in this building.
It is not a procedure which is illegal per se and it would be wrong to assume that it were.
However, we must insist that this trend be reversed in order to reinstate a sound administrative culture.
This direct contract procedure must not catch on and become the predominant procedure.
In the long term, it would mean accepting cost increases on orders without being able to check if they could be obtained more cheaply elsewhere, which is why this trend must be reversed.
The second point is this: Parliament has lost several cases on personnel issues before the European Court of Justice over recent years and the verdict of the European Court of Justice has been harsh and clear.
It has been clearly stated that our own, previously public, competition criteria have been broken for certain positions in order to lever certain persons into those positions.
Parliament and its members must ensure that there is no place for this sort of thing in our House and that we keep our employees motivated by ensuring that they can be certain that promotions and recruitments are made on the basis of merit and qualification, not cronyism.
Another important point addressed relates to the question of buildings.
We have come to the conclusion that Parliament is in an extremely difficult position, for which the Council is mainly to blame.
The Council finances its own building out of compulsory costs in the budget but has denied Parliament the facility of direct financing.
I am not in favour - and I say so quite clearly, despite all the difficulties which we have to overcome - of sending yet another box of chocolates over to the Council in its building and tying yet another ribbon around it and saying, all right, we profess our faith in the fact that the whole procedure is beset with legal problems.
We have already discussed them at length.
We have received every document written on the subject.
What I say is, whoever still has a problem should please go to the European Court of Justice and get it cleared up there, rather than turning plenary into an extrajudicial seminar.
They should also consider what it means, from a political point of view, if we go ahead and give these sweets to the Council.
The inventory has been addressed.
Mr Seppänen addressed it yesterday.
The report itself lists the difficulties which have arisen, the huge number of items which have disappeared or, to put it bluntly, been stolen.
In the meantime, thank God, we have introduced an electronic inventory system in Parliament.
We are now waiting for an explanation as to how this electronic system functions.
I should like to come back to the question of yardsticks and results.
If the majority in Parliament decides, not for reasons which have something to do with this report, but for reasons which have to do with the fact that certain groups have more skeletons in their cupboard than others when it comes to what they have done with their group money and what they have done with party financing; if a majority plays pass the parcel with this report, then we here in Parliament will end up in the position over the next few weeks of having to ask ourselves what future the Commission and Parliament discharge procedure has, now that it is no more than an excuse for party political manipulation and manoeuvring.
I hope I do not have to sit in such a Parliament.
Mr President, the discharge which we are discussing today, as far as agriculture is concerned, pertains to 1993, 1994 and 1995 and you may well wonder why we are so late.
The reason for this is that we delayed the discharge for 1992 for a long time, because we had made certain requirements of the Commission which up to last year it had failed to meet.
We are pleased to note that this has meanwhile been rectified.
So what exactly were Parliament' s requirements?
Firstly, we asked for 15 extra jobs to be created in the inspection department within agriculture and for the financial corrections to be increased from 10% to 25% maximum, in case something went wrong with agricultural expenditure.
This has since been done and we are grateful for this.
It still causes Parliament some concern that the jobs have not yet been filled and that it is extremely difficult to do so.
In general terms, the error rate for agriculture is below the general error rate for the budget.
Where the general rate is 5%, as already mentioned, that for agriculture is 3%.
This is moving in the right direction.
This may also partly be due to the fact that agricultural policy has changed over the years.
I believe it is easier to keep income policy in check than it is price policy.
There has since been an increase in expenditure for development within rural areas but I will come back to this.
Special attention should also be paid to the European revenue.
Although the own resources are falling, they are still an important source of income and it has now been decided that certain Member States are allowed to retain 25%.
This is all the more reason why the Commission should keep tabs on all the money coming in to which the European Union is entitled.
What does the Committee on Budgets mainly want?
First, the Commission should work towards driving back the current error rate within the short term.
In my opinion, we should be able to have a 1% error rate within a number of years.
One way of achieving this is to establish an estimated reliability level for each sector.
This is something which the Commission could undertake itself.
What is the error rate in the milk sector, the dairy sector, the cereal sector, etc?
In this way, the various offices will benefit from a healthy rivalry.
Everyone wants to outstrip the others and agriculture would be able to take the wind out of the sails of the other budget components.
For many years, we have also talked about an integrated management and inspection system for agriculture and lamented the fact that many countries are still unable to meet this requirement.
I think it is about time this stopped.
We have stipulated in the resolution that the Commission will have two years to solve this and I have been given assurances that this should be possible.
Although the agricultural budget components are scrutinised, they cannot be scrutinised in the same way as guaranteed expenditure, which is down to the Guidance Section for agriculture.
We think the Commission should come up with proposals to actually apply the financial corrections system to structural expenditure for agriculture.
In common with the Court of Auditors, the Commission is also concerned that huge mistakes are still being made in the export refunds system.
The Committee on Budgets, therefore, recommends discharge.
There are, however, a few problems remaining, one of which I have already mentioned, namely export refunds.
We are expecting a report on this.
We are also waiting for a report from OLAF on fraud involving the aid provided to flax in certain countries, notably Spain.
Finally, and I may come back to this at a later stage, we are waiting for a report from the Court of Auditors on the Fléchard affair.
We can grant discharge to the Commission without these three elements.
There is something else.
Since 1995, there has been a conciliation committee for agricultural expenditure.
If there is a difference of opinion between the Member States and the Commission on the financial correction to be imposed, we can call upon a conciliation body to mediate.
We have as yet to be convinced of the usefulness of this conciliation body.
The Commission has promised to assess this.
We look forward to the findings because we would like to considerably reduce the number of court cases at the Court of Justice in Luxembourg.
.
(PT) Mr President, the Treaty of Amsterdam greatly strengthened the system for protecting the European Union' s financial interests, by reformulating and extending the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty with the new Article 280.
So Amsterdam provided two new elements in addition to the principle introduced in Maastricht in accordance with which Member States are obliged to adopt measures comparable to those they take to combat fraud harming their own financial interests.
These two new elements mean that the European Parliament now has powers of codecision, and that the protection of the Community' s financial interests will have to be effective and equivalent.
The entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam therefore means that the principle of the equality of all citizens and of the equivalence of all acts in the eyes of the law must be applied in the area of the protection of financial interests.
Mr President, we are now considering the first legislative measure on the prevention of fraud and other irregularities since the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force.
This is an amendment to a regulation designed to prevent fraud and other irregularities relating to the common agricultural policy.
In 1970, the CAP accounted for up to 87% of Community expenditure and this amount has gradually fallen over the last three decades to around 45% of Community expenditure today.
It is therefore understandable that legislation for preventing and combating fraud should have developed independently for the CAP and not in relation to the general rules which apply to the whole budget.
Until a few years ago, even the policing of fraud in agriculture was not overseen by the appropriate department, which was UCLAF, but by the Directorate-General for Agriculture itself.
Now that the Treaty of Amsterdam is in force, this situation is no longer acceptable.
We cannot allow the protection of the Community' s financial interests to continue to be undertaken on the basis of loose, unconnected and contradictory legislation which deals with the various attacks on the Community' s financial interests according to the specific amount at stake and not in accordance with principles of fairness.
As regards protecting our financial interests, we must put a stop to the rigid divisions between the various chapters of Community expenditure and ensure that no double standards are involved.
Reform of the Commission cannot continue to be seen as a stream of meaningless clichés and as a hypothetical discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of various models of ex ante and ex post control and of decentralisation.
Instead, it should be seen as the determination to put an end to feuding and to bureaucratic sectionalism.
This is why we propose that this House should request that the legal basis for regulating the prevention of fraud and other irregularities be changed from Article 37 to Article 280.
In the same way that the Commission and all the European institutions have finally accepted and understood that all action in the fight against fraud must be undertaken in an effective and equivalent way, by entrusting OLAF with this task, the Commission must now accept that legislation on preventing fraud and other regularities must also be developed in an effective and equivalent way, in strict observance of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
We are confident that the Commission will ultimately be able to agree fully with this principle.
Mr President, my report is about the European Coal and Steel Community and how that fits in with Mrs Stauner's report and the discharge.
We have decided to give the discharge on three conditions, and the conditions are clearly spelt out.
We hope that by 15 August those concerned will give us the information that is requested.
What I find extraordinary is that EUR 2 billion are being managed by this vestige - the last remainder of the European Coal and Steel Community, which, of course, was very important historically but is not important any more.
It is being wound up and it is remarkable that such an instrument should continue with that budget and 145 staff.
I believe such an instrument should be wound up as quickly as possible so that it is incorporated in perhaps a reformed European Investment Bank: a European Investment Bank that is transparent and accountable.
Such investments can and should be made by professional banks rather than the little outfit that we have at the moment.
The number of people employed for the amount of money being invested is again quite disproportionate.
I am hoping that this can be wound up speedily and incorporated in either the EIB or the European Investment Fund, because that would be a better way of using the money and resources.
This is for the social and research fund, but again these objectives could be better addressed by a bank that would ask other banks to manage investments so that we have the highest return.
I hope that the three conditions, the conditional discharge and the obligations on those concerned to address these conditions will be taken seriously.
Far too often in the past we have found that promises have been made and not kept.
So I hope that the answers will be given to Parliament and to the Committee on Budgetary Control.
I think that is about all I need to say.
On that basis I recommend to this House a discharge.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as rapporteur for the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, it is with some satisfaction that I would like to point out that, in our own area of competence, the Court of Auditors had no criticism to make of the way the appropriations for the financial year 1998 were implemented.
I have, what is more, received no complaints from any officials at all.
I am not aware of any vengeful articles by investigative journalists, or any OLAF inquiries, and personally I have not managed to discover any proven cases of mismanagement, fraud or misappropriation of funds in our sector.
In a word, as far as our committee' s area of competence is concerned, there is nothing to prevent the discharge being granted to the Commission.
And now, to express my own personal opinion, I would like to say more generally that I support the conclusions of Mrs Stauner' s report with a view to postponing discharge to the Commission for the year 1998.
The citizens' primary right is to see that their money is managed and spent properly and as long is this is not clearly established discharge must not be granted.
I should, however, like to make two observations.
Settling political scores or making personal attacks must not be mistaken for combating poor management, irregularities and fraud.
In this context, it is essential to prevent a climate of political vendetta arising between the main institutions of the Union.
My second observation is that, in my opinion, it is essential to be as implacable in criticising oneself as in criticising others, and I therefore wonder about the effects, which I expect to be disastrous, of postponing discharge to the Commission on the one hand, even though Parliament is prepared to grant its own discharge, despite the administrative problems it acknowledges, and although the political groups gloss over their own administration.
My personal preference would be for adopting a more self-critical attitude.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, expenditure for research accounts for nearly two thirds of the budget for internal policy.
Consequently, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy has requested the Court of Auditors to carry out a thorough investigation into the legality and lawfulness of payments in research as a matter of high priority.
The Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy regrets the inaccuracies in one third of payments.
The European Commission has paid over the odds most of the time because the beneficiaries had failed to declare non-eligible costs.
Inadequate inspection by the offices of the Commission and the lack of contractually determined penalties for excessive declarations have also led to deliberate over-invoicing in nearly two-thirds of the payments.
What does the Commissioner intend to do about this?
Has the Commission ever taken legal action?
Or does it intend to?
I would like to have these questions answered.
The success and usefulness of the research programmes are beyond dispute.
But effective implementation requires better management and coordination, as well as inspections carried out by various Directorates-General.
According to the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, it is essential that the tasks pertaining to financial management be carried out by officials who are required to render full account of their tasks to the institution.
If money from Brussels is spent, then the responsibility should lie with Brussels and not with external service providers.
We are prepared to grant discharge under these conditions.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen.
Alas, I sit here between a rock and a hard place.
On the one hand, I would and should recommend, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism too, that the Commission be discharged due to the satisfactory take-up rate of the budget lines which affect us, despite numerous critical comments.
On the other hand, I cannot in fact recommend discharge due to unclarified incidents at the Commission which are beginning to threaten the very existence of regional project agencies and which, as the representative of my home region, I have been fighting to have clarified for months.
It is not enough for the present Commission to acknowledge the errors of the old Commission without finding a solution.
However, this is not the place for such personal experiences.
Allow me rather to highlight the causes for criticism as the representative and draftsman of the RETT Committee.
Firstly, certain measures dating back to before 1989 have still not been completed.
Secondly, the irregularities identified by the Court of Auditors refer mainly to errors in relation to proof of expenditure which are signed by Member States, and for which they are responsible.
The Commission is indirectly and to some extent jointly responsible here insofar as it should have issued clear rules for grants and aid.
Thirdly, delayed payments by the Commission which unsettle and, sometimes, ruin our citizens, as the result either of transgressions or inefficient bureaucratic structures and cover-ups or liquidity problems following cuts in payment appropriations by the Council.
The conditional postponement of the discharge suggested by Mrs Stauner is to be welcomed.
I personally would like to have better facilities for quality control, in situ, of how EU funds are used.
Mr President, the Committee on Cooperation and Development has been extremely critical in its appraisal of what became of the development and cooperation expenditure in 1998.
We have translated this criticism into a number of very concrete questions, answers and proposals in order to make drastic changes to the policy as it is being adopted now and will be adopted this coming year.
To our great delight, we are also at the dawn of a drastic reform of development policy.
Policy as it was adopted in 1998 by Europe as one of the world' s key players did not really have a clear poverty focus or clear-cut, result-orientated objectives and, as such, it was difficult to judge whether we had achieved our goal.
We have now agreed to re-arrange the entire budget in a number of clearly defined sectors according to international agreements in the field of poverty control and, following on from this, to submit annual reports on the results within the various sectors to our Parliament.
It has also been agreed that in these sectors, clear objectives will be formulated and that, in these objectives, basic health care and primary education will be considerably reinforced as components of social development.
This is not just restricted to either the European Parliament budget or the EDF budget, but refers to the total.
This brings us to the desire and agreement that the EDF, even if it is just in terms of figures, will at least be absorbed into the 2001 budget, so that we in Parliament can actually see where the money is being spent.
After all, we are talking about a huge amount which the European tax payer expects to be used to combat poverty.
If we look at what really happens, however, it is often not about a child who goes to school or food which is grown locally in a more productive way.
Very often, economic interests of the various Member States in Europe take priority over poverty issues in the relevant countries.
In terms of inspection, this is all undoubtedly neatly justified in accounts, but is incorrect in terms of content.
This poverty focus is essential in order to actually get value for money.
We hope that, with the inclusion of the EDF in the 2001 budget, even if we do not have any formal budgetary authority there, we will be able to pursue a more result-orientated policy by breaking it down into clear sectors.
Then there is still the staffing problem.
Many shortcomings, the lack of spending and the fact that 80% of the commitment appropriations are sometimes not spent, are due to an organisational structure which is inadequate, not sufficiently decentralised in the various relevant countries and guided by a form of regulation which does too little examining after the event and is too bureaucratic before the event.
In the light of this, there is a great need for reform on this score.
We at the Committee on Development and Cooperation have every confidence that we can bring about this reform thanks to the agreements we have reached with the Commission.
Further to the agreement we concluded with the Committee on Budgetary Control, I also expect that the action plan on 15 May will help us at the Parliament to turn a corner, in tandem with the Commission.
I would like to underline the confidence we have in the Commission and all its Commissioners.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, today, for the second time this year, we are debating the discharge of the Commission for the budget of a previous financial year.
Two and a half months ago, you granted the Commission discharge for the 1997 budget.
That discharge was accompanied by numerous, far-reaching calls to the Commission which provided strong momentum and incentive for the reform of the Commission and which are incorporated in the Commission' s White Paper.
I should like once again to extend my thanks on behalf of the Commission, especially to the rapporteur at the time, Mrs van der Laan and, in this context, to the rapporteur for the reforms, Mr van Hulten.
Today we are debating the discharge for the 1998 financial year.
Under the European Treaty, Parliament has a duty to audit the accounts, the statements of assets and the annual report of the Court of Auditors, together with the replies from the bodies being audited.
In its report on the 1998 financial year, submitted in November last year, the Court of Auditors granted the Commission a declaration of assurance with regard to receipts and the handling of commitment appropriations.
The Court of Auditors did not grant the Commission an auditor' s certificate establishing that payments had been implemented in a lawful and proper manner.
The error rate was considered to be too high by the Court of Auditors.
As the Commissioner for the Budget, I subscribe fully to the opinion that, in some areas, the shortcomings in the implementation of the budget are simply unacceptable.
That is why I immediately took the initiative, in my official capacity, of drafting an action plan listing specific measures sector by sector on the basis of a specific timetable, in order to reduce the number of errors identified.
Nearly 90% of all errors identified or highlighted by the Court of Auditors concern the Member States.
The majority of payments out of the EU budget are paid not directly by the Brussels administration, but by administrative units in the Member States.
This decentralised implementation of the budget has numerous advantages, but, of course, it also calls for efficient and close cooperation.
As rapporteur for the SEM 2000 programmes and decentralised management measures, Mr Kuhne has dealt with these questions in detail and I should like to thank him for his work in this area.
The Council, which recommended discharge for the Commission, included the question of shared management in its debate on the 1998 budget discharge and the proposal was mooted that the Member States should perhaps set their own objective for reducing shortcomings in the implementation of EU funds, an interesting proposal.
For its part, the Commission will step up its efforts to formulate more manageable financial rules for the administrations in the Member States and to provide advice and information, especially on the control systems.
Alternatively, should it prove necessary, the Commission will use financial corrections to refunds paid to Member States as a monetary lever, as is the case in agriculture.
The fact that the error rate for agricultural expenditure is well below the error rate for the Structural Funds is perhaps due to this financial correction instrument.
My colleague Franz Fischler will go into this in greater detail in a moment but I should like at this point to thank Mr Casaca for his report and to congratulate Mr Mulder on his report.
The Court of Auditors made no critical remarks on the budget for the European Coal and Steel Community and I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Khanbhai, for the report which he has just presented.
The European Court of Auditors also issued a declaration of assurance for the budget of the European Development Fund, although it did find cause for complaint.
Overall, there was a clear drop in the error rate for the Funds in comparison with previous years.
However, this gives the Commission no cause whatsoever for complacency.
On the contrary, the Commission also wants to achieve more satisfactory results for this financing instrument, which is so important to development policy, and this applies in particular to the question of the speed of aid.
You addressed this point, Mr van den Berg.
This is also one of the concerns of the rapporteur for this area and I should like to thank you, Mrs Rühle, for your willingness to include the arguments of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the Commission in your report and to propose an action plan and also, at this point, to thank Mr Blak for his preparatory work in this area.
The legislative, budgetary and control powers of the individual institutions overlap even more in the European Union than they do in the Member States.
It is therefore essential that we act in unity if European policy is to work.
This presupposes a clear and reliable division of tasks, which is why current talks and negotiations between Parliament and the Commission on the agreement, which also includes the question of access to and dealing with confidential information, are extremely important.
The chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control, Mrs Theato, also has a very responsible role in this respect.
It is in all our interests for these negotiations to come to a swift conclusion, hopefully with results which enable there to be a good policy and collaboration on such important matters as discharge.
The Commission has made a commitment to transparency and openness.
These are not just empty words as far as the Commission is concerned, which is why I have transferred all the confidential audit reports needed to the Committee on Budgetary Control, or rather to the rapporteur, during the course of the discharge procedure and which is why the Commission has also replied in detail to questionnaires, even though this differed from past reporting practice.
The Commission has nothing to hide and this Commission sees it as its duty to support Parliament fully in the performance of its duties.
But we need a procedure which safeguards the confidentiality of information and, more importantly, the principle of the rule of law whereby people cannot be pre-judged.
That must also apply to the Commission staff, just as it applies to people who belong to the other European institutions and to all our citizens.
The Commission is called on in the report adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control to answer various questions or take direct action by 15 May.
I should like to thank the Committee on Budgetary Control for this resolution and also for the deadline attached to it.
Some of the points refer to dealing with so-called old cases, i.e. cases of irregularities or suspicion of fraud from previous years.
I should like to say quite clearly at this point that the Commission will do everything within its powers to fight fraud and that applies not only to the future, but to clearing up past cases.
This Commission has no fear of any findings.
The Commission has proven this in the so-called Cresson/Barthelot case by passing documents to the courts, introducing disciplinary proceedings, lifting the immunity of a former member of the Commission, giving the investigating magistrate access to the Commission premises and demanding repayment of missing EU funds.
But I repeat: for the Commission, the rule of law applies.
This means that it cannot of course influence judicial proceedings, even if they are unsatisfactory, as for example in the ECHO case, on which the competent courts, which received the file a long time ago, have still taken no action.
It also means that proportionality is required when meting out punishment and demanding refunds and this applies both to demands by the Commission and to refunds demanded by the Member States.
The European Court of Justice again made that clear in its most recent judgement a few weeks ago, when it halved or even cancelled fines in the case of the cement cartel.
My colleague Franz Fischler will shortly be going into the question of the agricultural budget in connection with discharge in greater detail.
But I too should like to say at this point that I do not see the letters drawing the Commission' s attention to the fact that companies may fold or jobs be destroyed following certain Commission measures as an illegal attempt at intervention, irrespective of whether the letters originate in Parliament or in a Member State and regardless of whether they come from France, Ireland or Bavaria.
Naturally, decisions must be taken where there is room for discretion and they must be taken according to clear rules and in a transparent manner.
I shall fight for clear rules within the framework of the financial regulation.
Of course the Commission will take very careful notice of the Court of Auditors' recommendations and findings in the so-called Fléchard case and all I can say is that I, for my part, am very grateful to the Court of Auditors for taking on this task.
I am not in a position at this point to go into the individual points of the resolution in detail.
However, the Commission will immediately notify OLAF of your demands and, as far as the administrative investigation is concerned, I have set the procedure of clarification in motion.
Your resolution insists first and foremost on a reduction in the error rate.
I can assure you that the Commission is doing everything it can to achieve this, which is why we submitted the action plan, containing specific measures with specific deadlines and which is why we are completing revising the financial regulation and I shall shortly be reporting on this to Parliament.
This is why the European Anti-Fraud Office is being reinforced.
This is why the Commission has started reforming financial management as a whole by increasing the responsibility of everyone who handles the money of the European taxpayers, by improving efficiency and by setting the clear objective of restoring trust in the European institutions.
The Commission will do everything to ensure that the reform is a success and it would be a good thing if all the European institutions were to expose themselves to such reform.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to restrict my comments to the so-called Mulder and Casaca reports.
Mr Mulder, I should like to start by thanking you on behalf of the Commission for your report on granting discharge in respect of the decisions on clearance of accounts of the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF for the 1993, 1994 and 1995 financial years.
The main thrust of the report is that clearance of accounts for the expenditure financed by the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF was a job well done.
This can also be seen from the financial corrections quoted under number 1.
I consider this to represent a certain degree of acknowledgement and, at the same time, to be an order to do even more in the future.
I expressly state that I agree with number 4.
The date of April 2002 is needed in order at last to guarantee the proper operation of the integrated administration and control system in all the Member States.
It is also a prerequisite to our being able to reduce the error rate still further.
As regards the question of building up a central database containing data on all payments to final beneficiaries, I should like to draw your attention to the following.
The interaction between the common agricultural policy and the final beneficiaries currently passes via approved paying agencies in the Member States.
These agencies have all the data on the final beneficiaries and the Commission services naturally have unrestricted access to them.
However, I should like to stress that the Commission does not need a central database per se in order to exercise its control function and I would therefore suggest that a cost-benefit analysis should be considered here.
A study is currently examining if it is technically feasible to set up a central database for recording all payments and hence all final beneficiaries.
Even if it is not prescribed under law, it could of course simplify a number of operations, not only for the Commission, but also for the Court of Auditors or OLAF.
The Commission is aware of the fact that the European Parliament considers it important to know the names of the recipients of the largest sums.
However, I should point out here that, because of data protection at Union and Member State level, it would be impossible to publish such information, even if it were technically feasible.
As far as staffing the clearance of accounts unit is concerned, I can confirm, Mr Mulder, that only the three posts of the new unit leaders have yet to be published.
The recruitment procedure for the remaining six posts has already been completed, or will be shortly.
The Conciliation Body referred to in number 16 of the report is one of the measures which should ensure that efforts to speed up the procedure do not compromise the quality of document audits.
However, this is only a consultation process and it is the Commission itself which takes the decision in all cases.
I can also assure you that refunds and the aid regime for flax and hemp will be examined very conscientiously.
Corrections totalling EUR 249.8 million were made to refunds for the financial years from 1994 to 1998.
However, before we can make any further corrections for subsequent financial years, we must first carry out the scheduled control visits.
Allow me to conclude with a few comments on the declaration of assurance.
It is proposed in the resolution that there should be a separate declaration of assurance for the EAGGF and the individual sectors.
This question is, of course, addressed first and foremost to the Court of Auditors.
The Commission notes this proposal with interest.
A first step in this direction should of course be a declaration of assurance for individual policy areas, i.e. separate declarations for the agricultural fund, the Structural Fund and so on.
This alone would considerably improve this instrument.
And finally, my thanks in this respect to the Committee on Budgetary Control for their excellent cooperation in drafting the report.
A few words now on Mr Casaca' s report.
I should also like to thank you, Mr Casaca, for your report.
According to Council Regulation No 723/97, the Community contributes towards the costs "incurred by Member States in implementing new action programmes, arising out of new Community obligations, approved by the Commission and aimed at improving the structures or effectiveness of EAGGF Guarantee Section expenditure controls" .
The purpose of the proposed amendment tabled here is to improve controls.
In addition, provision is made for the Community to make a contribution in cases in which the Commission calls on the Member States to carry out additional controls over and above the minimum rate laid down in the regulations.
I should like to make the following comments on the proposed amendments.
The Commission cannot, unfortunately, accept proposed Amendment No 1 insofar as the rapporteur proposes changing the legal basis for the regulation from Article 37 to Article 280.
The Commission takes the view that Article 37 of the Treaty is the correct legal basis because the most important objective of the proposal is to prevent irregularities in EAGGF Guarantee Section expenditure.
As far as proposed Amendment No 2 is concerned, the Commission cannot accept the part which refers to the second paragraph of Article 5a, in which mention is made of administrative and staffing costs incurred by the Commission in administering this scheme.
I agree with the idea behind the proposal, i.e. to ensure that the Commission has sufficient means at its disposal to perform its tasks, but the proposal confuses the administrative and staffing costs incurred by the Commission which are covered solely from Part A of the budget with the operational costs in Part B of the budget and I am unable to agree to this.
Mr President, fellow Members, Mrs Schreyer, Mr Fischler, I should like to make one thing clear from the outset: postponing a discharge is not tantamount to refusing a discharge, irrespective of what is always wrongly assumed.
On the other hand, granting discharge is a serious procedure with serious consequences in that the controlling body answers for the fact that the activities and financial conduct of the body being controlled have been correct from a legal, economic and political point of view.
This responsibility on the part of Parliament vis-à-vis European citizens and taxpayers is a heavy burden, which is why discharge for the Commission' s management of the budget cannot be reduced to a compulsory, but somewhat tiresome annual exercise and I am sorry that the President of the Commission could not be here today.
On the contrary, what is needed is a thorough examination on the basis of pertinent sources of information and a conscientious appraisal of the results.
And that is what we have done in the Committee on Budgetary Control over recent weeks.
The rapporteur, Mrs Stauner, and the draftsmen of the opinions of the other discharge reports and working documents, whom I should like to congratulate on their work, have based their work first and foremost on the annual and special reports of the Court of Auditors and on the Commission' s replies.
The sources for the information and documents needed from the Commission, on the other hand, gushed little, if anything at all, despite a great deal of paper and, unfortunately, no clear answers were given to the questions asked.
When the Commission then writes to complain about the questionnaires and working papers of the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control, that shows that something has gone wrong with the flow of information between the controlling and the controlled parties and this must be rectified as quickly as possible.
We are working on that.
Mrs Schreyer also mentioned it.
However, I am warning you that the Commission is heading straight for the same fate as its predecessor.
According to Article 276 of the Treaty, Parliament, and hence the Committee appointed by it, is entitled to any information or documents which it needs or demands in order to prepare its discharge.
This includes reappraising old cases.
The rapporteur quotes four cases by way of example.
Other cases should be on the list, but the Commission has unfortunately not yet passed them on, despite the date of March 2000 set in the 1997 discharge.
Here too the Commission misunderstands our basic cause for concern.
The rapporteur and the Committee on Budgetary Control are not holding the present Commission per se responsible for the deplorable state of affairs in previous years.
The resignation of the previous Commission did not put an end to it.
On the contrary, the new Commission was completely aware of all the outstanding accusations before it entered office and it undertook to assume responsibility and establish transparency.
I take this to mean that it must clear up all the old cases without exception and - where necessary - must pass them to the courts.
Cover-ups or even sweeping issues under the carpet are not the answer.
On the contrary, the answer means being prepared to draw conclusions from the unhappy events of the past, so that the same thing does not happen again in the future.
This ranges from precise filing rules, so that documents cannot simply disappear, to a fundamental reform of disciplinary proceedings and much else besides.
This approach also informs the White Paper on the reform of the Commission tabled by Mr Kinnock.
Mrs Stauner' s report lists our short-term demands with respect to these conclusions and we all consider that they can be met by the stated deadline.
The Committee debated them at several meetings and finally adopted them with one vote against.
Here we must thank the rapporteur for her honesty, on the one hand, and for her perfect readiness to compromise, on the other.
One of the most important objectives that we consider the Commission should achieve is to reduce the error rate in payments to well below the persistent figure of 5%.
I know, Mrs Schreyer, that you have tabled an action plan.
Nonetheless, the error rate has remained at the same high level for the last five years.
We shall have to debate this.
However, we also know that most errors occur in the Member States and we are prepared, as a committee, to discuss this with you.
Nonetheless, we take the view and the Treaty states that the Commission is responsible for implementing the overall budget.
Excuses and promises are no use.
We need clear proof of improvement.
On balance, my conclusion is that we need a strong Commission, which is able to act, which works openly together with Parliament and which supplies Parliament with all the information needed or requested.
Using the pressure of postponement to advance discharge is constructive pressure because it gives the Commission the chance to clear up shortcomings caused by slowness, pettifogging or unwillingness so that Parliament will be able to grant discharge for 1998 as quickly as possible, hopefully before the summer recess.
I think that the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, should direct his team forcefully here in order to take transparency in Europe a stage further.
Mr President, the Committee on Budgetary Control has considered several reports recently, mostly relating to the 1998 discharge procedure.
It is a strange time for us to be considering how the Commission is faring after its forced resignation last year due to many of the issues highlighted in the 1996 discharge.
The discharge procedure is, of course, an opportunity for the European Parliament to exercise its responsibility in terms of monitoring the Commission and the other institutions' behaviour.
We check their accounts.
We ensure that policies have been well managed.
The Commission spent the last year preparing for a radical reform, outlined in the White Paper presented on 1 March, and we appreciate that it will take more than a few months to turn this massive tanker around.
Parliament and the Budgetary Control Committee are, however, keen to ensure that the reform occurs at a speedy pace, which is why we have decided to postpone discharge in the expectation that the Commission will hit the targets that we have set them within the next two months.
The report as it stands at the moment is very different from the initial report that was submitted by Mrs Stauner on behalf of the EPP Group.
That was clearly used as a political battering ram.
Mrs Stauner quoted Goethe.
I will quote Shakespeare.
The report was full of sound and fury signifying nothing.
That is why the explanatory statement attached to this report has not been agreed by the Budgetary Control Committee.
It makes no sense in the context of the postponement report, and it is totally nonsensical and hysterical in tone.
We are delighted that there was an almost unanimous consensus, however, on the new practical approach to the general discharge.
We would like to thank the rapporteur for her cooperation on that.
We expect and hope that the Commission will deliver and the rapporteur will perhaps take a more considered approach in her final report.
But one thing which has become manifestly clear to me during this process is that we need an overhaul of the discharge procedure to avoid this kind of confrontation again.
This discharge procedure should be an opportunity to study systems failures within the Commission.
In an ideal world, it should be based on the Court of Auditors' Report, but that does mean that both the Budgetary Control Committee and the Court of Auditors must develop a much closer relationship.
There is a massive amount of expertise in the Court of Auditors, expertise that Parliament should draw on in order to reach its own political conclusions.
The discharge procedure should not be a time to score political points nor to hound individuals but, where systems fail and lead to inefficiency or - worse - to fraud, it is the duty of Parliament to correct them.
We must also make sure that we find a mechanism within this system to make sure that we take account not only of the reports that are submitted by members of the Budgetary Control Committee, but also those by members of other parliamentary committees.
In postponing the discharge, we have set out clear points that we expect the Commission to act upon.
Never again will we accept the situation where we cannot get to the bottom of a case, because documents have gone missing.
Clear lines of responsibility must be established so that if problems occur, disciplinary action will follow.
Never again will we accept a situation where misconduct or a bad administrator will be judged by his or her peers.
We expect an external element to be included, as advised by the Committee of Independent Experts.
These are just two examples of how the Commission can improve its act in the short term without waiting to implement all the recommendations of the White Paper.
There is a question to answer as to whether the current Commission should or can take responsibility for the mistakes and problems of the past Commission.
Let us not forget that here we are considering the discharge for 1998.
If we took this to its logical conclusion, it would mean that Parliament could only judge a sitting Commission during three years of its tenure.
That is why it is clear that we must address systems failures rather than attack individuals or individual Commissioners who may no longer be involved.
We do not want witch-hunts.
We want answers as to how best we spend European taxpayers' money.
I would like to turn very briefly to the other reports that we have considered in committee, and first of all to the Kuhne report on the European Parliament.
Mr Kuhne has done an excellent job as rapporteur for the Parliament discharge.
There is no doubt that there have been vast improvements in Parliament's performance.
Our financial control system does not have the quantity of payments that the Commission has and therefore things are more manageable.
We have had everlasting problems, of course, with the buildings, often through no fault of our own but because decisions have been imposed on us by the Council.
If the Council had any concern about budget control, we certainly would not be sitting in this building right now.
There has been a great deal of talk about a report on political group expenditure.
The fact is that our committee has not seen this report.
It has still not been published officially, and therefore it is difficult for us to comment on it.
But transparency is a principle that we must hold dear in this context.
I am delighted that Mrs Rühle has done such a great job on the EDF report.
Mr Mulder has done a great job as well, displaying his usual wizardry with the EAGGF accounts.
We support Mr Casaca in his approach, although we did not expect the Commission to support us on that of course.
We certainly do not expect the Council to support our position on the Casaca Report.
We are voting for postponement on many accounts.
The important reports, of course, will come next.
We hope that we will be able to develop a better approach in the next part of this discharge procedure.
It is important that we find a new way of doing it.
Thank you, Mr President, for all your kind support over the years for the Budgetary Control Committee.
It is always greatly appreciated.
Mr President, I would like to echo what some speakers have already expressed before me: after last year' s events, this Commission will need to have all its wits about it if it intends to ignore what this Parliament has to say in resolutions.
All I can say at the beginning of this first debate is that the Commission would do well to go through the resolutions with a fine tooth comb, because this time Parliament is serious.
As far as the Stauner report is concerned, the liberal group is able to support the compromise resolution.
We are in favour of the Commission publishing an extensive report before 15 May which covers all the points we have raised.
In common with Mrs Theato, we hope that everything will be signed, sealed and delivered before the summer.
I should add that we, as a group, have less appreciation for the explanatory note which the rapporteur has added to her own resolution.
This was already mentioned last night.
In our opinion, an explanation should reflect the resolution itself and should not include any new elements.
I would like to make a brief comment on the report by Mr Kuhne.
We too have a great deal of appreciation and admiration for the way in which Mr Kuhne has drafted his report.
If we are to criticise the Commission, we should perhaps make sure that we have put our own house in order first.
It is difficult to scrutinise somebody else if we as Parliament do not ensure that we are completely beyond reproach ourselves.
I also think that Parliament' s administration would do well to stick to the many dates and deadlines included in the Kuhne report.
I would now like to come back to the Stauner report and a number of points made in it.
The Court of Auditors will shortly be publishing a report on the so-called Fléchard affair.
There have been many speculations in the press, in Parliament, and so forth.
We must not get ahead of ourselves.
A few things are already clear, however, irrespective of the fraud affair itself.
Firstly, how is it possible for documents intentionally to go missing from the four Directorates-General or directors dealing with these?
The documents disappeared everywhere simultaneously.
The big question to the Commission is: what has it since done on this score?
Secondly, we would like proportionality explained.
Should large businesses pay larger fines than small businesses?
Thirdly, where does the Commissioners' responsibility lie?
To what extent can officials decide some things for themselves?
This is an extremely political issue.
The following general rule will need to apply to this Commission: the error rate is too high.
It is not enough to say that it should come down.
We need a plan of action: by such and such a year, the Commission should bring the error rate down to such and such a level.
Then Parliament would know where it stood.
The Commission would then have a goal to work towards and we could market ourselves better to the general public.
This is what it is all about at the end of the day.
Europe' s ideal needs to be preserved.
Mr President, Commissioners, I too should again like to confirm that postponement must not be construed as a refusal of discharge.
On the contrary, we had no party political axes to grind in our committee and we obtained a broadly-carried compromise across all groups with just one vote against.
We can see that the new Commission is making an effort, but the 1998 discharge is at issue here and we must take it very seriously.
We must restore the public' s lost confidence in the European institutions.
We must re-establish confidence and that means that, as a committee, we must make a critical examination of the 1998 budget.
We want neither to play down nor sensationalise the problem.
On the contrary, we need to exert constructive pressure and we see the decision as a chance, not a punishment.
Our yardstick was how responsibility and transparency were dealt with and requires an open approach to shortcomings and an open approach to mistakes.
We hope that the action plan will help the administration to achieve better management.
We also take the view that the same yardstick must then be applied to Parliament and in this we completely disagree with Mr Kuhne, although we welcome his critical report.
Criticism is just one side of the equation; consistency is the other and we hope that a majority in Parliament will vote to postpone the decision, subject to the clear condition that the administration of Parliament must also table an action plan to improve management.
The questions of the award of contracts, buildings and staff are at issue.
We know all about the pressure of time up to the point of discharge.
The report by the financial controller, for example, was submitted relatively late.
Obviously it was not possible to submit this action plan in time for today' s decision.
However, we call on Parliament for precisely this reason to vote for a postponement here, so that an action plan can be drawn up jointly by 15 May.
This too we see as an important chance for Parliament to restore confidence and make it clear that it takes its own administration and the shortcomings in its own administration seriously.
I must also highlight something else, since Mr Kuhne appeared to be hinting that a hush-up would be in the groups' interest.
I can only say, as the new treasurer of the Greens, that I went to the administration and to the Court of Auditors back in November or December and pointed out that I had discovered a number of errors in the management of the finances on entering office, that there was mismanagement and that I would fight to get this mismanagement dealt with over the next three months.
I also pointed out that I was in favour of maximum transparency and openness in this area and that we urgently needed to address the financing of European parties in order to be able to refute the accusation of indirect party financing which was rightly being levelled at Parliament.
We need clear-cut criteria and clear-cut guidelines.
We must do away with grey areas at European level because, as we all know, grey areas can and will always be abused, which is why we want transparency and openness.
Transparency and openness mean - and this is my clear call - that we must apply the same yardstick to all the institutions.
We should vote for a postponement whenever we are of the opinion that an action plan can be drawn up within a month which will show the public that we take our errors seriously and are trying to correct them and I would stress once again that it has nothing to do with dismantling institutions; on the contrary, we want to strengthen them and we want to restore trust in the eyes of the public in Europe.
Mr President, it says "BUDG 1998 discharge" on the notice board, but it should say CONT.
Perhaps this could be corrected because Budgets and Budgetary Control are always getting confused.
It is the question of control which is at issue here.
It would be difficult to confuse them, Mrs Theato, but, in any event, we will try to correct it on the screen.
They tell me that it has to be written with a limited number of digits.
We will try to find a formula which will make it clear that we are talking about the COCOBU.
Perhaps CCB would be useful since this is the formula used in other bodies.
Mr President, the European Union lacks moral authority.
That is particularly problematic in matters of finances.
Parliament could achieve it, and it does wish to, which is clear from the reports now under discussion, but it lacks credibility in this area.
To maintain its own self-respect Parliament must accept the rules and regulations for the Members forthwith.
Parliament must investigate the misappropriation of funds by its political groups.
Our group will not agree that the practice of party aid should be introduced at the taxpayer' s expense to cover up such malpractice.
Parliament must investigate why it was so lax in its vigilance when it came to millions of euros' worth of Parliament property disappearing.
I do not really understand why it should discharge itself just now, when the report by the Court of Auditors of the European Communities on monetary and economic issues for 1998 is being prepared and is about to be published.
I would remind you how difficult it was in Parliament to raise the issue of malpractice on the basis of the accounts of the Commission for 1996.
I would remind you how the Social Democrats in particular defended Mr Santer' s Commission, and how we were obliged to compile a list of Members' names when passing a motion of censure.
Those parliamentary members that compiled the list were obviously right.
The 1998 accounts and data give weight to earlier conclusions: Mr Santer' s Commission appears to have approved a framework of budgetary discipline in which it was possible for malpractice to exist.
The members of the Commission in many cases are not themselves guilty of furthering their own interests, but the officials continue to act as before, and this Commission must take them to task.
To support them will be the fifty or so trade union officials employed by the EU, defending people who are guilty of malpractice.
They are the home guard for the officials that have behaved dishonourably.
Most of the officials in the EU are diligent and decent people.
In this case there is a need for increased vigilance, and that is something Mr Santer' s Commission was unable to achieve.
It would appear that Romano Prodi' s Commission has not got off to a very good start in this respect either, and the President of the Commission, in particular, has delivered opinions that show that the notions of public accessibility and transparency are not being honoured in this Commission.
However, postponing the discharge is justified and is the correct course of action in this situation.
We want to give the Commission the opportunity to improve the way it does things and show that it is able to do the job it inherited from the previous Commission.
Postponement of the granting of discharge is in itself the result of a quite incredible situation.
Even though it is not a question of discharge being refused at the present time, the postponement is a consequence of the Committee on Budgetary Control' s not having been able to obtain adequate information on time, of documents' having disappeared and of the fact that there is so much that can be criticised in the financial and administrative spheres that the impression is one of dealing with a South American banana republic rather than with a supranational European organisation.
These extraordinary results from a seedy administrative culture go back to 1998 and are not this Commission' s direct responsibility, but it is the present Commission' s responsibility to show that the misconduct, fraud and betrayal of mandates which have taken place really do belong to the past.
We have still not obtained proofs of this in all areas.
We have heard excuses, often in a dismissive tone, from the Commission, as if it were the Commission which was to be giving us discharge, rather than the other way round.
We have seen an express reluctance to hold those officials to account who are responsible for the circumstances open to criticism.
It is not that there are no rules.
Rather, it is a case of rules having been quite deliberately set aside in many areas.
As Mr Kuhne rightly pointed out, it is important that we should also direct criticism against Parliament' s own economic administration.
I would especially point out the quite unacceptable buildings administration and the way in which the rules for using the competitive tendering procedures were circumvented.
The impression cannot be avoided of systematic nepotism of precisely the kind which the competitive tendering procedure should prevent.
We shall therefore vote against the discharge for Parliament' s 1998 accounts.
If there are no dramatic improvements in the financial administration, European taxpayers will know how to react against this irresponsible misuse of their money.
The Commission must understand that they are not Europe' s overlords but the servants of European citizens.
I should like to emphasise that there is broad agreement within the Committee on Budgetary Control about postponing the discharge for the most important accounts, and I would thank the rapporteurs for the splendid and painstaking work they have carried out.
I would also especially draw attention to Mrs Stauner' s and Mrs Rühle' s very efficient work, just as I should like to thank Mrs Theato for her very conscientious and effective leadership of the Committee on Budgetary Control.
Mrs Theato should know that we value her desire to call a spade a spade.
Mr President, before I comment on Mrs Stauner' s report, I would like to endorse what has been said before, namely that the European Parliament is quite right to rap the European Commission over the knuckles and to at least postpone the discharge on the 1998 budget.
It is quite ironic that this should happen at a time when a draft report by the European Court of Auditors is being circulated which shows that our Parliament has not exactly spent the taxpayers' hard-earned money wisely either.
In the light of this, it might be expedient to establish in all honesty at this stage that the reproaches which we are quite rightly hurling at the European Commission today might well be heading in our own direction tomorrow, again quite rightly.
Indeed, if we are to believe the draft report, the groups deal with the many millions which are made available to them for God knows what reason in a very careless, even fraudulent manner, and the administrative department of this Parliament gets off anything but scot-free, to put it mildly.
This is just to add to the issues which have been dragging on for many years, such as the nonchalant way in which we deal with the expenses we are paid as MEPs, in principle with a view to recruiting personnel, or the way in which we handle the building policy of this Parliament, which is so strange as easily to prompt thoughts of large-scale fraud.
In short, today we are quite rightly acting as the plaintiff, but we need to be very aware of the fact that, tomorrow, we will be in the dock ourselves.
The fact that this is a case of the pot calling the kettle black should not, however, be any reason for tolerating deceit, fraud and further theft of taxpayers' money and should not, especially, give certain people any excuse for tolerating these things.
Nor should it be any reason or excuse for allowing those who have lined their pockets and taken advantage all these years to go unpunished.
I only wanted to make the remark because I am quite convinced that fraud and mismanagement are inherent and are causally linked to systems where there is no obvious connection between revenue and expenditure, between the levying of taxes, on the one hand, and the policies being financed with these taxes on the other.
In my own country, for example, I know of projects which have been launched with so-called European money which would never have been accepted or requested by the people, if it they had known that their own tax money would be used for them.
European money is always spent with less thought than tax money which has not made a detour through Europe.
This is done under the motto: if we do not spend this European money, somebody else will.
This may sound harsh or even simplistic, but that is how it is.
I have not even mentioned the overlap which exists in a large number of these European credits.
National states provide development aid, so does Europe.
National states combat racism, so does Europe.
National states support the women' s movement, so does Europe.
National states support the trade unions and parties, so does Europe.
National states support all kinds of Third Way movements, so does Europe.
And so on and so forth.
Manna falls from heaven and nobody knows whether it is all spent wisely, or worse, we know for a fact that a great deal of that money is not spent wisely, but there are no complaints because, in the case of European money, a kind of pro-European goodwill is systematically bought from all kinds of pressure groups.
Returning to today' s topic, I would especially like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Stauner, on her report.
It is true that the explanatory note to the resolution reads much like a piece of crime fiction.
It contains scandals which are now out in the open about waste, nepotism, theft, the Fléchard affair, the ECHO affair and such like, not to mention the direct involvement of Commissioner Cresson.
There is no need to keep on about what is stated quite clearly in black and white in this report.
I would only like to add that I, as representative of hundreds of thousands of tax payers, am shocked to find that the present Commission too is manoeuvring in all kinds of directions and making all kinds of attempts to protect a number of people responsible for this mismanagement.
I think that we need to do some straight talking to the Commission and that we may have to penalise their persistent bad conduct with a new crisis of confidence after 15 May, if necessary by means of a motion of no confidence, because desperate situations call for desperate measures.
Mr President, the Committee on Budgetary Control is doing sterling work under Mrs Theato' s, Mrs Van der Laan' s, Mr Bösch' s and Mr Blak' s expert leadership.
I should also like to complement Mrs Stauner on a good report.
My group will not grant discharge in connection with an account which conceals more than it reveals and has been submitted by a Commission which despises openness, subsidiarity and democracy.
How is it different from the Commission which was overturned?
Are our rapporteurs now getting complete information and full answers in response to their questions?
No.
Have administrative procedures been instigated against those who had their hands in the till or covered up for those who had their hands in the till?
No.
Has Mr Paul van Buitenen been rewarded for his courageous efforts to turn the Commission into a responsible organisation?
No.
He has moved to Luxembourg and has had to agree to keep quiet.
Moreover, any future van Buitens know that they will be fired if they behave as any person of integrity would expect of officials of the Commission.
Mr Prodi' s Commission is not responsible for the sins of the past, but all 20 Commissioners are now responsible for the fact that procedures have not been cleaned up and put in order and a fresh start made.
It is you 20 who are responsible for the fact that the Commission' s draft regulation on transparency will cause documents which are at present readily available to be locked away.
It is you 20 who are responsible for the fact that we, as Members of Parliament, are still not receiving the information we request.
You operate on the principles of absolute monarchy.
Come out into the open and acknowledge that it is no longer possible to govern with old-fashioned secrecy.
Admit that you will be replaced if you continue to sweep the dirt under the carpet.
You will soon have been in office for a year, so we have to observe that you too will be accountable if you fail to meet your responsibilities.
And we must apply the same critical standard against ourselves.
We ought not to approve Parliament' s accounts for as long as we have assistants who do not pay tax and yet obtain social security and for as long as travel expenses not connected to actual costs are refunded.
Mr President, a few years ago discharges in this House used to be perfunctory debates, certainly not held on Tuesday mornings.
But we now have a wider remit to discuss this subject. and over the last few years it has been realised that discharge is a very important part of the life of the European Union.
Under Article 276(2), the EC Treaty requires the Commission to submit to Parliament any necessary information on the execution of expenditure and operation of the financial control systems.
Article 276(3) of the Treaty requires the Commission to take all appropriate steps to act on Parliament' s observations concerning execution of expenditure.
It should not be any surprise to outside observers, or those in the system, that as Parliament has become more authoritative in ensuring the democratic accountability of the institutions, it will not be simply fobbed off with a lack of reply to questions which have been asked, however far they go back into the past.
I congratulate all the rapporteurs on the discharges before the House this morning.
I have a few comments on Mr Kuhne' s and Mrs Stauner' s reports.
Firstly, on the question of the Parliament discharge.
There has been significant progress on a number of issues outstanding but it is clear from Mr Kuhne' s report today that there are still a number of issues to be clarified: the question of the calls for tender; the issue of the financing plan for buildings; the question of the security service for this House here, and not least the question which is raised under paragraph 15 of the Kuhne report, concerning personnel policy.
Here it states and I quote: "deplores most strongly the residual impression left by these cases, whereby it would appear that favouritism plays a significant role in the granting of appointments to high-grade posts within the administration of Parliament" .
If we take the context of this report we will see that it has to stand on its own merits.
If we add to that the Court of Auditors' report on the operation of the political groups, we have come to the conclusion in our political group that we need to postpone discharge on its own merits.
It is not a question of the popping of champagne corks between Brussels and Strasbourg, that is an irrelevance if I might put it politely.
It is not a question of parallelism, it is a question of substance.
As for the admissibility of the amendment, I draw to the attention of the services of Parliament and to your attention, Mr President, the fact that Annex V of our Rules of Procedure does not apply to the Parliament discharge but applies to the Commission discharge and therefore our amendments should be considered to be admissible.
Secondly, I turn to Mrs Stauner' s excellent report and the explanatory statement.
It is a pity Mrs Morgan is not still here in the Chamber, because I understood her to say that you cannot just leave a discharge to systems alone; it is the question of access to information, so that we as a Parliament can grant discharge.
You can ask for access to information, but if you do not get it then you have to start applying a certain rigidity and postpone discharge.
The explanatory statement very clearly sets out the reasons for so doing.
I come to two points here.
The first is access to information.
We do not have at this time a framework agreement between Commission and Parliament - that is still outstanding in the context of Annex III.
Why?
Because Parliament and the Commission cannot agree about what access we have to information.
The impression is left that we are foot-dragging, but in fact we are not getting complete answers to the questions put by Mr Bösch and Mr Blak.
Parliament is not getting the answers it requires.
Secondly, the question of the disciplinary procedure.
It is an arbitrary procedure.
It seems that high officials get off and ex-parliamentarians, who are in the Commission services get downgraded for no apparent reason and against the information available.
I am thinking of the case of Mr Zavvos in particular.
Therefore we, as a Parliament, should look at each of these cases as it stands.
My group will be in favour of postponing discharges both for the Commission and for Parliament until all the information is available to us.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this debate is probably one of the most important matters which this Commission has to negotiate with Parliament at the present time and not just for the reasons which have already been addressed.
The fact has been overlooked today that, if memory serves me well, this is the first time the finance ministers of this Union have not unanimously recommended that the Commission be granted discharge.
So things are not improving, Commissioner Schreyer; they are obviously going in the opposite direction, which is why we must follow the recommendations proposed by Mrs Stauner in the Committee on Budgetary Control as closely as possible.
As far as the information policy is concerned, I am in full agreement with Mr Elles.
We are not holding you responsible for past errors, but I believe that, pragmatically speaking, we are entitled to expect two things of you.
Firstly, you must ensure that monies paid in error or, as in the Fléchard case, sums waived in error are recovered.
In other words, you must repair the damage to the taxpayer, insofar as it can still be repaired.
Secondly, you must ensure that the people responsible for mismanagement and erroneous developments are punished consistently, if necessary by making them compensate for part of the damage caused out of their own pocket.
That would represent two innovations at the Commission because, as far as I am aware, officials implicated have never yet had to pay money back into the EU budget.
The provisions of the financial regulation on this point do not need to be revised.
We need no reforms for the purpose, we merely need to apply these provisions, otherwise they will remain dead letter.
Having said this, you will understand, I think, that we have serious doubts about some of the proposals which you have put before the European public in the much-publicised Commission reform.
I need only refer to your plan to do away with independent - I repeat - independent financial control or your plan to delete provisions on the financial liability of authorising officers from the financial regulation.
It is obvious that some people have been living in glass houses in Brussels for a very long time.
If any of us goes to our constituency and tells our voters, now that one Commission has had to resign because of fraud and misconduct, that independent financial control and the liability of officials are to be deleted from the relevant provisions, then, by God, we shall have done Europe a bad turn.
Mrs Schreyer, Members of the Commission, use the postponement of discharge for the 1998 budget as an opportunity to show that the new team is strong on management and able to act.
Mr President, the key task of this European Parliament is, and remains, that of restoring European citizens' confidence in the European project.
Our most powerful weapon in this regard is the discharge.
This is why the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party is in favour of postponing discharge, as suggested, until such time as the Commission has fulfilled our specific condition.
In this way, we can keep the pressure on and bring about real reform.
Unfortunately, the Council failed once again this year to follow the good example of Parliament, and discharge for 1998 has been granted as if the matter were quite insignificant.
This is particularly regrettable because the national governments are responsible for 80% of European spending and are, as such, responsible for a proportionate share of the irregularities.
It is now high time that the Council followed our example and searched its own heart.
There is no doubt that our discharge resolutions are effective.
This is borne out by the far-reaching reforms which the Commission has now undertaken.
I would like to illustrate this with a recent example.
Our pressure has prompted the European Commission to undertake drastic reform in foreign policy.
I am keen, therefore, to share with you my initial reaction.
The plans for changing the project cycle and transforming the SCR into a European bureau are a positive step forward.
But the real political prioritising we need for the purpose of employing our very limited resources is still lacking.
The attention paid to the discharge granted to the European Commission is overwhelming, but I am of the opinion that the discharge granted to the European Parliament deserves just as much, if not more, attention.
Within the European Commission, a drastic reform programme has been launched at our insistence.
Unfortunately, it has proved impossible so far to take the same drastic steps in this House.
The Kuhne report is Parliament' s first report which takes discharge seriously.
Not only did Mr Kuhne manage to identify the sensitive areas where all the key points were concerned, he also managed to set fixed deadlines.
This is what Parliament will be judged on and he deserves our true appreciation for this work.
Some claim that the European Parliament should be judged by the same stringent measures as the European Commission.
I do not share this view.
In my opinion, we should raise the standard for ourselves.
We are the controlling body.
We have the direct link with the citizen.
We are primarily responsible for restoring their confidence in the European project.
This is why it is not enough to measure up against the non-elected officials within the Commission.
We should outstrip them by far.
Unfortunately, nothing is further from the truth.
I would like to emphatically lay the blame for Parliament' s bad image with those who have always had a majority.
The two large parties are responsible for the ethos of nepotism and underhand dealing which permeates this House.
But the small parties too which have mismanaged the party funding have once again put our name in a bad light.
The Kuhne report will be an important weapon which can be used by those in favour of reform in this House.
But whether it will be adopted at this stage remains to be seen.
There is in fact a risk that, if we grant discharge to ourselves whilst not having done so for the Commission, we will then take the edge of this report and this is exactly what we do not want to do.
We must think very hard about this so that we can actually restore the citizen' s confidence.
Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, do not try to argue that what is wrong is right.
That is the attitude we must adopt in this difficult exercise constituted by the annual discharge.
Mrs Theato was right in stating that granting discharge is a serious matter.
To grant discharge is, when all is said and done, to grant a certificate of good management.
I would like to thank all rapporteurs, but also the Committee on Budgetary Control, for all their hard work.
The Stauner report, including the explanatory note - which I fully support, by the way - is very critical of the European Commission.
The four largest groups have reached a compromise in which it is recommended that discharge be delayed and that the European Commission be given a list of 17 specific questions.
I am in favour of this approach and as such, would like to ask you to adopt Mrs Stauner' s report without any further ado.
Secondly, I would like to comment on the Kuhne report.
I am not trying to argue that what is wrong is right.
I wish to make it absolutely clear here that the Kuhne report does not follow this theme.
Mr Kuhne has completed an excellent piece of work.
His report incisively denounces what is going wrong in our institutions.
Mrs Morgan told us a moment ago that we do not want witch-hunts.
But Mrs Morgan, this is not happening.
What we denounce is stated quite clearly in the courageous report of our financial controller, Mr O'Hannrachain.
The complaints are staggering and include a faulty inventory and many thefts.
I was a victim of this myself in a previous life when my computer and printer were stolen.
Secondly, there are far too many restricted and private allocations.
These should be the exception, but we have noticed that in 1998, 50% of the cases were awarded privately.
This is no longer the exception.
Thirdly, I would like to mention buildings policy, a policy in which decisions are taken step-by-step, rather like slicing a salami, and which is made up of faits accomplis.
Ladies and gentlemen, we need a long-term building policy, to ensure that policy is not only carried out correctly, but that unnecessary expenditure is also avoided, a case in point being the underground tunnel being built here in Strasbourg which links the printing department in the IPE-I building to the distribution department in our building.
The price tag is FFR 27.4 million.
This is ludicrous!
Mr Kuhne has hit out in the press and also here today at the stance taken by my Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance.
He is blaming us for playing a party-political game.
Well, Mr Kuhne, I can assure you that this is not the case.
What we are doing is being consistent in our approach, however.
Surely, asking for our offices to be treated in the same way as the Commission is not a political game.
Hence our amendment which recommends postponement of discharge for Parliament' s budget and which has given the Secretary-General a list of queries which we expect to be answered by 15 May.
I am delighted to state that Mr Deprez has adopted the same stance a moment ago.
I am delighted to state that Mr Elles has tabled a similar amendment on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats.
I therefore hope to receive more support for our amendment which was completely voted down in the Committee on Budgetary Control.
I am now counting on a majority in the plenary meeting.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Stauner' s report, which we are discussing today, is important in more than one respect.
Indeed, it is of direct concern to the citizens of our respective countries, since it discusses European Union finances, and the citizens of Europe are entitled to ask for explanations regarding the use made of their money.
This report is also important because it deals with serious inefficiencies in the European Commission' s implementation of the budget, inefficiencies involving considerable amounts of money.
Our Group is in favour of any action which may be taken to combat fraud, by definition, and therefore shares the rapporteur' s opinion regarding the overwhelming need to make the management of the European Commission more efficient and effective.
We are extremely concerned at both the irregularities committed within the scope of the MED and ECHO programmes and at some of the details of the Fléchard case.
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group is convinced that such practices can only seriously impair the credibility and, hence, the image of the European Union as a whole.
We should also remember, ladies and gentlemen, that we have been forced to note shortcomings in the procedure for dialogue with the Commission, which seems not to have been able, or not to have wished, to respond to the expectations and questions of the members of the parliamentary supervisory body.
In view of the many contentious issues still pending, whether they involve irregularities or budget funds, our Group considers that, at the moment, it is essential to refuse discharge for the year 1998.
All we can do is urge the European Commission to pass on, within the necessary time limits, all the information requested by the Committee on Budgetary Control regarding the measures adopted, in order to overcome the obstacles to the granting of discharge.
For us to grant discharge without asking the European Commission for further details would, of course, be evidence of weakness on the part of the European Parliament.
This House would lose face and would discredit itself in the eyes of public opinion in our countries, and that is something we do not want.
Regarding the European Commission' s proposal, there could be no question of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group' s accepting sharing responsibility for the decision on discharge.
The Treaties clearly establish the exclusive competence of Parliament in matters of budgetary control.
Mr President, the 1998 discharge procedure illustrates once again that the European Union' s bad image is not totally unfounded but is actually based on facts.
In its 1998 annual report, the Court of Auditors mentioned an unacceptably high error rate and felt compelled, would you believe, to issue a negative Statement of Assurance.
As long as the Commission does not commit itself to drastically reducing that error rate from the beginning of next year, we cannot grant discharge to the Commission.
The Stauner report deserves every support on this score.
We in Parliament set high standards for the Commission, but do we set them for ourselves too?
We are right in insisting that the Commission base its budget on accurate estimates, but how accurate are the estimates for our own budget?
Year in year out, many EP budget lines show up enormous surpluses which are subsequently used to purchase buildings by means of a collective transfer.
I cannot help thinking that many administrative expenses are intentionally estimated on the generous side in order to have the extra funding for buildings in reserve.
These shady tricks must stop at once.
We also need to search our own hearts regarding public tenders.
It is unacceptable that the number of privately awarded contracts in 1998 increased to half of all contracts.
Why such a steep rise?
The Secretary-General has mentioned a few procedural reasons, but is this the full story?
A clarification regarding this drastic rise is urgently required.
Rapporteur Kuhne also puts his finger on the problems regarding the financing of the Spinelli building.
This is the umpteenth affair involving new buildings.
Is it not about time we commissioned an independent inquiry into the decision-making process for building projects?
We can no longer afford to cover the above issues with the cloak of charity.
We need to exert parliamentary pressure to bring about the necessary reforms.
We will therefore support the amendments to postpone discharge until such time as the Secretary-General has produced concrete plans.
Mr President, I welcome the two Commissioners who are most involved in the development of the budget, and I have no doubt that President Prodi will be present at the debate that will take place in two months time.
Beginning with the most important discharge, the discharge of the Commission' s accounts - in political terms, the most relevant and, in terms of quantity, the most significant - we are aware that your responsibility in terms of expenses is limited and that a majority of the responsibility in the field of expenses lies with the Member States.
It is important that you try to become, firstly, an example for the Member States to follow and that, therefore, you understand that we demand more of you, if possible; and one day we will have to start to talk very seriously about these cases which are always detected in the Council rather than in the Commission.
Furthermore I would like you to look at Mrs Stauner' s report from the most positive point of view possible.
All the groups have reached an agreement to raise 17 questions in relation to certain cases.
They are not the only ones.
We could have mentioned other problems arising from the TACIS or PHARE programmes.
After the crisis of the previous Commission, which you have begun to deal with, what we want - because we believe in your intentions and we want a strong and independent Commission and we are therefore giving you time - is for you to give us a positive response to certain very specific cases.
I can assure you that you will be able to reply in the affirmative to each of the cases which we are putting to you.
Therefore, between now and the summer, we could hold a sitting for the purposes of discharging the accounts.
Not only are we as interested as you in the discharge of the accounts, but in fact we are more so.
I would therefore like you to study the report which has been presented by Mrs Stauner with the broad consensus of the Groups.
This is a political debate, and you must understand that we need you to act.
Documents must not disappear.
You must do something, irrespective of the fact that I want us to reach an agreement soon on the way we will have to deal with the documents you call confidential.
As rapporteur for the 1999 Commission budget, I would love to be able to do my work in the clear knowledge of which documents we have access to and which we do not and why.
I will give you an additional piece of information.
This debate must not concentrate excessively on the accounting issues.
As you can see in this budget, this is a political debate which goes beyond a strict examination of what you have done with regard to the 1998 budget.
It is a general debate.
We will also have to reach a framework agreement on how we can include in this debate - which is becoming increasingly important - not only accounting issues but also issues from other years relating to expenditure or management.
You know that an unknown amount of money is lost through fraud or misappropriation.
You are facing a great challenge, because even more resources are lost through a lack of motivation, that virus which has infected the entire administration of the Commission and which you must eradicate.
More resources are lost through lack of motivation than through misappropriation.
This is a quality issue which will also have to be increasingly discussed in the context of this debate.
I will refer finally to the European Parliament' s budget, and I would like to reply to those people who say that, since we are supposedly tough and demanding with you, we must also be so with regard to our own institution.
Of course we must.
However we must not compare separate issues.
For example, the auditor has not detected any irregularity in Parliament' s budget.
We must therefore be prudent and fair and try to treat everyone as they deserve.
The same must be demanded of Parliament as of all the others, but this is our House, we have more information and we can therefore take a different approach when it comes to proposing, as the Kuhne report does, a conditional discharge and not a postponement of the discharge.
I will end by saying that you can reply to the 17 questions we have raised.
We want you to do so, and we understand that in that way we can support you so that you, who have just joined this Commission, can really control your house.
'Take the bull by the horns' - as we say in Spain - and we will be able to achieve a discharge for this year on the part of the majority of the Groups in this House before the summer.
Mr President, the new Commission is not responsible for matters from the past, but it is to be judged on the basis of its willingness to straighten out its affairs.
So far, it has not shown much desire to do so.
The Commission has put the lid on the issue, and it has been impossible to obtain the necessary information.
The Commission maintains that the matters in question do not fall under the 1998 discharge.
That is not the case.
All these matters surfaced in 1998 and they should therefore, of course, also be dealt with under the 1998 discharge.
The Commission has, on the whole, employed many dodges to avoid responding to our questions, and that is completely unacceptable.
The Treaty is clear: in accordance with Article 276, Parliament is entitled to obtain all necessary information in connection with the discharge procedure.
I should like to give an example.
In accordance with general practice, I, as the rapporteur responsible for the subject of development aid, sent the Commission a questionnaire concerning ECHO.
It was sent to the Commission in November.
Only in March did I receive an answer in which, moreover, I was told to take a running jump.
In the meantime, Mrs Fontaine received a letter from Mr Prodi, stating that the Commission was tired of answering all the stupid questions from the Committee on Budgetary Control.
Excuse me but, either the man has been out in the sun too long or he must have some incredibly bad advisers.
The Commission is obliged to answer our questions, irrespective of whether or not it likes the content of these.
Until they understand this, I think we should postpone granting discharge.
I hope the Commission will take our demands seriously.
If they do not, we shall be ready to send them on a very long holiday in May.
I should like to explain what the ECHO case is about.
First and foremost, I should like to emphasise that this is not a smear campaign directed against individuals, but a question of putting matters in order.
What signal is being sent out to present and future leaders of the Commission when the people responsible escape indictment?
The ECHO scandal has still not led to any repercussions.
The case is at present before the Court of Justice in Luxembourg which admits that nothing will probably come of the case and that it will no doubt refer it to the Belgian authorities in a couple of years' time.
The problem is that the ECHO case is not about property crime.
It is about gross negligence and about an official who has taken decisions without regard to the finance regulation.
The decision to exonerate the previous director was taken by the previous Commission, and this was a political decision pure and simple.
Now, the Commission has until 15 May to solve the problem.
If they do not come up with satisfactory solutions, I shall campaign for our obtaining a parliamentary committee of inquiry which can examine the matter in depth.
I also think it is a good idea to look a little more closely at the discharge for the development fund.
There are still unresolved demands but, if we postpone granting the discharge, this will be accompanied by clear demands upon the Commission.
The Commission' s delegations have failed.
There are several examples of cases where they could have prevented fraud if they had been just a little observant.
Unfortunately, there are too many delegations which are just there for the ride.
I have therefore asked permission to prepare an own-initiative report so that we can have these issues clarified.
The final thing I want to say is that the Commission should undertake to refer the fraud cases to OLAF.
I obtained 11 reports under Pentagon-like conditions, but OLAF still does not know anything about these.
I therefore think it is time that these matters were tidied up, and I am pleased that Mr Nielson has now shown that he wants to get this process under way.
I look forward to seeing the results.
Mr President, the issue of discharge is an immense one for the institutions of the EU.
Its importance is evident in the fact that in many cases it is now being proposed that the discharge should be postponed.
As far as the Commission is concerned, this is the fifth year in succession that the Court of Auditors has not delivered an unambiguously favourable verdict.
As the Member States, that is to say the Council, has advocated discharge, this is almost a matter of structural conflict.
Apparently, the Court of Auditors should specify the shortcomings and incidences of malpractice in more detail and place less trust in mathematics.
Although I say this, in no way does this diminish the Commission' s responsibility, which is a great one.
The reports concerning discharge show just how badly administrative reforms are needed.
Commissioner Kinnock' s package of reforms must be pushed through without delay.
The main focus is the reform of internal auditing in each of the institutions.
Administration and auditing must go hand in hand to preserve a sense of personal responsibility and help it grow.
The present system, in which it takes various signatures to authorise payments, does away with the notion of personal responsibility.
It is totally impossible to find anyone who will take responsibility.
Improving the quality of administration is a basic requirement for a greater sense of responsibility and better efficiency.
Increased control is only a reflection of the fact that the organisation has failed.
The main financial difficulties focus on the largest budgetary category, agriculture.
This is because agricultural aid is largely based either on land area or the number of livestock, and the Member State in question pays it.
This development is largely due to the WTO agreement, which determines the various forms of agricultural aid, their classification and the desired trend it should adopt.
The system has led to a tremendous amount of bureaucracy, an enormous increase in monitoring, and, in the long term, we can assume it will also lead to inefficiency and the entrepreneurial spirit of agriculture will vanish forever.
At the same time, the European farmers have become the most closely observed section of the population on the Continent, and, for that reason, I am hoping for a lucid clarification of the agricultural aid system at the forthcoming WTO talks.
Mr President, over the last few days we have read in the press that the European Parliament is a haven for thieves.
This is both embarrassing and distasteful.
We must act in such a way that EU property is treated with the same respect as other property.
In this connection, we must check up on the matter of parliamentary administration.
In the EU budget this year there is an appropriation of EUR 300 000 set aside for an investigation into parliamentary administration.
According to the budget, this investigation will be given to an independent expert.
What has happened to this investigation, why has it not got under way, and what is going to be done about it?
- (PT) Mr President, because of problems stemming from large-scale fraud in the production of wine and other types of fraud, we are more aware that EAGGF Guarantee Section appropriations are frequently used to promote the products of large-scale farming operations whose only real aim is to obtain subsidies, without even considering whether there is a market for these products.
This applies when small family-run farms, such as those dedicated to producing milk, find themselves outside the subsidy arrangements and find their very survival is threatened.
We therefore feel that the Commission' s proposal to amend Regulation No 723/97 and to change the legal basis of the Regulation on preventing fraud and other irregularities from Article 37 to Article 280 of the Treaty, as the rapporteur Mr Casaca proposes, is extremely timely.
This will ensure that agricultural expenditure is treated like any other expenditure involving EU resources, and this will strengthen Parliament' s power of intervention.
Mr President, Commissioner, I was responsible for the research section of the part of the report by my fellow member, Gabriele Stauner, relating to internal policy.
I was perfectly aware of its importance.
However, what we could not foresee was that, with the vote on the overall report, outbursts very similar to those at the time of the refusal of discharge for 1996 would occur once again.
To refer to the corresponding passages on research, I also make a statement on what have deliberately and disparagingly been referred to on occasions as old cases.
Old cases are not the same as obsolete cases; they are an outstanding burden which the Commission must finally remove from our shoulders.
The Court of Auditors highlighted a series of shortcomings in the research area in 1998.
It complained about the pre-dating of contracts and a high overall error rate in payment audits due to incorrect proof of or information on costs, an error rate for which the Commission is perhaps not 100% responsible, but is at least 90% responsible.
There is the old case of visiting scientist B and how his contract came into being.
They also include the internal audit report drafted in 1997 on the area of jurisdiction of the former Commissioner for Research, Mrs Cresson.
This report disappeared from the filing cabinet at the end of 1999/beginning of 2000.
At the same time, there was the so-called European nuclear affair.
Who then is going to be surprised that a link between the financial controller' s filing cabinet and the roaming plutonium was established at the end of 1999?
We might be satisfied with some of the explanations that the Commission offers for these incidents.
Having spoken on many occasions, I am pleased to say, with trustworthy Commission officials, I have the impression that they are ready and willing to make corrections.
As are we.
But mistakes have been made and the audit was organised as politely as when an auditor visits a company.
However, it was the Court of Auditors that carried out the audit, an institution that has no form of personal interest in the matter and it is no good playing down the mistakes.
If, nonetheless, the rapporteur takes the view today that these cases have not been solved properly, then I would like to side with her fully and unreservedly, as did the Committee on Budgetary Control with just one vote against.
I call on the Commission to immediately give us satisfactory answers, which stand up in public.
Then everyone will have a true picture.
Questions can hurt.
We asked them because mistrust and criticism have been spreading since the refusal of the 1996 discharge.
But what matter are the results which will be presented on 15 May.
Mr President, representatives of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, the discharge procedure is a complicated exercise.
We have to assess a budget two years after it has been implemented by the Commission, while taking into consideration the budget which is currently being framed, the improvements needed for the implementation of the budget and the practical realisation of the political goals of the European Union.
This already complex situation is further complicated by the peculiar situation we have found ourselves in for almost a year now, to wit, the discrediting of the European Union to a certain extent following the resignation of the Santer Commission last year; a new Commission, in which most of the Commissioners were not members of the Commission which was led to resign; a new Parliament, with many Members facing this discharge procedure for the first time; and reforms or proposed reforms directly concerning European Union finances.
I am thinking of the Structural Funds for the things already achieved, and the Financial Regulation for the things already achieved.
This is the context in which we received Mrs Stauner' s report, a report which, unfortunately, makes only a limited assessment of the Commission' s implementation of the budget for the financial year 1998 against the yardstick of the political goals which the European Union set itself.
If it is unthinkable and intolerable for public money to be used for irregularities and fraud, and if we must both dismantle the mechanisms enabling such abuses to take place and denounce the people involved, then we can also question the methods used to draw up this report.
This report was unacceptable in its initial form because it did not give us the material to form an opinion as to whether or not the budget for 1998 was correctly implemented by the Commission.
It has been possible to adopt a compromise, but the fact remains that we find the explanatory statement unsatisfactory, as it does not reflect the new direction of the report, and portrays relations between our institutions as frozen in an attitude of defiance, at a time when we and our fellow citizens are hoping that productive cooperation in the interests of improved cohesion between our States will develop.
The content and the arguments presented in other more specific reports provide no more justification for postponement of discharge.
Let me refer, by way of example, to Mr Khanbhai' s report, which revealed some problems in the ECSC accounts, including, among other things, the solvency ratio and the transfer of property, although the Commission and the High Authority are currently reducing these problems with a view to the expiry of the ECSC Treaty in 2002.
In this specific situation, it would seem that the current discharge procedure would be a perilous exercise.
Should this not require giving a more precise framework to the work of Members of Parliament within the Committee on Budgetary Control?
I shall conclude by mentioning the internal reform of the Commission.
Among other objectives, the Commission has set itself the task of improving financial control by various means: new structures, responsibilities of authorising officers, and financial controllers within each directorate-general.
We must be attentive to ensuring that this reform makes it possible to achieve the set objective and that it requires the various financial operators within the directorates-general to assume real responsibility.
It also seems essential that, in combination with the determination to reduce irregularity and fraud effectively, the reform should be able to look into the implementation of our policies within Member States, where one of the problems arising concerns payment deadlines and the inadequacy of some payment appropriations.
Mr President, this is a useful and very necessary procedure.
One problem that I have about it is that there is a natural tendency to concentrate much more on the 4% of the budget that might have been lost, or the 2% that probably was lost, than the 98% of the budget that was properly spent.
It is necessary to acknowledge that 98% was properly spent.
It is also important to try to correct the situation where things have gone wrong, but in so doing not to exaggerate it in such a way as to create in the European public's mind an image of a European Union that is out of control, that is a sea of corruption and cannot be trusted with taxpayers' money.
There is fraud at every level of government at which I have served - local, national and European and regional.
It is always there, but local and national bodies can stand up to criticism better perhaps than this younger institution of the European Union, which is less accepted.
While it is important to put things right and to give people confidence, nevertheless it does not help their confidence if we exaggerate the extent to which abuses occur and money is lost.
I thank Mrs Stauner for her report.
Some people have criticised it for being a bit too severe.
Mrs Stauner is new to the Budget Control Committee, but her statement is a real reflection of the mood and the debate that went on.
I do not agree with all of it, of course, but nevertheless it was agreed by a majority.
I would not entirely accept the explanatory statement.
It is Mrs Stauner's own explanation but it is the motion for resolution that we the Parliament have to decide on.
Another point that I would like to make is that in seeking to bring everybody into accountability, whether they be officials or Members of the Commission, we ought, like Mr Deprez said, to avoid this vendetta between institutions.
We ought avoid particularly vendettas between an institution and individual commissioners.
We should see this Commission as a college and while the individual commissioners must be held accountable, nevertheless we must take an objective view of what is going on and beware of either European party politics or international politics colouring our judgement.
The last point I will make is that we have not only an obligation to ensure that accounts are better kept and money is better accounted for.
We also have an obligation to ensure that when we make regulations they are regulations which can be put into effect.
Over the years, I witnessed the making of all the regulations that are creating the problems and my experience in this Parliament was that we wanted to pander to public sentiment.
We never sought to ensure that our regulations were enforceable.
Mr President, Parliament' s refusal last year to grant discharge on the 1996 budgetary year heralded the fall of the Santer Commission.
Parliament employed its powers in a sound manner under special circumstances.
A college of Commissioners, which has since been appointed, has presented an ambitious reform programme.
Last year' s opposition from the Commission to Parliament has now developed into good working relations.
Needless to say, Parliament needs to keep a critical eye on the Commission.
It is unseemly, however, to deploy the discharge procedure as a weapon in a party-politically motivated battle and, what is more, it undermines Parliament' s influence in the long run.
Mrs Stauner' s motion for a resolution, which was before us initially was, in this respect, unbalanced.
It over-simplified the issue and its sole aim appeared to be to malign the new Commission.
Her motion for a resolution contained damning accusations regarding the Commission which, as it happens, did not even relate to the 1998 budget year.
Meanwhile, the motion for a resolution has been amended drastically and the suggestion was made to postpone the discharge decision.
The Commission is being given the opportunity of responding to a number of urgent questions raised and requests made by Parliament before 15 May.
I would like to single out one point from among these questions and requests.
Over the past year, it has become clear that the Commission' s disciplinary procedure does not function properly.
In countless cases, no action was taken or if it was, it did not lead to any result.
The procedure needs to be completely overhauled.
The Commission has made suggestions to this effect in its White Paper.
However, these suggestions do not go far enough.
The Committee of Independent Experts has recommended the appointment of an independent outsider, preferably in the role of chairman of the Disciplinary Committee.
Parliament supported this proposal in January and does so once again by means of this motion for a resolution.
I would ask the Commission to reconsider its position.
The European Parliament' s financial situation has been the subject of extensive media coverage over the past few weeks.
Mr Kuhne has drawn up a report on this subject, on which I would like to warmly congratulate him.
He did not let himself be talked into adjusting his well-balanced approach in the face of sometimes heated publications.
The Kuhne report proposes granting Parliament discharge, provided a number of well-defined requirements are met.
For example, the offices of Parliament are expected, from now on, to offer, in the majority of cases, contracts for tender which are public in nature.
In addition, Parliament needs to indicate when the reform process which is being launched within the Commission will start taking effect in Parliament.
One of the key proposals is to separate the audit and financial control functions.
The Commission has already indicated that it will submit proposals to this effect before the summer.
I am of the opinion that such separation should also take place within Parliament.
An independent parliamentary audit office needs to be set up as soon as possible whose task is to ensure the effectiveness of public spending by Parliament.
Such an office should make annual - and if necessary, more frequent - recommendations regarding the working method of Parliament' s offices.
Only when Parliament has its own financial housekeeping in order will it gain credibility when it comes to assessing and sometimes condemning the Commission and Member States.
Mr President, as the Commission is well aware, I am not accustomed to being an easy-going, meek or lenient speaker when it comes to the Commission in its role as executive.
I am therefore all the more at home today in expressing the concerns I have due to the discharge procedure which is being carried out.
I do not wish to challenge the compromise which appears in the resolution negotiated between the political groups and the rapporteur.
This compromise has three distinct advantages over the rapporteur' s initial draft.
Firstly, it no longer uses the vehement and aggressive tone of the initial draft report, a tone which I do not find, as I might say in the style of Kenneth Starr, worthy of this House, being rather more suited to the tabloid press, and one which should not in any case be used to characterise relations between a responsible institution, such as our own, and a Commission in which we expressed our confidence but a few months ago.
In this respect, the report has been improved.
Secondly, this report ceases to indulge in the unjustified implication of officials who may have taken more or less appropriate decisions but who do not in any way deserve to be exposed to public condemnation and pilloried in a procedure which is not subject to judicial process.
Thirdly, this report asks the Commission questions which it can answer within reasonable time limits, enabling us to vote upon discharge within the time limits stipulated by the Treaty.
These are the three positive features.
There are, however, three forms of sidelong shift which give me pause.
The first is that we are forgetting what the discharge procedure consists of.
We must remember that discharge involves, and must only involve, accepting the financial statements for the year and ensuring that expenditure is in order, and does not involve digging out again and again the skeletons which have been hidden away for years in the cupboards of the various institutions.
It is paradoxical, and even unfair, that the report in question makes so little mention of the financial year 1998.
The second shift in emphasis involves the failure to make it clear that the explanatory statement is distinct from the report.
On the one hand, we have a dispassionate and objective report, undoubtedly insistent, but legitimately so, and on the other hand, we have an explanatory statement which, even though it represents only the opinion of the rapporteur, nonetheless is a godsend to the press.
How many journalists are aware that the resolution represents the opinion of the House but that the explanatory statement represents only the opinion of the rapporteur?
This gives us grounds for concern.
The third and final anomaly is the gap between Parliament' s handling of its own problems and Parliament' s handling of other people' s problems.
We cannot adopt a sliding scale for measuring correct behaviour, and we are taking a major political risk if we are more indulgent towards ourselves than towards others.
Mr President, thank you for letting me conclude.
I should just like to mention the maxim that the police always catch serial killers as soon as they step up the rate of their killing.
We brought the Commission down a year ago, and we had better not give in to our homicidal impulses again.
Mr Bourlanges, you have spoken rather longer than the time allocated to you, but you are such a committed fighter, there is no stopping you!
Mr President, I shall focus on only one point: access to information.
Many of my colleagues have raised this issue this morning.
We need better access in order to move forward.
In my committee, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, we are determined to take our responsibilities as MEPs very seriously indeed.
We have asked Members of Parliament to volunteer to follow budget lines.
These Members of Parliament are now approaching Commission services to talk to the officials responsible for those budget lines.
We are having problems and we are having problems in finding out who is the right person; the people we talk to are not clear what their responsibility is, what information they should be giving us.
Some services cooperate very well; some are setting up briefing meetings for Members of Parliament - but others are not.
What we need from the Commission is a new system.
We need a better reporting mechanism to parliamentary committees, to the spending committees, so that we know what information it is going to give us.
A start would be a list of who is responsible for what in which budget lines of each committee.
Only in this way can we do what we are supposed to do, and restore the public confidence that Mrs Schreyer spoke about this morning.
We need to know that money is being spent properly.
If we have that confidence we can pass that message on to the public in Europe.
My colleague, Mrs Morgan, spoke earlier about the need to overhaul the whole discharge procedure.
That is right.
For too long discharge was seen as something bureaucratic and rather unnecessary - something to get out of the way very quickly.
Now we have to move away from that, we have to overhaul it, and I hope proper reporting mechanisms to committees will be part of that overhaul.
Mr President, I am speaking here especially in the capacity of rapporteur of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.
First of all, I would like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur for her report.
I am delighted that we now have a broad-based compromise on the issue of discharge which enables the Commission to make progress and to solve a number of problems which have cropped up recently.
I would also like to comment on a few points which are included in the report of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.
Firstly, we share the Court of Auditors' criticism regarding the inadequate measurability of the effects upon employment of the structural fund measures.
I would ask the Commission to pay more attention to this aspect.
We have, slowly but surely, made tremendous progress in this field, but this does not seem to be evident from the way we are dealing with the funds.
Secondly, I would like to mention the issue of financing.
There have been problems recently regarding the payment credits of the Social Fund, in particular.
Unfortunately, these problems have not been solved.
This merits further attention too.
Finally, I would like to mention the problem surrounding the Leonardo programme.
You will be aware that the Leonardo programme has played an extremely important role in the events which have led to the previous Commission resigning from office.
Nevertheless, we wish to underline that this association needs to be brought to a definite close, and it is also important that sufficient consideration be given to the lessons we have learnt in the field of BAT.
These are the key points which I would like to highlight here.
The Committee on Budgetary Control has naturally been unable to adopt all these points in their entirety.
This would not have been appropriate either, but I would like to take this opportunity to add these specific points to the list which is, in fact, already before you.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we discussed Mrs Stauner' s report in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on the basis of an opinion by Mr Thielemans and reached a number of unanimous conclusions containing a different political evaluation of the 1998 discharge on which I have three comments to make:
First, we take the view that we must learn lessons from past cases and, of course, clear up every single case for which we have new, additional proof.
Nonetheless, we want to give the Commission instructions which look to the future, not instructions to deal with a past for which it is not even responsible.
Secondly, we passed punishable offences to the courts in a one-off show of strength during the last parliamentary term.
We ensured that OLAF had the structure and facilities needed to pursue any suspicions or irregularities.
We want, in the final analysis, to place our trust in the courts, OLAF and the disciplinary measures and decisions taken and to work together with President Prodi' s new Commission on a basis of trust and on the basis precisely of the relevant new rules and obligations introduced.
Thirdly, this includes, as Mr Bourlanges explained earlier, acknowledging and accepting results such as the disciplinary proceedings carried out in the ECHO case, even if Mr Blak wants to fight this tooth and nail, as he said earlier.
But every Member must, in the end, understand that, as Members of the European Parliament, we have to carry out our control duties as accurately as possible, but that we are neither detectives nor public prosecutors, let alone black angels of vengeance.
Demanding a new audit, without submitting any proof or evidence, is hardly going to enhance the credibility of our Parliament.
Mr President, I welcome all the reports on the discharge procedures, especially Mrs Stauner's report.
Before I make my initial comments, I just wish to welcome what Mrs McAvan said about access to information from the Commission.
I have found it remarkably difficult to get important documents and information from it on a number of occasions, especially for various budget lines relating to culture.
It would be very useful if the Commission were to release more information to us and give us the reports we ask for.
I welcome Mrs Stauner's report for a number of reasons.
One because, as we are dealing with 1998, we should be looking at the past and trying to find answers to the questions we have raised about Fléchard, ECHO and the MED problems.
These are all relevant nowadays because we must learn the lessons from them.
Any new proof that arises from these cases must be investigated.
These investigations must be very rigorous and must be reported back to us.
OLAF must use its teeth.
The three cases I have mentioned are also quite important because they reflect remarkably on four current Commissioners.
All four of them must look carefully at their past, come clean and show this new Commission where reform is needed.
I hope that Commissioner Kinnock listens to this debate and will reflect upon.
There are lessons to be learned and many questions to be answered and he is the man in charge of getting these questions answered for us now.
I also wish to make a couple of points on the Kuhne report on Parliament's own budget discharge.
We regularly cast stones at the Commission, but when it comes to looking at our own finances sometimes we are a bit slow on the uptake.
Although we have recommended discharge for our own budget this time, there are a number of points in the discharge report we should look at, especially the inventory services and the new system.
I welcome the fact that the Kuhne report has called for a report on the new inventory system for Parliament.
I hope the Commission takes the time to look at this debate seriously.
This Parliament is very serious in the way it discharges various budgets.
I agree with Mrs Morgan that maybe we need to reflect on how we discharge budgets in the future.
However, for now, the Commission has a number of questions to answer and I hope it will start right now.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is the second time I have spoken today and I should like to thank you for the highly constructive atmosphere in which this extremely detailed debate is being conducted.
Because of the time available, I cannot, of course, comment on every intervention; however, I shall try to summarise the various points.
The question of access to information in order to be able to carry out the discharge procedure with the required degree of seriousness and with the documents which you need for the discharge process was central to various interventions.
I should like to point out once again in this context that the Commission has passed all the confidential reports requested to the rapporteur, or rather to the Committee on Budgetary Control.
I must simply therefore ask, if we are being accused of withholding something, that you specify what has been withheld, because it is only on this basis that we can clear up misunderstandings or give you more information and this should not fail because of the Commission.
There is in fact a contentious issue, which also needs to be regulated for the procedure for the future, and that is the question of the minutes of disciplinary proceedings or administrative investigations.
This question has again been left out of the agreement on the grounds of valuable personal interests and I should like to point out that specific regulations also apply to Parliament in disciplinary proceedings.
I should also like to comment on Mr Blak' s question on the questionnaires.
There has been a specific procedure for questionnaires in the past.
The committee has now changed this, albeit informally.
This resulted in the Commission' s confusion as to whether or not the questionnaire drafted by Mr Blak, but not confirmed by the committee, was an official questionnaire.
The Commission then said that it would, of course, reply to the questionnaire, despite the fact that this point was not clarified.
That again shows that it really does make sense here to lay down clear procedural rules.
The Commission is really not interested in such misunderstandings or discussions; let us lay down clear procedures here so that our cooperation is complete and satisfies all concerned.
I should like to pick up on a point made by the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control because the question of why the list of old cases was not passed on was asked.
I can only say in this context that the procedure changed with the legal basis for OLAF.
The legal basis for OLAF clearly states that the director of OLAF is responsible for information on investigations or the results of investigations.
I think we need to discuss this at some point together with the Committee on Budgetary Control and the director of OLAF because the Commission no longer has jurisdiction here.
It has no more information than you do, on which investigations are at what stage.
We have to discuss this with the director of OLAF.
I shall, of course, pass on any requests but I cannot give you any information in lieu of the director of OLAF in this respect.
Another important point is the question of disciplinary procedure and I should like to comment on this.
The Commission explained to Mr Van Hulten in its White Paper that it would reform this disciplinary procedure as it now stands.
Nonetheless, our reform must remain within the bounds of the European Treaty.
But what we can do is become involved in disciplinary procedures externally in order to make it clear that this is not some sort of closed shop but a regulated procedure conducted objectively in order to examine accusations.
A multitude of points were made but I should like to comment on the question of the discharge procedure.
Mrs Morgan, I should like to thank you for your proposals concerning clarification of the discharge procedure, together with Mr Bourlanges, who referred to it in his point on the question of the interpretation of the current Treaty.
Mr Bösch, you made the comment that the Council did not unanimously recommend discharge for the Commission this year.
In fact, it was the Netherlands which failed to carry the decision on the grounds that the Commission should draw up a clear timetable.
Mr Mulder, you also returned to this point.
I think we should discuss this at some point - including in the Committee on Budgetary Control - because although the procedure in the Netherlands is of course different, there are valuable points which we could perhaps adopt for the procedure in relation to the European budget.
Now to the question of reform and financial control, which was also raised in several comments, criticisms and demands.
The Commission made it perfectly clear in its White Paper that one of the most important points was to reform financial control.
Even if one of the suggestions made in it was that previously centralised, ex-ante financial control would be changed, abolished and decentralised, Mr Bösch, it also includes a suggestion which is stressed time and again by the independent experts and the Court of Auditors.
It is not a question of reducing control but of making it more efficient.
I firmly believe that this can only be done by making every official who handles European money responsible for ensuring that money is disbursed efficiently and correctly.
No one must be able to hide behind centralised financial control.
The Commission has also decided to set up a separate, internal ex-post audit service and I think that this will again demonstrate that the Commission takes the subject of improved financial control extremely seriously.
It has been clearly stated that the objective must be to reduce the error rate and I can only agree with this.
But obviously I cannot reduce the error rates for the 1998 or 1999 budgets in retrospect.
On the contrary, the objective is to take clear steps to achieve a better result in the future.
That is the purpose of the action plan submitted by the Commission.
I should like in this respect to come back to what you said, Mr Pomés Ruiz, i.e. that the Commission should perhaps tell the committee which confidential reports it has submitted for the discharge procedure.
I would be glad to comply with this request because I think it too helps clarify matters.
Mrs Langenhagen used her intervention to criticise the independent financial controller of the Union in connection with a report on the research centre in Geel.
However, I should like to point out that to say that the financial controller is responsible for the plutonium incident in Geel is unfounded because she exercises no atomic supervision or any other type of supervision in Geel.
But I have of course taken note of this accusation and have already started an administrative investigation in order to ascertain if there was a duty to provide information about the discussion of the report with the research centre and to pass the report on to the European Court of Auditors.
Mrs Ferreira, allow me to congratulate you on your first speech in Parliament and to thank you for your call for cooperation for the benefit of European politics.
I should like to end by saying that I do not see any confrontation in the postponement of the discharge; what I do see is that the European Parliament has exercised its right to demand information, set conditions and call on the Commission to take action, as it is entitled to do.
I also see in the demands in the resolution support on the road towards a renewal of European politics and, in this respect, I really can promise you that we shall examine every point of this resolution very carefully and take it very seriously and we shall give you our reply on the information demanded and the steps taken without delay.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
(The sitting was suspended at 11.45 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon)
Vote
Recommendation for second reading (A5-0080/2000) by Mrs Kauppi, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the taking up, the pursuit and the prudential supervision of the business of electronic money institutions (12004/2/1999 - C5-0306/1999 - 1998/0252(COD)) and on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 77/780/EEC on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the taking up and pursuit of the business of credit institutions (12005/1/1999 - C5-0307/1999 - 1998/0253(COD))
Before the vote:
Bolkestein, Commission.
Following the debate that took place last night, and repeating the arguments which I put forward yesterday, I would sum up the Commission's position as follows.
The first two amendments deal with redeemability at par value.
The Commission's opinion is that this introduces unnecessary legal uncertainty into the text.
That is why the Commission cannot see its way to agreeing to the first two amendments.
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 propose to limit substantially the circumstances in which Member States may waive some or all of the provisions of the directive to certain limited electronic money schemes.
As I said yesterday, if there are legitimate concerns they can be dealt with at the review of the whole procedure within the next few years.
Therefore, the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 and 4.
On Amendment No 5, the last amendment, although the Commission itself would take a less negative view of that amendment than it takes of the first four amendments, it still is of the opinion that it would be better to reject all five amendments and to leave the proposal as it is.
(The President declared the first common position approved as amended and the second common position approved)
Recommendation for second reading (A5-0084/2000) by Mr Staes, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 95/53/EEC fixing the principles governing the organisation of official inspections in the field of animal nutrition (10804/1/1999 - C5-0273/1999 - 1998/0301(COD))
Before the vote:
On behalf of the Commission, and in particular, on behalf of my colleague Mr Byrne, let me say that the Commission sees its way to accepting all the amendments that have been proposed by Parliament.
I need not add anything further since Parliament, I am sure, will welcome this.
(The President declared the common position approved as amended)
Report (A5-0072/2000) by Mr Lannoye, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 95/2/EC on food additives other than colours and sweeteners (COM(1999) 329 - C5-0068/1999 - 1999/0158(COD))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0090/2000) by Mr Kirkhope on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the Republic of Austria with a view to adopting a Council Decision to combat child pornography on the Internet (10317/1999 - C5-0318/1999 - 1999/0822(CNS))
Before the final vote:
Ladies and gentlemen, the Commission supports all the proposed amendments adopted.
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0091/2000) by Mr Frahm, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a Council decision creating a European Refugee Fund (COM(1999) 686 - C5-0120/2000 - 1999/0274(CNS))
Before the vote on the amendments:
Mr President, the European People' s Party would like a separate vote on Amendment No 19.
As such, we would like to propose a split vote.
I am sorry but it is too late.
The request was not submitted in time.
It has to be made the evening before the votes.
The Rules are very clear.
I should explain to the House that the reason we do this is so that all the groups can prepare their voting slips and so that there is no confusion during the votes.
If we start breaking that rule then it just creates chaos during the votes.
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTES
Staes report (A5-0084/2000):
The proposal before us today aims to amend Directive 95/53/EC in order to provide a legal instrument more appropriate to the requirements of inspections in the field of animal nutrition.
Following the dioxin crisis in May 1999, it was apparent that it was necessary to adapt this legislation.
At that time the Commission announced a legislative programme with a view to improving food safety regulations.
The programme was adopted by the Council and by the European Parliament, and included a revision of Directive 95/53/EC.
At the time, several problems had been identified.
Mismanagement of the crisis, particularly the poor coordination between the various authorities involved, became apparent and was noted in the course of the Commission inspection.
There were delays in transmitting the information on dioxin contamination to the Commission, and measures taken at national level were inadequate.
In order to offset these omissions, the proposal aims to stipulate that Commission and Member State experts should have the possibility of carrying out inspections not only within the Community but also in third countries, particularly following the emergence of a phenomenon likely to have an adverse effect on the fitness for consumption of animal feeding stuffs marketed within the Community; that a safeguard procedure should be set up and that the Commission should have the opportunity, if necessary, to assign Community experts to the site in order to check whether Community regulations are being observed and to take any appropriate measures necessary; that the Commission should be responsible for adopting specific coordinated inspection programmes, in addition to the general programmes already stipulated by Directive 95/53/EC, in the event of unexpected contamination which may represent an imminent and serious risk to human and animal health.
The common position did not adopt the European Commission' s right to take safeguard measures appropriate to the context of animal nutrition in the event of an emergency.
Obviously, this is extremely reprehensible and even irresponsible!
This is why the rapporteur proposes reintroducing this clause, and I am pleased to see it because without this clause there is no guarantee of consumer protection in food crisis situations.
Lannoye report (A5-0072/2000):
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work on the proposal for the directive amending Directive 95/2/EC.
This directive authorises the use of a number of new food additives which are currently banned but which have been assessed recently by the Scientific Committee for Food (SCF) and deemed fit for human consumption.
The report clearly expresses consumer concerns in the face of the flood of additives, of chemicals, into our daily diet.
Indeed, our diet has changed radically under the influence of lifestyle changes and the contributions of new technologies.
The time devoted to preparing meals has been reduced considerably.
This often leads us to eat ready-made meals, which are practical but which do not really suit our tastes or fulfil our vitamin and mineral requirements.
The fact is, the industrial foodstuffs which wind up on our plates have often undergone intense processing leading to the loss of flavour, texture and colour.
In order to overcome these disadvantages, the chemists of the agri-foodstuffs industry add artificial flavourings, flavour enhancers, firming agents, colorants, etc.
What is more, with food distribution chains becoming ever longer, it becomes unavoidable to have recourse to preservatives and oxidation inhibitors.
This cannot fail to give rise to concerns on the part of consumers who, following recent food crises, are increasingly anxious to know just exactly what they have in their plates!
In response to these concerns, the European Union has endowed itself with a particularly complex arsenal of legislation which is supposed to eliminate any risk to the consumer.
So, in order to justify the inclusion of an additive in a foodstuff, there are three criteria which must be fulfilled, though there is still rather a wide margin for interpretation.
The technological need for the additive to be approved, for example, is obviously determined by the industry itself, which argues primarily in terms of reducing production costs and winning markets.
At the moment, this criterion is the weightiest consideration.
Usefulness for the consumer is a particularly vague concept.
Does the consumer really wish to eat a fruit or vegetable which has remained in his fridge for a month without changing in appearance?
Finally, there is the criterion of harmlessness.
Before any substance may be authorised for use as a food additive, it must, in principle, be subjected to toxicological assessment.
Normally a great many tests are carried out on laboratory animals in order to determine whether the substance is harmless, and at what dosage it may be safely consumed.
There are still loopholes!
On the one hand, the human being does not always react in the same way that animals do, so extrapolating from the results of tests on animals to human experience is always problematic.
On the other hand, these experiments assess the effect of each substance taken in isolation.
Our diet, however, often contains a cocktail of different substances whose combined effect is rarely identified!
The precautionary principle must be used with the utmost rigour in matters of foodstuffs!
The Commission' s proposal has not taken adequate account of this principle!
We therefore await Commission proposals for provisions that are directed more at improving consumer protection but also at promoting quality foodstuffs!
Kirkhope report (A5-0090/2000):
The Danish Social Democratic Members of the European Parliament have chosen to vote in favour of the report and fully and wholeheartedly support the initiatives being taken where this is concerned.
The Internet has created an entirely new situation where the duplication, sale and distribution of child pornography is concerned.
The Internet operates across national borders.
It is not, therefore, possible for an individual State effectively to contain the spread of child pornography.
Initiatives such as this, in which cooperation between States is increased in the common struggle against the spread of child pornography, is absolutely necessary.
As I stated during the previous part-session, in our debate on child sex tourism, there is nothing that arouses more horror and disgust than the sexual exploitation of children, and we have to admit that the Internet facilitates such 'practices' by enabling all manner of perverts to consult illegal sites anonymously.
Having made this extremely alarming observation, it is essential to consider the means of combating this phenomenon in order to protect our children.
I must, in addition, congratulate the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on its work, which produced some very interesting proposals.
One suggestion it makes is that every European Union Member State should make special police units responsible for monitoring the Internet, looking for pornographic material involving children.
If we wish to take effective action against child pornography on the Internet, it is not enough to simply react to crimes which have already been discovered.
In addition, the report sets the cut-off age at 16 for the definition of what must be considered to be child pornography.
I further support the rapporteur in insisting that the Council decision should be more binding and that the proposed measures should not be left to the discretion of the Member States.
In the same way, the idea of the 'offence of child pornography' must be seen as quite comprehensive!
There was a proposal to add that 'the production, sale and distribution or other forms of trafficking in child pornography material and the possession of such material is punishable' , but 'possession shall be punishable only where it is the result of an intentional or deliberate act or, if it is not, where possession is deliberately retained.'
Without this qualification, users 'surfing' the Internet and inadvertently accessing a site displaying child pornography would also be punishable.
Productions which, although they do not actually feature children, may suggest or intend to suggest that children are involved are also covered by the definition of offence.
Users of child pornography must be punished severely to serve as examples.
In addition, it is very important to organise better cooperation between Member States police forces through Europol.
The European Parliament must make bold proposals and must remain very vigilant.
We must utilise all the preventative and restrictive means possible to combat such phenomena.
This proposal is a step in this direction and I can therefore only give it my support.
This Council initiative is essential because it is not possible to allow childhood and naivety to be exploited for degrading commercial purposes, in denial of all humane values.
It is of the utmost importance to prevent such violations of the rights of individuals and the rights of children and not to confine ourselves to merely reacting.
I share the opinion of our rapporteur and the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, that the Council proposal should be made more binding.
The definition of offences of child pornography must also be stricter, and I find the definition given by the parliamentary committee perfectly appropriate, 'the production, sale and distribution or other forms of trafficking in child pornography material and the possession of such material is punishable' with the proviso that 'possession shall be punishable only where it is the result of an intentional or deliberate act' .
We need all citizens to be involved and to be vigilant, not just police forces through Europol, and public authorities, but also Internet users and the economic network producers, in order to be able to identify the people who use these electronic messages.
There is too much at stake for us to fail to call for the mobilisation of the general population against this danger, and that is why I am compelled to vote in favour of this report.
Regarding Amendments Nos 22-28, which are the subjects of a joint vote, we would state the following.
We regard the problem of child pornography with the utmost seriousness, whether it be on the Internet or in other media, and we obviously share the view that both the Member States and the Applicant States should do everything in their power to combat child pornography.
In the same way, it is important that joint, effective measures should be taken and that the European Parliament should be kept informed of how this work is progressing.
For the same reasons that we have a negative attitude to the proposals to establish special registers of convicted sex offenders (Amendments Nos 21, 30 and 32), we do not consider Amendment No 24 to be politically desirable.
Even if it were technically possible, registering the identities of everyone allocated e-mail addresses would constitute too far-reaching a curtailment of personal privacy, as well as risk discouraging such lawful use of the Internet as is much to be desired.
The twenty-first century is the century of communications.
Paradoxically, it has become more usual to contact friends or colleagues on the other side of the world than to chat with one' s next-door neighbours.
Within the vast Internet market there are some people who have found ways to make easy money from exploiting human poverty.
Amoral producers and distributors of material have decided to respond to the deviant urges of some individuals by disseminating pornographic documents involving children over the Internet.
No one gets upset at finding large numbers of prostitutes in the streets around this building or at seeing them on display in the windows of Brussels, no one protests when newsagents sell, albeit on the top shelves, magazines flaunting the worst deviations, including paedophilia.
And yet this House is indignant today at child pornography as if it were not all part of the continuum.
Once again this damage is caused by permissiveness, which, while it may satisfy the mania of some, remains a source of unhappiness for many others.
The police and judicial authorities of our respective States must therefore receive adequate resources to combat this plague which affects the most vulnerable of us.
In this area which is cross-border in nature, it may be useful for the European Union to make its own contribution.
While the combat must involve international cooperation, however, it is also essential to fight on a day-to-day basis by preventing all these practices becoming commonplace.
Some people will retort, as they often do, that it has always existed and will always exist.
What a fatalistic comment, and what resignation, what contempt for the human condition!
I am delighted to see that our institutions are today becoming aware of the tragic fate experienced by thousands of children throughout the world, including our own countries, and are deciding to find a solution to it.
I am however afraid that the usual double standards may make these measures meaningless, for how credible are policies which would restrict the fight for human dignity to some parties and leave out others?
Obviously we need to offer children special protection, but in a society which has lost its points of reference, whatever they may be, and which leaves life' s victims by the wayside in the name of individual freedom, it is our duty to fight to ensure that everyone, man, woman and child, is enabled to live in dignity.
I hope, without too much confidence, that the day will come when our main concern will once again be for the public good, responding to the highest aspirations rather than to the lowest temptations.
Frahm report (A5-0091/2000):
Mr President, creating this European Refugee Fund is the very least that could be done to face up to the reception of refugees and forcibly displaced persons likely to enter European Union territory.
We are therefore voting in favour of creating the Fund, although it is clearly inadequate to ensure the decent reception of refugees and it is, above all, an alibi for lack of action.
Let us just mention the unspeakable attitude of the countries of Europe, particularly those responsible for the bombing raids on Serbia and Kosovo, with regard to the refugees forced into exile, many of them precisely because of these bombing campaigns.
Refugees which wealthy Europe has abandoned, in the most part, to the care of neighbouring countries in the region, which have still not recovered.
We also deplore the fact that the States of the European Union are making the allocation of refugee status ever more restrictive and more arbitrary.
We deplore the fact that great numbers of women and men fleeing from oppression are being refused this status and are being made stateless persons under permanent threat of being returned to their country of origin with the risks, often serious risks, that that involves.
The creation of a European Fund for refugees, which the European Parliament has just adopted, despite the Union for a Europe of Nations Group' s voting against it, provides a fine example of these hypocritical proposals which will solve nothing at grass-roots level and will serve only to make the situation worse by transferring costly and unsupervised jurisdiction to Europe.
As I explained in my speech yesterday, this fund is not specifically intended to handle infrequent, exceptional and tragic instances of influxes of refugees originating from crisis-stricken countries, but to handle the day-to-day distribution of appropriations for the management of the usual flow of refugees of all kinds towards the most developed countries.
But what additional contribution is this Fund going to make exactly, in comparison with the present situation?
As in the case of the structural funds, the citizens will be led to believe that Europe is handing out heaven-sent money in order to assist them in managing refugees.
This money is not really heaven-sent, of course, it is taken away from those self-same citizens without their being aware of it.
Europe is thus creating a good reputation for itself on the cheap.
It is always the same process: some pitiful situation is selected (the plight of the refugees, in this instance) in order to appeal not to rational argument but to people' s sympathy.
We are given the explanation that Europe will bring about the synergy that will solve the problem at minimum expense and, as proof, we are told that the new Fund will be a lightweight body, allocated only limited appropriations.
Over the coming years, however, it will be noted that the competences transferred to Brussels are executed with little discipline, as they are too far removed from the citizens, that the Fund has made the States less responsible, that therefore more money is needed, that European inspectors are also needed in order to supervise the use of appropriations, and that an entire European administration is needed to manage what will have become an uncontrollable monster.
We have just witnessed live the birth of a new sideways shift in Europe, one which will be extremely costly for everyone, and whose only effect will be to make the States mere onlookers and, what is more, it will achieve this using their own money.
At the end of 1998, the Commission proposed a Community action programme with a view to promoting the integration of refugees within the Union.
Following our opinion and the response of the Council, the Commission replaced this project with a proposal to create a European Refugee Fund, initially for a period of five years (2000-2004) and I must say that I am delighted with it!
In putting forward a multiannual plan with a wider sphere of activity, the Commission is acting in compliance with the Treaty of Amsterdam in undertaking long-term actions in favour of refugees and displaced persons and responding to the requirements expressed by the European Council in Tampere in October 1999 regarding the creation of an instrument appropriate for emergency situations.
This represents a clear improvement on prevalent practice to date.
The Fund is to establish a financial redistribution system in order to balance out the financial expenses incurred by Member States in receiving refugees and to enable those with the least developed systems to bring them up to speed.
The Fund is a single instrument intended to integrate the three facets of European policy on refugees: the reception, integration and repatriation of refugees and displaced persons.
It will therefore make it possible to support actions within the Member States such as improving reception conditions and procedures in terms of infrastructures and services (accommodation, material assistance, social welfare, assistance with administrative procedures), the integration of persons entitled to some form of stable international protection, voluntary repatriation and reintegration into the country of origin.
The target groups are refugees, under the Geneva Convention, persons that have applied for this status, and displaced persons that have requested protection on a temporary basis.
In addition to the structural measures, the Commission proposes to use this Fund to finance emergency measures in the event of an unexpected massive influx of refugees.
For the financial year 2000, the Commission proposes an allocation of EUR 26 million for structural measures and EUR 10 million for emergency measures.
As is often the case, this allocation is inadequate to handle the actual requirements.
In order to obtain real results, the budget for this Fund must be increased.
The European Commission must provide us with financial estimates covering the entire period of the programme within the scope of current financial perspectives and, if necessary, a proposal for the revision of appropriations, in view of the fact that much greater amounts will be necessary in order to achieve the Fund' s objectives.
Let me conclude by emphasising that creating this European Refugee Fund represents the first step towards a common asylum system and we must continue to work towards this.
If the purpose of creating a European Refugee Fund were to make asylum and refugee policy in the Member States of the Union more humane and open, then it would be a welcome step.
The Fund, which is merely the product of a combination of three budgetary lines, will not do this.
There is evidence in addition to the debate as to what the creation of the European Refugee Fund really means.
It means "distributing the burden" .
An approach whereby immigrants entering the EU in search of protection are seen as a "burden" which has to be "distributed" is fundamentally flawed.
No policy which takes humane account of the needs of persons fleeing persecution can be constructed on such a basis.
The policy of the Member States and of the Union is geared towards heading off and turning away refugees, as the recent inclusion of a "re-adoption" clause in the Lomé Convention demonstrates.
If this is what the outlines of European asylum and refugee policy really look like and if refugees are seen as a "burden" , then creating a Refugee Fund is a cosmetic exercise designed to hide the real face of a European policy of turning refugees away.
The Fund will not, in this form, cause any country to switch to a policy of greater openness towards the immigration of refugees.
Nor will it improve the legal security of persons fleeing persecution and in search of protection.
But it is precisely the legal security and the right of participation of refugees, which must be considered.
The European Union calls throughout the world for freedom of movement for capital.
But it is reducing the freedom of movement of persons yet further by closing borders and cutting itself off from refugees and asylum seekers.
Every year many refugees die, killed on the external borders of the EU.
To assume in these circumstances that creating a Refugee Fund will make for a more humane asylum and refugee policy is an illusion, which is why I have abstained.
That concludes the vote.
(The sitting was suspended at 12.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
Outcome of the European Council in Lisbon, 23 -24 March 2000
The next item is the debate on the European Council report and the Commission statement on the outcome of the European Council in Lisbon, the Social Summit.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the Lisbon European Council has certainly given new impetus to the European agenda and I am sure that you will be aware of its results, both through reading the conclusions and also as a result of the broad public coverage that this Council received in the European and international press.
The key aim of defining a new world-wide strategy for the European Union within a world economy that is open, competitive and truly global was achieved.
That strategy is to make the European Union the most dynamic and competitive economic area in the world, based on knowledge and able to guarantee sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and with greater social cohesion.
A knowledge-based economy underpinned by a society based on information and research will be a powerful factor in the European Union' s development and of course requires a swift and consistent process of structural reforms and the completion of the internal market.
This objective also involves modernising the European social model, investing in people and combating social exclusion.
It also involves implementing sound macroeconomic policies encouraging economic growth and employment.
Strengthening the European Council' s coordinating and guiding role will be vital to developing the Lisbon strategy.
The European Council will annually monitor the progress that has been made, by holding a European Council meeting each spring.
It will also establish the broad guidelines for the sectoral Councils.
A coordination method was established, with specific timetables for the short, medium and long term, outlining objectives, benchmarking based on best practice and also other kinds of indicators.
This is an open method of coordination, which we hope will produce optimal results.
These guidelines will also be transposed into national policies, and will be periodically monitored and assessed as part of a process of mutual learning between Member States.
The goals set at the Lisbon European Council are extremely ambitious and give specific mandates to the Commission.
Just yesterday, President Prodi presented the Commission' s programme in this area to the Council and also to the various Council formations, and it is therefore crucial that we bear in mind the diversity of platforms on which the strategy laid down in Lisbon was developed, with its implications for the fields of scientific research, education, the single market, industry and so forth.
Developments in electronic commerce, the liberalisation of the telecommunications market and the establishment of a framework for reducing the costs of access to the Internet are, of course, crucial factors in the success of this modernising strategy, and the e-Europe Action Plan, which will be presented to the Feira European Council, will also be a key instrument in speeding up the progress of the European Union towards becoming an information society.
Just yesterday, I was able to inform the General Affairs Council that the Portuguese Presidency had already prepared a timetable for the remits given by the Council for implementation of specific measures in the various areas, and also for appropriate preparation of the Feira and Nice European Councils.
The Ecofin Council will primarily assume responsibility for strengthening the Cardiff process, the action plan for financial services, the action plan for venture capital, the tax package, the mid-term review of the employment guidelines and for the assessment of the contribution made by public finances to growth and employment.
The Internal Market Council will assume responsibility for electronic commerce, copyright and related rights, for the dual-use export control regime, for removing obstacles to services and public contracts, for Community and private sector electronic procurement systems, for the establishment of a coordinated strategy with a view to simplifying laws and rules and for the Community patent.
The Employment and Social Affairs Council will assume responsibility for conducting a review of the employment guidelines, for mandating the High-Level Working Party on Social Protection to prepare a study on the sustainability of the pensions system up to 2020, for applying an open method of coordination to policies for combating social exclusion and for considering the future direction of social policy, with a view to reaching agreement on a European social agenda at the Nice European Council.
The Research Council will assume responsibility for the e-Europe Action Plan and for promoting the establishment of a European research area.
The Telecommunications Council will assume responsibility for concluding the review of a regulatory framework for telecommunications and for the liberalisation of the market in this field.
The Consumer Affairs Council will assume responsibility for the distance selling of financial services - by approving pending legislation - and for alternative systems for resolving consumer disputes, by establishing a Community network.
The Education Council will assume responsibility for considering the future objectives of our educational systems, with a view to contributing to the Luxembourg and Cardiff processes by establishing new basic skills at European Union level, for creating a European diploma for basic IT skills, for removing obstacles to the mobility of teachers, for developing a European format for curricula vitae, for monitoring national policies on implementing these objectives, for access to the Internet in schools by 2001 and for the minimum training, by 2002, of the network of information technology teachers.
The Industry Council will assume responsibility for drafting the charter for small businesses and for establishing a procedure for standardising appropriate practices for the creation and development of innovative businesses, particularly small- and medium-sized businesses.
The Justice and Home Affairs Council will be responsible for adopting the pending legislation on jurisdiction and enforcing judgements.
It should be borne in mind that implementing the remits decided in Lisbon will require close cooperation between the Commission, the Council and the European Parliament, since many of the laws to be adopted are subject to the codecision procedure.
As you can see, the task of setting objectives at the Lisbon European Council is developing into a major timetable for action that the Commission and the various Council formations must now implement.
The Portuguese Presidency has already taken appropriate measures in Council so that the specific Council formations can immediately start implementing the programmes defined for their respective fields, and so that appropriate coordination takes place in this area, through the presentation of a synthesis report, either by the time of the Feira European Council this June, or by the Nice European Council, during the French Presidency.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office, ladies and gentlemen, as Mr Gama said, the recent Lisbon Summit was a great success for Europe.
It was certainly a turning point.
The European Council defined a new Union strategy, a strategy which will make us a leading power in the new knowledge-based economy and make it possible to restore the necessary conditions for full employment.
Even at this early stage, the revised forecasts for both economic growth and employment are cause for optimism.
The Lisbon European Council made a firm political commitment to an ambitious socio-economic plan; clear objectives were agreed for the reforms, the European social model was consolidated and, most importantly, it is now possible for the pledges made to be followed with immediate, practical actions.
This amounts to a completely unprecedented sign of confidence in Europe' s future and in the future of our economy and our social cohesion.
Our success in Lisbon was largely due to the excellent preparatory work of the Portuguese Presidency.
António Guterres' handling of the debate was exemplary.
The Commission also made a decisive contribution to this success, for the conclusions are significantly similar to the contents of the preliminary synthesis document which we drew up in preparation for the Council.
The Lisbon debate generated substantial agreement on most issues.
The only truly disputed points were the time frames for the liberalisation of the energy and transport markets, public services, the tax package and the competences of regional authorities in education and training.
These issues are major but they are limited in number.
This high level of consensus allowed the Presidency to set an extremely ambitious agenda.
I will not go into the conclusions in too great a detail, but stick to the main points.
The European Council stressed the importance of a strong, sound macroeconomic policy, consolidation in the field of taxation and sustainable financial policies and the structural reforms.
With regard to the information society, the principle elements of the e-Europe initiative proposed by the Commission were put into effect, in particular regarding the legal framework for e-commerce, the opening of the telecommunications market, internet connections for schools and teacher training.
The Commission was asked to develop a benchmarking strategy to define best practice and to guarantee both the development of the necessary infrastructures and the availability of the necessary funds.
With regard to the internal market, the European Council adopted ambitious objectives in the field of procurement and in order to implement action plans for financial services and risk capital.
In addition, measures will be taken to accelerate the liberalisation of transport, energy and postal services.
Research, education and lifelong learning all received a boost.
The Council also agreed on the need for a sharp increase in employment, particularly employment of women, and, I repeat, the forecasts are currently very encouraging.
One of the most significant steps forward was the consensus between the Member States regarding the need to explore the possibility of modernising the social security systems and making pension systems sustainable, on the basis of a Commission initiative.
Until recently, such an agreement would have been unthinkable, and this could be an extremely important development.
The Commission is therefore going to play a central role in the follow-up to this Summit.
I would just like to mention some of the items on our agenda: firstly, we are going to draw up new legislative proposals, in particular regarding the legal framework for e-commerce - which has become extremely urgent due to the inadequacy of the present framework for e-commerce - and for procurement; secondly, we are going to introduce benchmarking in all the stages of the "open coordination" process in the areas of research, enterprise policy and social exclusion; thirdly, we are going to present our communication, entitled "A new European social agenda" , which will serve as the basis for the Nice Summit organised by the French Presidency; finally, we are going to prepare for the spring Councils by producing an annual synthesis of economic and social progress which will be a sort of general report on the economic and social situation in Europe.
These spring conferences, which will take place each year, will be important in terms of assessing progress made and developing future strategies.
The Commission will therefore play a crucial role in ensuring that the Council' s undertakings are translated into practical measures, and that Lisbon is thus a genuine success for Europe.
The Commission must act as the driving force in this process.
Tomorrow, I am going to meet my fellow Commissioners to ensure that work starts immediately and that the various different objectives set are achieved.
I am determined to see that this Commission makes good its promises.
I would like to thank Parliament, before this House, for its encouragement, but also for the new ideas that it has given us during these debates.
In Lisbon, we also tackled the issue of the Balkans - in a meeting held during the break for supper, which was not on the agenda but was nevertheless a working meeting.
At that meeting I raised the point of the European Union' s political responsibility for the Balkan region, and stressed that our entire credibility is at stake.
The European Council subscribed to the joint report prepared by the Commission and the High Representative, and also our request for more effective coordination between the various programmes implemented by the Union in that region.
I repeat before this House that the need for this coordination is urgent, spectacularly urgent.
Following my lead, the Heads of State and Government agreed upon the need to clean up the Danube.
We have accumulated the necessary resources and I now expect appropriate measures to be taken.
We also agreed to speed up the procedures for supplying aid to the Balkans.
Finally, on the subject of Russia, the European Council recognised the strategic nature of our relations with Moscow and invited President Putin to take note of our concern over the situation in Chechnya.
I sent him a letter congratulating him on his election and stressing the Commission' s genuine interest in cooperating closely with the Russian Government, but the Chechnya issue was mentioned specifically.
To sum up, Madam President, I would like to thank this House for its valuable contribution to the Lisbon Summit and for all it did to ensure the Council' s success.
Ladies and gentlemen, I find the outcome of this Summit very encouraging, and I would like to stress once again the Commission' s commitment to ensuring the swift, efficient implementation of the decisions taken at the European Council.
I am counting on your full support and your cooperation to help us to achieve this.
The eyes of the citizens of Europe, whom you represent, are on us, and they expect a great deal of the follow-up to Lisbon.
It is our duty not to let them down.
Madam President, Mr Gama, President Prodi, with good reason the Lisbon Summit could be dubbed historic in terms of its political content.
At the meeting the Union' s strategic objective was to create the world' s most competitive and dynamic information-based economy, with steady growth and the ability to create more and better jobs.
The aim alone does not, however, make the meeting a historic one; what does is the range of measures that the meeting is recommending the Union and its Member States take to achieve their objective.
I will borrow the words of the Presidency.
Firstly, to achieve the model, we have to put our faith above all in the private sector and in cooperation between the private and the public sector.
That will be dependent on the mobilisation of market forces available and action on the part of the Member States themselves.
The Union will act as a catalyst in the process.
Secondly, we must reduce the tax burden among the workforce, especially among the relatively low paid and less educated.
Thirdly, we have to reallocate public money to increase the relative importance of the growth of capital both physically and in terms of human beings.
Fourthly, we must speed up the process whereby competition is freed up, for example, in the gas, electricity, postal and transport industries, with the objective of having a fully functional internal market in these sectors too.
I have given just a few examples to show that the Council of the fifteen countries of the European Union, fourteen of which have socialist governments, has adopted a totally central to right policy with regard to the economy and development, one which is associated with social responsibility, in many respects like that of the PPE-DE Group.
When I speak of this with such satisfaction on behalf of my group, it is not with the slightest hint of mockery.
In our opinion, the essential thing is not to look for political conflict, but to use the right tools for the benefit of our citizens.
In the decisions taken at the Lisbon Council, those tools took the form of a social market economy, which was a good thing.
Let me utter a few words of warning.
The main responsibility for achieving results lies with the Member States as far as the liberalisation of markets and the making of electronic commerce cheaper for consumers are concerned.
I would ask whether the astronomical price of the third generation mobile phone licences now being put up for auction in England will be of benefit to the consumers of the future?
It will not be.
Greed will bring its own revenge in that the system will be made expensive and will be slow to establish itself.
I give the example because it is relevant and not because I want to draw attention to the fact that the United Kingdom is doing something than runs counter to the decisions of Lisbon.
Let me issue a second word of warning.
We are on the threshold of enlargement.
As we now step on the gas with regard to an eEurope within the Union, are we making it more difficult for those countries joining the Union to adapt?
The answer cannot be not to speed up developments in the direction of an eEurope.
The answer is, in fact, a question: are enlargement, which has been planned, albeit relatively slowly, and the budget in accordance with the decisions of Agenda 2000, mutually compatible?
Is structural aid to be increased after all, so that those states intending to join are not left even further behind in terms of development compared with the Union?
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to say finally, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, that we have full confidence that Romano Prodi and the Commission he heads will be able to achieve the Lisbon objectives.
The PPE-DE Group and, to the best of my knowledge, the whole of Parliament, support the Commission' s work while voicing constructive criticism.
As the imperfections of the Single Market now also stem from protraction on the part of the Member States, the implementation of each of the decisions taken at Lisbon will also depend at institutional level above all on whether the Member States will stand by the solemn theses of Lisbon in the years to come.
Madam President, the Lisbon Summit will mark a milestone.
Following on from Luxembourg in 1997, when Europe revealed its joint responsibility for employment, the European Council has just outlined a new economic strategy, intended to make the European Union not only the most competitive and most dynamic knowledge-based economic system in the world, but also a model in terms of employment and social cohesion.
"The novelty of this summit is that it dealt with the entirety of economic and social policy."
This is a quotation from Belgium' s Liberal Prime Minister.
Along with him, the President of the French Republic, and the Heads of Government of Austria, Spain, Ireland and Luxembourg have endorsed the Lisbon conclusions.
Some political forces within this Parliament nonetheless appear to wish to turn the Lisbon Summit into some sort of Socialist International 'happening' .
How else is one to interpret the refusal of the PPE and ELDR Groups to negotiate a joint resolution common to the main political forces within Parliament?
Some conservative and liberal ayatollahs seem not to want to hear anything about a macroeconomic and monetary policy of benefit to the European social model.
The untrammelled free market seems to be their only god.
Yet the market economy must necessarily have a social dimension.
Here is a riddle.
In Lisbon, who was it that said that the citizens of Europe are looking to the European Council to give shape to a social Europe?
Who was it that said that, for European citizens, I quote, "unemployment wrecks lives and societies for entire generations and, even though it is starting to fall, unemployment remains the main concern" ?
That "the across-the-board return to economic growth means that we can do things today which were impossible yesterday" ?
That citizens are scandalised by "untrammelled capitalism, whose relocations, social dumping, ruthless exploitation of the disparities between the social and fiscal legislation of the Member States and remorseless pursuit of profit at the expense of working men and women" ?
These are the words of Mrs Nicole Fontaine, the President of this Parliament.
The Group of the Party of European Socialists also supports Mrs Fontaine in her declaration made in Lisbon to the effect that, I quote, "The European Parliament is committed to the social model in all its aspects" .
The President has our support when she asks the European Council to, I quote, "introduce balanced rules on company mergers within the European Union" ; and says that there should be "a ban on any mergers that do not comply with binding European legislation on prior notification and consultation of workers" ; "that, before such mergers can take place, a serious assessment of their social impact is carried out" , and when she points out that "unregulated mergers, based merely on dominant capitalist concerns, have a devastating effect on the Union' s social cohesion" .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists agrees with the President, when she demands an observatory of industrial change, and a fairer distribution of income between capital which enables and work which produces.
In short, the Group of the Party of European Socialists endorses the conclusions of our President, whom we congratulate on her fair and courageous statements.
Parliament would appear ridiculous if it voted in favour of the joint resolution tabled by the PPE and the ELDR, who seem to wish not only to disown our President, but also to disassociate themselves from both President Prodi and the Conservative and Liberal Christian Democrat Prime Ministers who endorse Lisbon.
I therefore advise all the Christian Democrats, all the Liberals and all the Democrats in general who want to see a social market economy, to vote in favour of the resolution proposed by the Group of the Party of European Socialists.
We wish to combine economic efficiency, quality of life and social protection.
We want sustainable development in all these aspects.
(Applause from the left)
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I should like to start by saying that we in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party did not especially agree with the observations made by Mrs Fontaine in her speech at the Lisbon Summit.
However, we were very pleased about the far-sighted messages which were to be found in the conclusions from the Summit.
We are particularly pleased about the emphasis placed upon Europe' s creating prosperity and employment by strengthening the market economy and increasing competitiveness, partly through greater flexibility in the labour market and reduced social charges in connection with low-paid jobs.
I also want to express satisfaction at the fact that the open coordination with which we are familiar from employment policy is to be used as a tool in other areas to promote the use of information technology and reinforce training and strengthen research.
Working for common goals in this open and flexible way, in which countries can measure themselves against each other and learn from one another, is a good way both of ensuring progress and, at the same time, of guaranteeing individual countries' freedom to seek their own solutions to their own problems.
I would also express great satisfaction at the fact that the opinion sets a time-frame for developing the single market in important areas, chiefly through the commitment to rapidly create a legal framework for e-commerce.
However, there is, in fact, just a great a need to develop the traditional economy, and I am therefore delighted at the emphasis on increased research efforts and on the enlargement of the single financial market, as well as at the Council' s support for liberalisation within the energy, postal and transport sectors, even though it has not set a time scale for such liberalisation.
In developing employment policy and combating social exclusion, it is only right to invest not only in economic growth but also in education and training as a way of giving those who are excluded from society a foothold in the labour market and enabling them to help themselves.
There are major advantages in a form of coordination based upon benchmarking, but we should of course be careful that the whole process does not take a bureaucratic turn or lead to over-zealous management.
Finally, I would offer an important and perhaps less complimentary remark.
In the Lisbon conclusions, the Council refers a good deal to what it is going to do in the future, perhaps following proposals on the part of the Commission.
I hope that we are not to read too much into this apparent emphasis upon the intergovernmental character of EU cooperation.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, President of the Commission, I think it is clear that, in January, when the Portuguese Presidency issued its first paper, the original impulse was perfectly laudable.
The widespread dissemination of communication technologies was going to cause, indeed, is causing considerable change in the living and working conditions of the citizens of Europe.
The conclusions of the Portuguese Presidency contain many positive commitments and objectives.
Having said that, these are in danger of being watered down, and the motion for a resolution tabled by the PPE Group and the Liberal Group presents an absolute caricature of this, giving Parliament the opportunity to split along the good old left-versus-right divide, which does not match the observation of the practical policies implemented within the fifteen Member States, and which certainly does not meet the challenges of the future.
Having said that, Mr Prodi, the real challenge would be if, in coming months, you did not endorse this motion for a resolution, in the event that Parliament votes in favour of it tomorrow.
We therefore call upon you, along with the Council, to consider in further detail a number of points which we feel are noticeably absent from the Lisbon conclusions.
The first point is the strategic goal.
Has the strategic goal of sustainable development which was supposed to be an integral part of a twenty-first century economy, which would meet the requirements of the planet and its citizens, been forgotten?
There is not one line on the reports which the Commission nonetheless submitted at the European Council in Helsinki.
Not one line on the practical implementation of Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union.
The connection must be made between the dissemination of modern communication techniques and the implementation of sustainable development.
The second point relates to employment.
European citizens must not be kept in ignorance of the fact that the dissemination of these communication technologies is going to destroy jobs as well as create them, and that at the very core of our societies, at macroeconomic as well as at microeconomic level, it presents a challenge to the redistribution of working time and the redistribution of incomes.
Avoiding these questions is to invite serious social crises despite the spirit of optimism currently characterising the economy.
The same applies to the matter of taxation, which you mentioned.
In one of its documents on the integration of financial markets, the Commission itself said that such integration was possible only with a minimum of tax regulation.
This is also true of the Monti package.
These matters are going nowhere, and integrating the financial markets without fiscal regulation at European level is still tantamount to establishing a two-speed Europe.
Finally, in social matters, I do not think it wise, Mr Monti, for the Commission to give up any legislative proposals in matters of employment law.
The new economy also involves enabling workers, in the event of company restructuring or necessary discussions about the incorporation of technological innovations in companies, to proceed in decent conditions.
This must also be included in the Nice social agenda and we urge you to ensure that this is the case, because my Group wishes to see a strong and ambitious Commission, and will support you if you take the comments I have just made into account.
Madam President, many observers have stressed the fact that the Special Summit was characterised by the triumph of the contentions of Mr Blair and Mr Aznar.
If that means that the Lisbon Summit sanctioned a liberal view of Europe, then I must of course, unfortunately, concur with this analysis.
I cannot however be delighted by it.
I do not by any means wish to allow the current British and Spanish Heads of Government to monopolise the offensive position with regard to the information revolution.
In my opinion, this is indeed a huge challenge which must be accepted.
So when I read the summit conclusions which state that Europe has set itself the goal of promoting a dynamic knowledge-based economy 'capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs' , I say, 'Go on then, I dare you.'
An annual upturn in investment in people and adopting a proactive policy to promote full employment is something I am firmly in favour of.
The political difference between us is not a question of whether or not to adopt modern methods, but of what our concept of these modern methods is, particularly on the place and the role which all men and women, bar none, must play, both as workers and as citizens.
In this respect, however, Mr Blair and Mr Aznar and their followers are held captive by archaic liberal ideas, which are conformist in the most ordinary way: allow the market, particularly the financial market, to operate, introduce wage flexibility, reduce labour costs, even if it means boosting the mechanism which produces inequality, precariousness and exclusion across the entire planet.
There' s the rub: do we or do we not have the courage to tackle these taboo areas at the very time when we are starting to see such promising beginnings of a new phase in human civilisation?
This, in my opinion, is the yardstick against which we will be able to measure Europe' s true ambition and also the true modernity of the left.
- (PT) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first like to highlight some positive conclusions resulting from the Lisbon European Council, which essentially relate to the joint motion for a resolution supported amongst others by my group, and which has already been attacked so fiercely here by the Socialists.
These conclusions were presented by the Heads of State and Government as part of a strategic objective to make the European Union the most competitive area in the world within ten years, by developing a knowledge-based economy and adopting policies geared towards growth and full employment.
I must ask this, however: do the statements by those currently in power in Europe, who are, in the majority, Socialists, and who, for various years have headed the governments of their respective countries, not above all reveal more about their shortcomings and the serious failures of the European development model which they have been promoting?
Is there anything genuinely new and original about the Lisbon Summit conclusions that had not already been diagnosed and stated in the 1993 White Paper "Growth, Competitiveness, Employment" ?
A commitment was made at that time to, and I quote, "information networks" ; today the commitment is stressed, and I quote again "to the area of knowledge and access to the information society" .
In the White Paper, the stress was put on "lifelong learning and continuing training" .
Now, and I quote once again, the issue is "lifelong learning" .
I could go on, as there are countless conclusions completely identical to those in the 1993 White Paper.
There is nevertheless one aspect that deserves a particular mention in the area of policies for full employment.
In 1993, the objective was to halve the number of unemployed in the European Union, from 17 million to 8.5 million.
The fact is that we are now in 2000, unemployment still stands at 15 million and the summit conclusions promise us rates of almost full employment in ten years' time.
This is at best politically irresponsible and displays a mentality which is quite typical of the Socialists, even for those followers of the third way, which is based on the proactive development of a strategy which, as you all know, is the product of many different factors and is ultimately based on the actions of businesses.
As one well-known analyst said, Europe' s leaders have decided on something that they cannot possibly achieve.
To promise, as they have done, ambitious targets for growth and employment is equivalent to announcing an increase in the population or the number of days of sunshine.
We believe that the role of governments should instead be to focus on developing means to enable social and economic agents to generate wealth and to produce positive results in these areas.
Another aspect that is worthy of attention is essentially that the summit appears to have ignored the fact that the countries of the European Union have different historical backgrounds and economic and social structures.
These are disparities which eastward enlargement will only accentuate, and the summit also appears to have ignored the fact that there are still imbalances that even average levels of development cannot hide.
This applies to both positive and negative aspects.
How can we explain, for example, that Sweden and Finland, countries with highly developed social protection systems, have levels of Internet use identical to those in the United States, that is around 50%, whilst the United Kingdom, a much more liberal country, has levels of around 29%?
On the other hand, how is it that there can still be gross disparities in the minimum wage levels of some Member States, marked differences in the quality of social security systems and in the value of retirement pensions, and even in levels of unemployment or hidden unemployment, not to mention increasingly widespread pockets of poverty and exclusion?
The European Union may have begun its race towards levels of development already seen in America' s economy and businesses, but this, the real Europe, will not become a reality until the convergence of national economies and internal economic and social cohesion are given top priority.
It was with great interest that I followed the European Council' s summit in Lisbon.
There was a very impressive display of rhetoric, chiefly indicative of impotence on a massive and growing scale.
It is, of course, all well and good to have the strategic goal of becoming the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world with a view to creating sustainable growth.
The first problem, however, is that no specific actions of any kind have been outlined which can give actual substance to this ambition.
The second problem is that the social problems entailed and which (for better and, particularly, for worse) are a very significant part of actual life in the European Union have been ignored.
The Presidency' s conclusions talk of "the European social model" .
I am not aware of any European social model.
I am familiar with a number of different models for social welfare, tied to specific national traditions.
In my own country, there is a tradition which differs markedly from the dominant tradition in the European Union.
The real problem is being completely ignored.
This was hinted at in the negotiations prior to the intergovernmental conference, namely the problem of implementing reforms so as to create a European social model.
I must issue a strong warning against doing any such thing.
There is to be a commitment to majority decision-making in this area.
My own country' s government opposes this, and so do we who are sceptical about this self-fulfilling development within the European Union.
The most significant legacy of the European Council' s summit in Lisbon is all the unresolved problems.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Lisbon focused on employment, economic reform and the shift to the digital age.
But Lisbon is not the first summit to discuss the topic of "employment" .
Since Essen, we have had numerous declarations of intent and well-meant action programmes.
The only way to achieve a sustainable increase in the employment rate is to give companies the entrepreneurial room for manoeuvre which they need in the form of framework conditions.
The proposed measures to promote SMEs are confined to analyses and to drafting yet more non-binding declarations of intent.
Paper is cheap.
Unfortunately there is a total lack of concrete results.
A sustained improvement in the employment situation can only be achieved through structural reform, which means reducing the tax burden, simplifying tax systems and making it easier to incorporate a company.
We are all familiar with these requirements.
Everyone says, "Yes, that is quite right" .
But implementation is where it falls down.
As an Austrian member, I must also address the sanctions of the 14 in connection with Lisbon.
The ability to be democratic goes hand in hand with the ability to discuss.
The efforts of the presidency to ban the subject of Austria from the agenda gave me even more food for thought.
It is in the interests of the Union to clarify relations between Austria and the EU.
Refusing all discussion was never a recipe for resolving a conflict.
Many people back in Austria ask me "How can the peaceful house of Europe be built if the highest representatives are not on speaking terms or refuse all discussion?"
These symbolic gestures are the right way to open up old wounds between people.
I therefore say to everyone who declares that the sanctions are for the government but not the people, that such a separation is not possible.
A democratically elected government cannot be separated from the people who elected it.
This is illustrated by absurd examples such as the taxi boycott in Brussels, problems with school exchange programmes and much else besides.
The distrust shown towards Austria, despite the fact that it has not once violated democratic principles since 1945 stands in clear contradiction to the spirit of this Community.
Judge the Austrian government by its deeds.
You will not find any violation of the spirit of the Union.
(Applause from the right)
Madam President, I wish to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council and to wish him every success in the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union.
I am sure that we are all in broad agreement with the Lisbon Summit' s strategic objective to make Europe, and I quote, "the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world capable of sustainable economic growth" .
Nobody doubts the importance of preparing the European public for the demands of a society based on information, knowledge, and new communications technologies as strategic weapons, in order to emerge victorious in the future, generating employment with higher-quality work and higher pay.
This would all be fine if the Lisbon Summit had been held specifically to discuss this kind of issue, which would mean that it should have been called the Information Society Summit, or the Knowledge Economy Summit or the New Economy Summit, according to people' s whims, taste or pretensions.
To call it the Employment Summit, however, would be to depart from its real purpose.
It is like putting a fake label on a product, which does not match the content.
In this case, it was done out of political expediency.
The truth is that the objective of employment goes far beyond these issues.
Firstly, the new economy, which essentially represents a challenge for this generation, cannot put a bomb under the old economy, which is the mainstay of our lives and whose modernisation and structural adjustment represent a stage that we cannot dispense with.
This means that we must immediately discuss strategies for restructuring the traditional sectors of our economy, which rethinking the choices that we will have to make in relation to the guiding principles of the World Trade Organisation would require.
Secondly, a strategic debate on employment would have to start with a substantial analysis of the European Union' s agents of competitiveness, because that is what sustainable economic growth depends on, and hence employment and social well-being.
The truth is that in a debate of this kind, we are bound to wonder why the EU has grown at half the rate of the United States of America over the last few years, and why no government has had the courage to question the more harmful effects of the so-called "European social model" , because, without wishing to detract from its positive aspects, this model is, to some extent, an incentive to passivity, to indolence and sloth in some elements of society, who could and should work.
We should therefore ask ourselves why the level of economic reintegration into the active population has been so low amongst those who have benefited from certain support policies.
This applies particularly to the "minimum guaranteed income" type of system.
We must also ask ourselves why we in Europe have a system that is so state-led and so interventionist that it regulates the competitiveness of the economy in a damaging way, and which, in the guise of arguments about society and stability, sometimes conceals high-spending strategies and even, very often, strategies for helping their political cronies.
These strategies certainly have a harmful effect on economic growth, on the distribution of wealth, and consequently, on employment.
A far-reaching debate on the problem of employment in the European Union would inevitably, therefore, have to address these issues properly.
Madam President, I wish to add my warm welcome and congratulations to the presidency on the successful achievement of the Lisbon Summit.
I think we will come to see in the future that all roads did lead to Lisbon via Luxembourg, Cardiff and Cologne, because Lisbon should be the end of a process, one that can actually deliver as regards the sort of priorities we want to bring to a successful conclusion throughout the whole of the European Union.
The key question is how we turn the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit into action; we must ensure that we turn the rhetoric of Lisbon into a reality.
I shall not dwell too much on the specifics of the Lisbon Summit.
A lot of us have been through that already and we welcome many of the conclusions.
I want to look at the challenges that are inherent in the Lisbon process for Parliament, the Commission and, indeed, all three institutions.
In particular, for Parliament there is a huge challenge in realising the full legislative implications of completing a single market.
There is a challenge in realising the full potential of the e-economy.
There is a challenge for Parliament in playing its part in helping Europe to become the dynamic centre of sustainable job creation, innovation, competitiveness and modernised social welfare.
It is a challenge that Parliament must rise to, working with the other institutions, Commissioner Prodi and his colleagues, and the Council.
If we do not, nobody will understand or forgive us for not realising our aim.
The reason, as I mentioned before the Lisbon Summit, relates to those who are in the gallery with us today - the citizens of Europe.
We have to turn Lisbon into something that means something to them, something to the people in my home town of Wolverhampton.
To me, Lisbon is all about creating a Europe of highly-paid, highly-skilled, high-value-added jobs.
If we can achieve that sort of Europe from the Lisbon process, it will be good for our citizens and for Europe as a whole, because what could be more socially just and inclusive than a Europe that genuinely benefits from full employment and good jobs that everybody can enjoy?
That is our challenge.
In conclusion, I thank the Portuguese presidency very much.
I thank the President-in-Office, the Minister and, in particular, Prime Minister Guterres for all the personal effort he put into this process.
At Lisbon the Portuguese presidency gave us the key to unlock a decade of sustained innovation, competitiveness and job creation across our continent.
Now is the time for us as a Parliament, the Commission and the Council to work together to ensure that key is turned.
- (PT) Mr President, Mr President of the Commission, Mr President-in-Office, the document adopted at the Lisbon Summit is rather abstract, and this may mean that it is not implemented equitably.
The policy that has been adopted could conceivably result in a high rate of growth, rivalling that of the United States, but it is unlikely to prevent social exclusion or achieve social cohesion and regional balance.
I wish to discuss this problem, which affects fundamental European policies.
The European Council ought to be aware that in Europe today, the lowest per capita income and the highest levels of employment exist side by side in the same regions or countries.
This requires a European employment policy with its own budget, linked to the Structural Funds policy that the European Council does not want to blindly accept.
The Council should also be aware of the fact that there are countries in Europe that are not highly developed, but which are nevertheless prepared for the knowledge economy.
They have a high-quality system of technical, university and professional education, but since they do not have the necessary economic development, they are once again seeing their sons and daughters emigrate.
These young people, paradoxically, are acting in the same way as computer experts who are trained in India but then go to work in the United States.
The Council ought to think about this and work towards a real Europe.
- (PT) Mr President, the results of the Lisbon Summit demonstrate that everything the Portuguese Presidency has up to now presented as a priority for employment and for combating social exclusion has merely been a massive attempt to pull the wool over our eyes.
Its supporters may try to make its conclusions look rosy, whether they are talking about the so-called modernisation of the European social model or about the need to make the European Union the most competitive area in the world, but they cannot hide their real aims, which are to produce a labour market free from the conditions imposed by legislation designed to protect workers' rights, to put social security entirely in the hands of the financial markets and to speed up the process of liberalisation in fundamental sectors such as gas, electricity, postal services, transport and telecommunications.
Therefore, instead of more high-quality jobs with employment rights, instead of a reduction in working hours whilst maintaining salary levels and without flexible working arrangements, the summit' s decision will, in practice, lead to poorer jobs, which are less secure, which provide fewer rights, and do not offer an effective system of social protection.
Instead of high-quality public services which meet users' needs, protect the most vulnerable sectors of society and generate high-quality jobs, the Council has decided to speed up privatisation to satisfy the interests of economic groups and to increase their profits.
This will have a harmful effect on employment and on working conditions - which will deteriorate - and on the environment and town and country planning.
If we are to draw something positive from this, it is the major demonstration by tens of thousands of workers who condemned the growing instability of employment as they marched past the Lisbon Summit.
They condemned unemployment and social exclusion and demanded more high-quality employment, better salaries, more social rights and a change of direction in European policies, in order to achieve economic and social cohesion.
Mr President, in the debate preceding the Lisbon Summit I said that the preparatory documents seemed to show that, in tackling the new economy, the Heads of States and Government were torn between a centralised, bureaucratic approach and a freer, more simply coordinated approach.
Following this Council meeting, in our view, the scales have tipped in favour of the freer approach, since the Lisbon conclusions declare that there is no question of adding further European regulations to those which exist already but, quite the contrary, of implementing - the expression is used several times - a new open method of coordination.
The knowledge economy which we are moving into is thus already having a retroactive effect on our concept of the European institutions, for this new method of coordination must mean, as we already know, that top-down authoritarian integration and uniformising regulations are to be abandoned and replaced by a system in which the States and national democracies will play a much more important role, and will combine within networks following the specific model of a computer network.
The Union as such must then simply play the role of coordinator and catalyst, to use the precise word used in the Lisbon conclusions.
This new method also entails the European Council rediscovering its fundamental strategic guidance mission, while allowing the various Councils of Ministers to take the practical decisions and the Commission to prepare and execute policy.
This is the way we may finally achieve more balanced and more democratic European institutions.
The Lisbon conclusions, Mr President, may, however, in other respects, give rise to a number of reservations.
Since there is not much time, let me cite just one: the proactive goal of increasing the proportion of women in employment from 51% to 60% by 2010.
This really is the type of authoritarian attitude which should be a thing of the past.
It is not up to the authorities to say how many women must go out to work.
This is a matter for the interested parties and civil society.
The authorities must simply ensure that housewives receive fair treatment and that personal choices may be made freely.
Mr President, I decided to speak in this debate when I read the truly excellent analysis of the current situation in Europe produced by the European Commission before the Lisbon Summit.
It is true that the Lisbon Summit also represented something of a sea-change in attitudes towards the global society and in particular towards issues like e-commerce.
At the same time there was a tension in Lisbon between the old world of the international socialists and the new world of those who have a slightly wider perspective.
So the city of Henry the Navigator may become the city of Netscape the navigator, a new approach which I thoroughly welcome.
The summit was variously described as a social summit and an e-summit and so on.
Much was said about the economic and social policies that were supposed to emanate from Lisbon.
The reality is that the European social model is now living in London and she is called Laetitia Casta.
She is Marianne, the symbol of France but taxes in France are now so high that she now has to go and live in London despite the vastly increased taxation under Labour.
Very soon now the government is about to raise GBP 16 billion through the sale of the third generation mobile telephone licences as Mr Suominen reminded us.
There is tension around Europe but at the same time I detect a sea-change.
I rarely speak in debates after summits but this is an important one.
I therefore look forward to some genuine action from the European Commission.
It is action not words that is needed.
When I talk about words, I am thinking about words like "bench-marking" and "peer review" .
I am sure there are not many people in this Chamber who understand what bench-marking or peer review means.
Do not worry, it is meaningless.
What actually matters is a light touch on the e-commerce directive, a light touch on telecommunications.
Give people the freedom to use the Internet to their advantage, to their benefit, for social reasons, for educational reasons, for the disabled - all the benefits the Internet can give us.
We do not need the heavy regulatory touch of the past.
Please Mr Prodi, ignore your friends on the Left and stick with the new world not the old world.
Mr President, let me say to Mr McMillan-Scott that a spectre is haunting Europe, the spectre of economic efficiency and one wonders why it is still so evasive despite all the great efforts that liberalism has put into it.
It is a question of strategy really.
So what is the strategy for making a success of this incredible economic transformation Lisbon is promising us?
It is a strategy which is radically innovative.
All those who have endeavoured to tackle the problem of the European economy so far have done so within the context of the old economy.
Guterres decided that the problem was practically insoluble in this context and, rather than having to contend with the deadlocks of the old economy, he decided to circumvent them altogether.
It is what you might call a great inspirational strategy which proposes that Europe put all its effort into the new economy, into information technology and into telecommunications in the hope that, as this new economy develops, the old economy will take a new direction in its wake.
The most basic example is employment.
Europe currently has 16 million unemployed whom it cannot absorb.
At the same time, there are 800 000 highly-skilled jobs in the new economy which cannot be filled due to a lack of skilled human resources.
Some say these figures are set to reach 1.6 million next year.
If Europe does not learn its electronic lessons fast, these unfilled jobs will multiply and the economy will slump.
And even if we do fill these 800 000 jobs, there will still be a further 15 million unemployed.
We do not appear to have solved any problems whatsoever.
However, the new technologies can, with our support, lead to competitiveness and cost reductions in all sectors.
And as all the other sectors become more productive, thanks to the impact of the new economy, they too will create more jobs.
This is the simple yet great idea of Lisbon.
The question is whether this idea will work in practice.
And whether or not it will work in practice depends on whether or not we are capable of a new financial perspective in Europe.
All these years, Europe has been convinced that investing taxpayers' money into the old-style economy was a waste of time.
This is where all the zero deficits, stability plans and so forth come from.
It is debatable just how much of ECOFIN' s die-hard approach was totally justified, but perhaps we are now in a position to leave this behind us.
Lisbon may well have shown us how to leave this behind us because, if we are to attain its objectives, we need public investment in the new economy.
We need to build information highways, on which private enterprises can of course then create and run their own vehicles.
However, these highways can only be built by the Member States, by the public sector and by the European Union.
Lisbon will be judged on this, i.e. on whether or not we are capable of integrating the public and private economies in an original and enterprising manner.
Mr President, as far as the European Council in Lisbon is concerned, even though it was dedicated to employment, the unemployment of eighteen million women and men in the European Union and the human and social tragedy that this represents are just a grey area in a current economic situation which is more promising than it has been for a generation.
Such cynicism borders on candour!
The present situation, which is exceptionally advantageous to employers and the property-owning classes, arises specifically because of the extent of unemployment, the pressure that this exerts on wages and the generalisation of precariousness.
As for the promise to create twenty million jobs in the years to come, this is just as deceitful as it is ridiculous.
The Council presented the so-called new economy as the main provider of jobs for the future, but the stock exchange crisis which occurred a few days after the Summit demonstrated just to what extent the new economy was, more than anything, the basis for old-style speculation, and that the promised jobs in information and communication technologies were, after all, just virtual jobs.
At the same time, the demonstration of Alsthom' s European workers in Brussels reminded us that the real economy, that of big business, is continuing to cut thousands of jobs and to make unemployment worse, while governments back these firms up by cutting support and allowances to the unemployed in order to force them into accepting any old job, at any price, under any conditions.
Mr President, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, on one side of the coin we read that economic growth and employment figures are up, the e-Europe action plan is in the pipeline, unemployment is beginning to drop slightly and the economic and employment forecasts are good.
On the other side of the coin, we read that there are still 15 million unemployed, the telecommunications and Internet services sector is underdeveloped, there is a widening skills gap in information technology, structural long-term unemployment, too many state monopolies and fetters, competitive disadvantages vis-à-vis the USA and shortcomings in the implementation of European innovations.
Lisbon aroused expectations as far as rectifying these shortcomings is concerned.
And anyone who arouses expectations must be measured by his or her actions, must introduce consistent benchmarking, carry out regular follow-ups, formulate ambitious goals, draft a master plan in every country as to how these goals are to be implemented and, above all, quickly follow words with deeds.
We shall measure the Member States, as represented by the Council, by when each school in Europe has Internet access, by when electricity, gas, telecommunications, the postal and transport markets are fully deregulated, by what the charter for small enterprises really says and by when the incorporation offensive is implemented.
We shall measure you by when the financial services internal market is complete and by when the quantity and quality of innovation and its implementation makes Europe the most competitive and dynamic economic area in the world.
Allow me to say in support of Mrs Raschofer that, because of our experience with you, we shall measure you by your conduct vis-à-vis Parliament and the Commission during this process and by when a sustainable reduction in unemployment is actually achieved.
Our eco-social market economy model is the basis for our action and we call for it to be developed further.
Mr President, I welcome the Lisbon conclusions.
In fact, seen from the perspective of employment and social policy and against the long procession of summits which preceded it, Lisbon stands out along with Luxembourg in terms of the potential it offers us.
I stress the word "potential" because, as others have said, we now need to look at the follow-up.
Partly that follow-up is institutional.
We will be looking very carefully, for example, at how the broad economic guidelines will be prepared, at just how successful the input of the Social Affairs and Employment Council will be in emphasising the need for employment and social cohesion when it formulates the broad economic guidelines.
Also, we are told that each spring the European Council will consider an overall report to be produced by the Commission that will deal with structural indicators to be agreed.
We wonder who will agree those structural indicators and just how strong the synthesis report to be produced by the Commission will be.
What will the role of the Commission and this institution be?
Will it, in fact, be largely intergovernmental?
If so, I think we will be disappointed.
But we are not just concerned about the institutional follow-up.
We are also concerned about the substance.
What proposals, for example, will the Commission come forward with by June this year on social inclusion, as it was challenged to do in the Lisbon conclusions?
Further than that, how quickly will the high-level group on the future of social protection begin to move into the realm of a convergence strategy for social protection that this House has called for?
So we are concerned with the substantive follow-up as well.
One point disappoints me - that is the stance of the EPP in all this.
It is trying to pretend that it welcomes the outcome because it is largely liberal and concentrates upon the liberal market aspects.
It should be honest and say that, like us, it has always supported a social market economy.
We welcome the emphasis upon the smooth and efficient functioning of markets.
But as always we want that to be balanced by solidarity and social inclusion.
I hope the group has the political honesty to accept that it continues to support that point of view.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, from amongst the very interesting Lisbon conclusions, please allow me to highlight a declaration which, because it is apparently technical - although I believe it is politically very important - has not yet been mentioned by previous speakers.
I am talking about the request to the Commission that it contemplate, for 2001, a coordinated strategy in the legislative field.
At the moment we have, to name but a few, initiatives such as SLIM, the Business Test Panel, the Regulatory Policy Guidelines and the Better Law-Making Report, not to mention the initiatives relating to codification or the quality of legislation.
Clearly this will all have to be coordinated and we will even have to go further in laying down the new regulations or restructuring the existing legislation.
Improving quality must not only be directed at Community legislation but also at the legislation of the Member States.
In all new legislation we must establish a better balance between 'self regulation' and 'public regulation' , in accordance with what, in the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit, in some initiatives, has been called coregulation.
We must review the 'Best Business Impact' initiative.
Throughout the whole of this exercise, we must take account of the interests of the consumers and the interests of the environment, and these are complicated tasks.
Returning to simplification, the SLIM initiative requires a complete revision.
We need a clear programme.
We also need this programme to be applied on a national level, where there is still a lot of 'gold plating' of directives when they are transposed.
We need expiry clauses and we need to improve codification.
Codification is currently too cumbersome an instrument, too ineffective, and therefore we perhaps have to reform the Treaty.
We have to tackle that reform of the Treaty.
Lastly, we have to regulate more quickly and be more effective.
Since we are in the Internet era, we have to take account of the fact that, in Internet terms, a year is equivalent to three months at the most.
Therefore we need to make improvements in that respect as well.
Mr President, congratulations on a particularly focused summit as regards: the clarity of the objectives; the analysis of the tasks needed to meet those objectives; and the built-in progress-chasing system.
There was particular emphasis at this summit on the European area of research and innovation, following the excellent communication from Commissioner Busquin.
This is a domain of severe under-achievement in the European Union.
We need deeper knowledge in science and technology.
We have grasped the need to rectify our lack - by means of patent protection, mapping of areas of excellence, tax incentives for research and development, an electronic network for scientists and enhanced mobility for our researchers.
The sixth framework programme will be another tool.
As well as deeper knowledge, we need wider knowledge.
We need people who have been disenfranchised in the areas of science and technology - women, older people and particularly those suffering disadvantage - to be on board in the quest for this wider knowledge.
We need to use the knowledge in better ways.
Of course, we need new products and we need new processes and we need new ideas about how our society should be run.
We also need new sustainable technologies.
The European Socialists are fully behind the leap forward which is possible given the cogent analysis that took place at the Lisbon Summit.
Mr President, many commentators have drawn adverse comparisons between the European Union and the old Soviet Union.
Both have been profoundly anti-democratic, both have seemed opposed to enterprise and wealth creation.
At the Lisbon Summit it appeared that the EU had rediscovered a commitment to enterprise.
Although I have some reservations about references to the social market in the EPP resolution, I am happy to support it.
Let us hope that it is carried into effect and is more than mere soundbites and press releases.
In direct contrast, the President of our Parliament made a remarkable speech in Lisbon which amounted to a virulent and vituperative attack on multinational companies, on liberal economics, on free markets and on the very heart of western capitalism.
I have no doubt that she was prompted by the best humanitarian intentions.
But we must understand that if her proposals were carried out, they would damage competitiveness and productivity, they would deter investment, they would hurt prosperity and, above all, they would increase unemployment in Europe.
She was attacking nothing less than the foundations of western capitalism, the engine which has delivered wealth and success undreamed of by earlier generations.
She said that Europeans are quite "scandalised by untrammelled capitalism, whose relocations, social dumping, ruthless exploitation ... and remorseless pursuit of profit at the expense of working men and women have a direct and traumatic effect on their lives."
This goes beyond socialism, this is pure Marxism.
It may have been appropriate for the Kremlin in the 1960s but it is totally out of place in 21st century Europe.
It is typical of this Parliament that we call for an end to unemployment yet we promote actions that have the opposite effect.
Her remarks fit this depressing tradition perfectly.
I do not know whether she was speaking for her party, for the Parliament or in a personal capacity but I absolutely reject, repudiate and condemn her remarks and am delighted to have this opportunity of publicly dissociating myself from them.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, in January and last month, we were able to congratulate the Portuguese Presidency on its initiative to hold this special Council and on the thorough and conscientious way in which the Council had been prepared.
And today, now that the Council has taken place, we would like to offer our congratulations on its conclusions and to congratulate President Prodi on the way in which the Commission, under his leadership, contributed to the Council' s success through the timely presentation of its own paper.
However, Mr Gama, all such conclusions have one drawback in common: they cannot change the world overnight.
Today, we have heard several speeches by Members who would like the Portuguese Presidency to come here and say "before the summit we had 15 million people unemployed and today we only have 10 million; before the summit we had 40 million people living in poverty and today there are only 30 million" .
We know how difficult the real world is and how difficult it is to get the European Union to agree on a strategic objective.
I would like to express a deep-felt concern here: whilst the presidency, the 15 Member States, the President of the Commission, the Commission itself, the President of the European Parliament and a substantial part of this European Parliament are agreed on an objective and on a strategic plan, the main group in Parliament is deeply divided over what it wants and over which path it should follow in the European Union.
We confirm once again that we agree with this objective and that we are fully behind it, but we also wish to reiterate that the only part of the American model we are interested in pursuing is that of growth, since we do not want Europe to be a carbon copy of the American model.
Nor do we want to copy the social aspects of the American model.
We urge the Portuguese Presidency and the Commission to continue in their determination to fight for us to be able to create our own model from the opportunities offered by globalisation, so that the wealth generated can be used to combat poverty and can be more evenly distributed to ensure that social cohesion, full employment and sustainable development will be the outcome - in ten years' time, but things should steadily improve up to then - of this meeting in Lisbon.
Congratulations, Mr President.
Mr President, I have to say that I have listened to this debate in increasing amazement, especially when I hear the socialist group talk about our resolution.
It appears that the socialist group only wants to hear one-sided applause and praise about everything which took place in Portugal.
We too would like to congratulate you, Mr Gama.
There is a certain likeness between you and your distant predecessor Vasco da Gama at Cape of Good Hope.
The employment situation in Europe seems to be slightly improving.
As far as this is concerned, congratulations are in order, also for the fact that many fine promises have been made.
It remains to be seen whether they will materialise or not.
This is not so evident as the Summit is remarkably opaque about this, especially if we consider the three most important Prime Ministers involved.
First of all, Mr Blair.
He makes enough noise but is destroying the British industry by setting the exchange rate for the pound far too high.
The French government is drafting a definition of social policy which implies that nothing should change and, as such, will run into problems with this social policy.
This is a problem too.
Finally, there is Mr Schröder, who does nothing at all, so we can be very brief about him.
Mr President, in a situation such as this, surely it cannot be expected from the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats that we come up with a 'hurrah' resolution.
We are satisfied with what the Portuguese Presidency has said and brought about, but we really need to wait and see whether action will follow.
We have listed a few problems.
There may be reservations regarding issues which have been presented by both the liberal group and our group.
However, we as the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats - and this is clearly spelled out in the resolution - proceed on the basis of the model of a social market economy, and this is what it is about.
It has taken socialists a very long time to get this far and we are pleased that they are nearly there.
We also hope that they will implement it efficiently.
Unfortunately, we have not yet seen any evidence of this.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the report to the European Parliament on the results of summits is always an experience.
It is an experience because if only half of what is regularly announced to us really happened, if Europe had already achieved the results which have now been presented to us as the slogan of the European Council - fighting unemployment and putting the European Union in the leading position on the world markets -, this alone would be a success.
Has the Council still not learned how little its political promises are worth when it then fails to implement anything and trivial matters are blocked in the Council for years?
Has the Council still not learned that we never solve any problems in Europe because we keep shifting them to European level?
Can the Council really back out of its responsibility in the individual Member States so easily?
As the European Parliament, we should not accept this.
The right model for successfully meeting the challenges of globalisation is competition for the most successful economic, employment, research, education and social policies, not European dumbing down.
Who, if not Europe with its different traditions and cultures, can find an answer to this, provided that we leave responsibility for problem solving where it belongs, namely with the Member States?
It makes no sense to define European targets for economic growth if we do not remove barriers to growth at Member State level.
It makes no sense to unify education policy at European level if we still have countless problems with arrangements for recognising diplomas.
Even the desire to connect all schools to the Internet is not a question, which should be dealt with at European level.
It needs to be done locally.
As a member of the Committee on Budgets, I warn you against doing this with European funds from the European budget.
Lisbon missed its big chance to really improve things substantially for the citizens of Europe.
Instead, all we heard were pipe dreams which can never be checked and for which the Council is responsible in the Member States, not at European level.
In the end, people will take their leave of such a Europe.
We must not allow that to happen.
Mr President, I believe in a common strategy which must be monitored from within Europe.
I think that the Lisbon Summit has given us a new impulse in this respect.
This is important and these are aspects which one would expect from a Summit.
But it goes without saying that the merit of this Summit, at which so many good intentions were formulated and which is also based on an excellent analysis, will be judged on the action taken subsequently.
Because a number of the matters which were brought together at the Summit - as, in fact, happened - had been formulated previously by the Commission.
The e-commerce document springs to mind, for example.
This is an existing document.
Another example is the intention to draft a legislative frame for pension funds.
This intention was formulated a long time ago.
In addition to the positive aspects of summits such as these, I would also like to make room for some criticism.
These summits try to build a momentum - and it is important that they do so - but this momentum caves in because so little action is taken subsequently, as a result of which people no longer believe in the next momentum.
The press now writes that the most important element of the Lisbon Summit was that it actually took place, nothing else.
This is very serious.
The content of the Summit was not bad, but faith in subsequent action is evidently ebbing and this is a very serious matter indeed.
I would like to list three elements which are lacking in my opinion.
Firstly, fiscal integration, which has been talked about for so long.
In order to take action in the economic field, fiscal integration is required.
Secondly, social security.
There should be a convergence programme, a kind of guideline for social security.
Thirdly, if you want to enhance employment for women, you will need to undertake some action in the care sector and not simply in the new technologies, however important they may be.
The care sector will be of key significance in years to come.
Finally, I do not share the view of the British Conservatives and I would like to make this quite clear.
It is important to point out that, within the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats, there are also voices other than these.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I feel that it was very important for this debate to be held and to have heard your opinions, your contributions, your points of view and your criticisms for, without such criticism, Europe cannot grow.
However, you will perhaps have realised that I have not come here to trumpet the successes of the Lisbon European Council, because that has already been done and it would be a waste of my time and of yours if I had come here to do that.
What I have come here to tell you is what the Portuguese Presidency is doing to consolidate the program laid down at the Lisbon European Council and what it is doing in terms of specific programmes to boost Ecofin, the Internal Market Council, the Education Council, the Telecommunications Council and the Research Council.
We already have specific programmes on which the sectoral Councils will begin work immediately.
The President of the Commission, yesterday in Council and today, here in the European Parliament, has also presented a very clearly timetabled programme of actions by the Commission for implementing the e-Europe programme.
This is a very important time for Europe to assert its identity: we have managed to control inflation at European level and in the Member States.
We have managed to stabilise public expenditure, to reduce deficits and to ensure a certain level of growth.
We have managed to reduce unemployment, and to launch the single currency, we are defining consistent policies for institutional reform, reform of the Council and the Commission, and we are also committed to enlargement and to building a very dynamic and innovative common security and defence policy.
So we could not afford to miss this opportunity - and the Lisbon European Council did exactly what was required - to provide Europe with a certain degree of coherence in terms of a general strategy for modernising the economy and employment.
We did so bearing in mind that this could not be done in an independent, self-sufficient way, but only by taking account of the fact that we are part of globalisation, that we are facing a competitive challenge on a world-wide scale and that we had to provide a European response to this challenge.
This is why the Lisbon European Council surprised those with excessively ideological positions, because it did not address employment using the clichés of the past.
Do you remember?
Two, three, four or five years ago, the issues of unemployment and employment were only discussed in terms of two theoretical opposites: state-funded job creation, resulting in spiralling public expenditure and deficits, or job creation through unemployment, through the lay-offs caused by excessively lax social policies.
So the Lisbon European Council marks a watershed in the way we perceive the challenges of modernising the European economy in a framework of global competition, on the one hand, and, on the other, the problems of employment itself.
This Council was nevertheless firmly focused on both modernisation and employment.
This is the first time that the European Union has set a goal for economic growth that is not to be imposed but which is aspirational: 3%.
This is the first time that the European Union has set goals in the field of overall employment by trying to raise the overall employment rate from 61% to 70%, and employment amongst women from 51% to 70%.
It is also the first time that the European Union has set goals for those parts of society that lack adequate preparation, in the 18-24 age group, and it is the first time that the European Union has set clear goals for more modern professional training, specifically professional training that will equip our citizens to address the problems of employment in a highly competitive economy and not in an economy which is old or obsolete, or in an economy based solely on manufacturing.
By setting very clear goals for fiscal policies, in order to gear them towards employment, or by setting goals so that the Commission can assess the sustainability of social security policies up to 2020, the Lisbon European Council has also established a new social agenda in Europe and will even enable the next European Council to focus on something that for years the European Council has not wished to focus on - a European social agenda.
What is significant is the fact that this was done without any scandal, without any great controversy, and in an absolutely consensual way.
To conclude, I would like to thank you for your speeches and to say that Lisbon European Summit marks a turning point in the way we talk about the problem of economic and social innovation.
And, of course, we who were so deeply involved in preparing the Lisbon European Summit, with the cooperation of everyone, the Commission, Parliament and our social partners, now also have a duty to say to you, that if we are not to treat this issue as a caricature, now is the time for everyone to get into the frame, as anyone who wishes to go back to mere caricature will not be in the frame at all.
Mr President, few words are needed to conclude this debate, for the debate itself has been extremely clear and detailed.
I would like to start from the Mr Martinez' s happy fault when he juxtaposed the two debates: I say "happy fault" because the atmosphere of the second debate, which was on Africa, could not have been more tragically different from the Lisbon debate.
The few days - hours even - which separated the two debates revealed a wealth of differences: when we talk of a new Europe, an innovative Europe, we must not forget that, across the water, there is a terrible situation in Africa which is out of control.
To return to Lisbon, the debate was intense and passionate because it touched on tangible subjects of major concern.
However, we must be clear on one point: although we did talk in Lisbon of the new economy, we cannot divide the economy into a new economy and an old economy.
Europe is like a huge seed, and its economic strength lies precisely in its tradition of operating in all sectors, both new and traditional, and excelling in the traditional sectors.
Now, the spread of new technologies, which we call the new economy, acts like fermentation process, completely transforming the old economy.
This is its strength.
E-commerce is not a separate end in itself.
The Internet and the other new tools cannot be regarded as a separate factor, but they can be translated into an enormous increase in the productivity of other sectors.
When the means of distributing the most basic, simple wealth changes, the entire economy changes as well.
This is the boost we were waiting for: we are now in a position to take the leap forwards, thanks to the extensive coordination achieved in Lisbon.
This begs another comment on Lisbon.
I have observed some differences of opinion over the role of Europe and the roles of the individual States.
You must understand that this is a network.
The importance of the Lisbon Summit does not lie in the fact that some areas have to be managed at European level, although a certain amount of large-scale coordination of investments does have to take place at European level.
Most of these innovations are the responsibility of the national, or even local governments.
That is clear.
The significance of Lisbon lies in the fact that, when we are united in our action, this boosts the productivity of the system.
If the same countries were each to act separately, the effect would not be great enough to boost the European economy.
This is the importance of these Summits: if we unite in our action, we multiply its efficiency.
This is the potential significance of Lisbon.
My final point is, once again, the development of human resources.
This applies to both new and old economies as well.
European investment in human resources is still low, and this is a huge area in which we must make up lost ground.
I feel that the goal of halving the number of 18-24 year olds who attend neither a school nor a training course is both realistic and of paramount importance.
This is clearly the way to overcome the problems experienced even by some of the larger European countries in recent months such as a shortage of young engineers and the need to import Internet engineers from the third world.
This is clear evidence of a development block, which is due precisely to the failure to exploit our human potential.
In Lisbon, our policy-making action was focused mainly on this issue, and certain major horizontal decisions were adopted which engage both public opinion and our own imagination.
Somebody mentioned the fact that the mobility of teachers and researchers was also discussed in Lisbon.
This gives me great pleasure for few people remember it.
Well, for this to occur at European level is revolutionary, although our task now is to set regulations in place to make teachers and researchers effectively mobile.
This is such an unprecedented idea to emerge from the fertile European intellectual climate that, if it succeeds, it will genuinely be a great leap forwards for the productivity of Europe and the European way of thinking.
In my opinion, these are the genuinely important horizontal decisions adopted in Lisbon.
Finally, we need a little bit of luck as well, for perception of this recovery is necessary for all these initiatives to be effective.
We have wept and wailed on each other' s shoulders for the last three years.
Either we have confidence in ourselves or we do not even attempt such measures, for what we lack is not money but confidence.
There was a meeting of the Commission today on the economic previsions, and I have to say that Europe has acquired a new dimension over the last few months, in terms of employment, commercial orders and company policies.
If we take into account the macroeconomic stabilisation referred to by President Gama, we have the genuine possibility of a sustained period of growth.
In Lisbon, we laid the foundations for exploiting this period of growth: now it is up to us to make sure we build upon them.
Thank you very much, Mr President of the Commission.
I have received eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Article 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon.
The debate is closed.
EU - Africa Summit (Cairo, 3 and 4 April 2000)
The next item is the Council statement on the EU-Africa Summit held in Cairo on 3 and 4 April 2000.
.
(PT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this Cairo Summit represents the result of four years of diplomatic work which has enabled the countries of the European Union and Africa to come together for this initiative, the first under this framework, overcoming many problems throughout the process, both of substance and of form.
The Cairo Summit instituted a mechanism for global dialogue at the highest political level which will enable us to add a new dimension to EU-Africa relations which have, until now, been limited either to bilateral frameworks or to regional platforms for dialogue, be they the ACP mechanism or the Barcelona Process.
The summit represents a turning point in relations between the two continents and will enable the European Union to make its strategic partnership with Africa as strong as its partnerships with Asia, the Gulf States or with Latin America.
The first sure indication of its success and of its historic importance was the level of representation of European and African countries: 58 countries - 45 from Africa and 13 from Europe - were represented at Head of State or Government level.
This ensured that all issues of common interest to the European Union and Africa were addressed, and on an equal footing, since both sides had the opportunity to express their concerns and also their common objectives.
In this context, all issues covered by these concerns and objectives - economic, political and development issues - were discussed in a frank and straightforward way.
I would like to highlight some significant measures adopted by the summit.
In economic terms, understanding was reached on the need to define policies which will enable African countries to gain maximum benefit from the liberalisation of trade throughout the world, thus reversing the current trend of consistently and progressively marginalising Africa in world trade.
The commitment to reduce world poverty to half its present levels by 2015 was reiterated.
On the important issue of African debt, and despite the fact that at the summit a huge range of countries stated their national policies on this issue, it was stipulated that the bi-regional group of senior officials, which will in the first instance ensure that the summit' s decisions are implemented, will prepare a report on the debt situation in African countries.
This report will then be studied at ministerial level, under the summit' s monitoring mechanism.
On the other hand, the African countries committed themselves to promote and respect human rights, to eliminate patterns of discrimination against women, to fully support the establishment of the International Criminal Court and to combat discrimination and intolerance.
In the area of good governance and the rule of law, both parties demonstrated their commitment to adopting specific measures to prevent and combat bribery, corruption and nepotism.
In this context, they expressed their willingness to adopt the necessary measures to guarantee that illegally obtained public funds deposited in foreign banks should be subject to investigation and returned to their rightful owners in the countries of origin.
Concern was also expressed about the harmful effect on development of military expenditure, which is constantly increasing.
Other important issues such as education, AIDS and the environment were addressed under the theme of development, with the understanding that these are essential elements of the challenge of sustainable development in Africa and of eradicating poverty.
One fundamental area of dispute between Europe and Africa is returning stolen or illegally exported cultural goods.
Some progress was made on this issue too.
The bi-regional group of senior officials will prepare a report for assessment at ministerial level of the viability of taking further action in this area.
The last part of the action plan concerns the monitoring mechanisms.
These mechanisms will guarantee the continuity of this overall dialogue between Europe and Africa at the highest political level, at ministerial and senior official level, and it has already been established that the second summit will be held in Europe in 2003, thus ensuring continuity with this process that has now begun with the first EU-Africa Summit - the Cairo Summit.
Mr President, the holding of the summit was in itself a success achieved after considerable difficulties.
These difficulties - mostly of a political character - remain and need to be tackled by Africa and Europe, both separately and jointly.
The summit was the first encounter at the highest political level between Africa and the countries of the EU.
It will add a new strategic and global dimension to the existing relationship between Africa and Europe and will bring that relationship to the same level as that we already have with Asia and Latin America.
The EU already has a deep and broad relationship with Africa, notably in the field of development, where that relationship is unique and backed up by substantial finance.
We are spending development assistance money at the level of EUR 2.5 bn per year.
For our part, we have done what we should do and more if we look at the HIPC initiative to help the highly-indebted poor countries.
Here the EU is still waiting for a number of G7 countries to play their part.
We want to see the African countries as equal partners in the 21st century - the first century they are entering as independent states.
The EU has a comparative advantage in regional integration that Africa can benefit from, and we will ensure it benefits from it in the coming years, when the organisation of regional economic cooperation will dominate the agenda in Africa.
The summit provided an opportunity for useful discussions on debt and other bilateral problems.
It also provided an opportunity to underline the need for Africans to participate actively in the WTO process and to seek support for the Community's approach.
It was possible for the EU to tackle politically sensitive issues, such as good governance and human rights, with African leaders at the summit.
Other difficult questions, such as the question of the return of cultural goods, were also discussed.
The declaration and plan of action adopted at the summit take account of the sensitivities on both sides.
Internationally recognised principles, in particular human rights, are respected and clearly reflected in the declaration.
This is important to note in view also of the very few statements made during the summit that deviated somewhat from this general consensus about the basic principles that we and others take for granted.
It is regrettable that the civil society forum could not take place in Cairo but representatives of the forum were received in Cairo in the margins of the summit.
The text adopted in Lisbon by the forum was widely distributed by the Algerian and Portuguese presidencies.
The follow-up to the summit should enable the EU to round off its existing relationship with Africa with a high-level relationship covering, in particular, a continental approach to political and security questions as well as economic issues.
The Commission will endeavour to make a success of the meetings of the bi-regional group to be held at senior official level.
The ministerial-level meeting to be held between summits should concentrate on questions which concern the entire continent, meaning a continental approach must be taken to political and security questions and questions which are not covered by the mechanisms set up under the existing ACP-EU, Mediterranean and South Africa agreements.
Our view is that the follow-up to the summit should wherever possible be pursued through existing mechanisms.
The background is that we already have a credible working relationship.
With the new EU-ACP Convention being successfully concluded a few months ago and with the EU-South Africa cooperation agreement now being implemented as planned, we have two very important additions to the MEDA cooperation and the Barcelona process.
This means that we have not only the perspective of this Cairo summit but also a well-established basis to continue, widen and improve our daily work.
Mr President, I welcome the fact that the Cairo EU-African summit took place, but I must stress my disappointment that no one from this democratically elected Parliament had the opportunity to address the summit, nor did NGOs have any input.
At the very least, the two Co-Presidents of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly could have made statements and this would have given an EU-African balance.
Members of this Parliament, through the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the ACP-EU Joint Assembly, have laid the foundation for many of the policies in the developing countries: the Martens report in 1997 pointing to the benefits of the Lomé Agreement; the Rocard report in 1998 strengthening the objectives for the future; my own report in 1999 on regional cooperation and integration which is top of the Cairo plan of action agenda; lastly, Mrs Kinnock's excellent report in 2000 on the future ACP-EU partnership agreement that sets the scene for the next 20 years.
The final Cairo plan of action is an excellent document if we can now turn words and good intentions into concrete actions.
I know debt relief was at the top of the African agenda and everything must be done to alleviate poverty, but we must have some evidence that funds saved go towards better health care, better education and an improved standard of living for people and not into arms and war materials.
For these ideas to come to fruition, African countries themselves have to make the effort towards good governance.
We have already seen some good election results.
Let us hope that we can see the same happening in Zimbabwe, Ivory Coast and Togo in the forthcoming elections.
The top priority of regional cooperation and integration should have strong political benefits as well as trade ones.
With only 6% of African trade being carried out in Africa there is huge potential for an increase in trade if tariff barriers and trade barriers are removed.
Many of these countries will need both time and financial help to compete in the world market, but these countries must understand there is no other option in this new era of globalisation.
This is all unattainable without peace and peace-building; conflict prevention, management and resolution must be top of the African agenda.
The OAU must be given international support to continue its work and the peace initiatives must come from the African countries themselves.
Where peace is achieved, help must be given for demobilisation and reintegration, and the use of child soldiers below the age of 18 must be banned.
Ethnic cleansing has been the horror of the last 25 years, and religious wars destroy the very fabric of a country.
Peace can bring prosperity.
The main thrust of our aim therefore must be better education leading to better health care.
Through AIDS and malaria, Africa is losing the very generation it needs to build its future.
This summit was a start but much has to be done to turn words into reality, and we, Members of this House, must be part of that new world.
Mr President, I appreciate that wide-ranging coverage of the issues by Mr Corrie.
I would like to concentrate on my view that poverty eradication in Africa must begin with children and the realisation of children' s rights.
The Cairo summit will be followed up by another forum in Dakar on basic education.
The need for basic education is the single most important cause of global poverty.
Therefore, we need to ensure that girls in particular have equal access at least to educational advantage.
We can see that education will deliver, it will stimulate the economy, it will offer opportunities to control population and increase health awareness.
Dakar is an opportunity to deliver on internationally agreed targets.
The EU should put its political will behind universal primary education by the year 2015.
Clearly commitments made a decade ago have not materialised.
Africa is falling deeper into mass illiteracy and poverty and being further marginalised from mainstream developments in the economic and democratic fields.
In sub-Saharan Africa more children are out of school now than a decade ago.
40 million African children today are not attending school.
One third of the classrooms in Africa do not even have a blackboard.
They have no toilets.
70% of their schools do not have any clean water.
Teachers are under-qualified, often unqualified, and they struggle without pencils, exercise books or blackboards, often trying to teach children who are simply too hungry to listen or concentrate.
Julius Nyrere, one of Africa' s most famous teachers, in those post-independence, optimistic days, said education is not a way of escaping poverty, it is a way of fighting it.
Some of you may be aware that Julius Nyrere spent his spare time translating Shakespeare into Swahili.
But that man' s wonderful dreams were lost.
He lived to see one third of African men illiterate and two thirds of African women.
I urge the Commission and the Council to make the link between poverty eradication and basic education.
The benefits for us all will be seen in increased child life expectancy, cuts in population growth and improvements in farm production.
We have the blueprints and I urge all of those with the political will to take action, to deliver for the children of Africa.
Mr President, I should like to thank the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council for their reports on the Cairo summit and say how really surprising I think it is that there has never been a summit of this kind before.
When, however, one learns that it took four years to arrange it, then this is not perhaps so extraordinary.
Will anything come out of a meeting of this kind?
Well, that probably depends upon how you look at it.
If you start by considering the disasters, famine, conflicts and problems with AIDS which Africa faces, then, as Mr Prodi says, it is certainly a long way from Lisbon to Cairo, in which case not a lot will come out of the summit.
But nor do I think that one could have expected it to.
That was not, of course, the purpose of the summit.
The purpose of the summit was to open a dialogue between the EU and African countries.
That dialogue was in fact initiated, and it is safe to say that, at times, it was fairly unrestrained with its demonstrations and its wrangles or, in any case, point-scoring.
I believe, moreover, that both Africa and the EU can learn from dialogues of this kind which, I believe, are also a prerequisite of our avoiding the risk of African countries' displaying bitterness about the history they partly share with countries in Europe.
I believe that the final document will prove to be an important reference point in connection with further cooperation between the EU and Africa.
This is due firstly to the fact that the document in itself constitutes an important signal about increased cooperation between the EU and Africa and about the fact that we have not forgotten Africa, and secondly to the document' s emphasis upon the interrelatedness of democracy, politics and economics and upon the fact that Africa' s integration and development should not, therefore, be seen in divided and piecemeal terms but as integral parts of a single whole.
Whether or not concrete results will be achieved in this way will depend, of course, upon the political will we show in the future.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Cairo Summit gave rise to great expectation among African countries, particularly among those which hoped to see their debt cancelled.
Europe' s response to this was to say that it was too great a call upon its own resources to move towards the complete cancellation of the debt.
On the contrary, we affirm the political need to restore balance in the relations between African and the European Union.
After having plundered the natural resources of Africa very widely, and in fact continuing to do so, we must cancel our historical debt to them by cancelling their current debt to our banks.
This would enable us to pursue relations on a sounder basis.
And the Members of the European Union must stop lying.
We are asking African countries to respect democratic principles, but we are perpetuating antidemocratic practices in order to guarantee our own financial interests, in the style of Elf or Total, in a number of countries.
We order African countries to guarantee the plurality of political parties and allow the NGOs freedom of expression, but we negotiate only with Heads of States, the majority of whom represent only themselves, forgetting to invite the NGOs to the Cairo Summit.
We are asking African countries to accord women a larger place in society, but we ought to begin by establishing parity in our own countries.
Need I remind you that some European Union countries have less than 10% of women members in their national parliaments?
We expect the African countries to observe cease-fires, but we are fanning the flames of conflict with our arms exports to belligerents.
But none of this is the key issue.
As long as the European Union does not provide itself with the resources to ensure that the agreements for the granting of mandatory licences for the production of medicines to combat the AIDS pandemic are applied, expecting any progress in the African economy will remain in the realms of the pious hope.
For how can one expect a country in which a quarter of its young people are dying from AIDS every year to have a booming economy?
Once again, as we have already said, the European Union and the Member States must make their actions consistent with their statements.
For, while we are hesitating, while we are shilly-shallying, while we are discussing, Africa is dying.
Mr President, first of all I would like to emphasise that I consider the fact that this summit has been held to be extremely positive.
It has always been our opinion that every effort should be made to achieve this objective, as we have always felt that it would be a good opportunity to launch a genuine partnership that would be of mutual benefit to both continents.
But we also feel that the results of the summit fell considerably short of what was possible and indeed desirable.
I even think that it was the difficulties along the way that led to the idea that the event should be held in the first place, orthe formal meeting and the group photo, and not what could and should result from it, with a view to establishing a strategy for this partnership on a new footing.
Indeed, the conclusions do not strike me as being adequate to address current needs and opportunities.
It is obvious that economic issues are shaping a genuine rapprochement between the two continents, a fact which cannot be hidden by the individual positions of some Member States, which have a limited but positive influence.
I am referring in particular to external debt relief for the LDCs.
This is occurring because the European Union, which has been consistently and mistakenly withdrawing its cooperation, is being affected or guided in its cooperation with Africa by two fundamental ideas.
On the one hand, by the prospect of transferring traditional, preferential relations to the rigid framework of the WTO, a fact that became obvious in negotiations on the post-Lomé agreement.
On the other hand, by the priority being given to relations with Eastern Europe, which was clearly demonstrated by the cuts in expenditure on cooperation in the current budget year.
It is obvious that with this kind of outlook and in the light of the enormous problems and shortfalls facing most African countries in terms of the economy, the environment, health, infrastructure, conflict resolution and poverty, amongst others, it is difficult, if not impossible, to cement a genuine partnership which is effective and lasting.
This is the route we must follow in the future.
I say "must" because, contrary to what has just happened, I hope that in future the European Parliament and the NGOs will be part of this process.
I also say this because I hope that this summit will at least contribute to a greater awareness of the real problems that exist in the field of cooperation with Africa, and that it will represent a warning call for the need to change tack in this area.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in the 1960s people used to say Africa was not on the right track, and now, in 2000, Africa has still not arrived.
And why not?
Because no destination was established.
Where do you expect to get if you do not know where exactly you are heading?
Africa' s initial objective was to achieve independence, with nation states instead of ethnic tribes, and the result was Rwanda, the Hutus and the Tutsis, Nigeria, the Ibos, and Biafra.
The next objective was Socialism, the fair-haired comrades.
Black Africa was supposed to turn red.
The result was famine in Ethiopia, Algeria' s agriculture destroyed, not to mention Guinea under Sékou Touré.
The white man, Mitterand, then offered Africa parliamentary democracy, parties instead of tribes.
The result was a permanent situation of coup d' état, even in the Ivory Coast.
The present objective appears to be liberalism, the market, the IMF, the World Trade Organisation.
The result is rebellion by the poor people of Tunis and the poor people of Casablanca at the rise in prices, European meat destroying the Fulani' s livestock farming in Africa, the Latin American banana destroying the Cameroon or Ivory Coast banana, and fats extracted from GMOs are about to destroy the Ivory Coast' s cocoa.
All in all, from Socialist Africa to ultraliberal Africa, from the European Development Fund to the World Bank, from the summits in Bujumbura, Addis-Ababa, Nairobi, Casablanca, and now, on 3 April, Cairo, it is always the same assessment, the same threesome of poverty, epidemic and massacre.
Even so, on 4 January, the UN found the final solution, or the miracle cure: a proportion of the 800 million Africans would have to emigrate.
They even set a figure: 159 million Africans were to be unloaded on Europe by 2025.
In the same way that the problems of the inner city are not solved by building towns in the countryside, Africa' s problems will not be solved by shifting part of Africa to Europe.
The logical thing to do today is to apply to Africa what has worked elsewhere, what has worked wonders in our countries, in the United States, in Europe, the solution which in our countries created heavy industry, agriculture, the textile industry, the solution which in our countries created growth and sustainable development.
There is one word for this solution - protectionism, and there is one instrument for this solution - customs barriers.
This solution has been worked out in theoretical terms, and called 'self-centred development' .
And, what is more, the new Senegalese President is inspired by this, telling the young people that they should get involved rather than waiting for the billions to arrive from Europe.
In practical terms, Africa will achieve the first stage in growth according to the Rostow model if it protects its agriculture, its livestock farming, its self-employed craft industry, and its emergent economy.
Opening up to the world market, on the other hand, will expose it to the law of the jungle and to the plundering of the natural resources of Africa, wood, oil, minerals, the flora and even the fauna, by multinationals.
This is, moreover, what we have seen, ladies and gentlemen, with the privatisation of specific key sectors in Africa.
For the Africans it was a negative outcome.
Africa does not therefore need either the cut-throat world economy or the economy of world charity, with the Holy Father and the Blessed Jacques Chirac, or the cancellation of a government debt of EUR 300 billion.
The watchword of the solution is customs protection on the African side and, on the European side, intelligent intergovernmental cooperation, of which the Lomé Convention was a prime example.
In this respect, the Mediterranean could serve as a test bench for a Euro-African policy which respects identities.
We in the Front National proposed a practical working method which involved dealing with the individual issues - water resources, soil erosion, desertification, the management of fisheries resources, livestock farming, pollution, control of migration flows - in a Marshall plan for the Mediterranean and Africa which would be funded from customs duties, reimbursable to African states in the form of open credit accounts in European banks.
We have proposed an international organisation, with an intergovernmental high-secretariat of the Mediterranean.
This would have its headquarters in Cairo, Tangiers or Tunis.
An interparliamentary assembly, like that of the ACP.
I feel that Athens would be the ideal site, or perhaps even a university in Valencia, Montpellier, Nice or Barcelona.
And there perhaps the words of Raymond Loulle would hold sway.
The practical implementation of these Euro-Mediterranean projects, respecting the identities of both shores, north and south, and involving around twenty Euro-Mediterranean states, would open the way to greater ambitions.
It could then be extended to relations between Europe and sub-Saharan Africa.
This is a great project, Mr President, on the scale of humanity as a whole, and humanity needs both Africans and Europeans.
All the more reason not to flood Africa with the unregulated world economy and not to flood Europe with an influx of people.
Humanity needs Africa where, it is said for the first time, in Kenya, man first stood upright, and humanity needs Europe where, for the first time, in Greece, thought first stood upright.
Mr President, when Mr Solana came to visit our group last week and was questioned about the outcome of the Cairo Summit, his answer was that the atmosphere had been good, which is more important than an outcome.
I disagree with him on this.
Commissioner Nielson also said something to that effect.
I think that the atmosphere is important, but as a basis for reaching sound agreements.
If the agreements are not forthcoming, then a good atmosphere is neither here nor there.
Nonetheless, an EU-Africa Summit is to be welcomed.
I also feel positive about the Portuguese Presidency' s initiative.
This huge continent is still beset with a lack of democracy, war, human rights violations, drought, flooding and chronic poverty affecting large parts of its population.
There are most certainly a number of countries which are better off, which boast sound growth figures and where the first signs of prosperity are visible, but there are also countries where the situation has dramatically changed for the worse.
Mr President, the European Union has over the past 25 years invested a great deal of time and effort in development and cooperation.
It is disappointing to have to state that this aid has not always had the required effect.
In our opinion, we need a new Africa policy, a policy in which democracy and sound management are prerequisites for aid and cooperation.
The Union can then also be expected to adapt its agricultural and trade policy in such a way that it is of more benefit to Africa and not, as is now often the case, a source of further disadvantage.
In return, we can expect African countries to cooperate better at regional level, open up their markets and give their economies a fair chance.
At the same time, Africa needs sound budget management combined with effective social policy, good education policy and sound health care.
Excessive spending on defence or futile projects should be avoided.
Mr President, the African countries have asked us to clear their debts.
This is vital for the poorest countries, especially if these enjoy good leadership and a balanced budget.
But more than anything - as underlined by Commissioner Nielson -we need to treat Africa in an adult manner.
We need to support what works but we also need to dare to speak up if certain things are unsuitable.
We need to support good leaders and good governments, but offer no support to dictators, bad leadership or countries riddled with corruption.
If the Africa Summit in Cairo has led to this kind of realism, then we have created more than just a good atmosphere and we are probably on the right track.
Mr President, the recent Euro-African Summit has given rise to concern, even vexation, but at the same time, it has also given rise to satisfaction and hope.
There was concern about the way the Summit was being managed - it did not even appear in the programme for the current six-month period - with moments of confusion, suspense and abundant rumour-mongering, which were incompatible with the seriousness and rigour which should be expected from the European Union given the importance of this historic meeting, the first to be held at the highest level between European and African leaders.
There was concern and vexation as a result of the way in which the European Parliament remained in the margins of the Summit process, partly due to our indifference.
This marginalisation, and that of the African parliaments, demonstrated a considerable incoherence on the part of the organisers.
It is incoherent to go around preaching good government, democracy and the rule of law while, in practice, ignoring the parliamentary institution which is essential for the realisation of those principles.
There was vexation on discovering that certain NGO meetings - the fora of civil society - which should have taken place in Cairo, sponsored by the European Commission itself, could not take place because of communication problems or the veto, still unclarified, of some part or other of the organisation of the Summit.
However, I said at the beginning that there were also positive aspects to this Cairo Summit which were cause for satisfaction and hope.
There was satisfaction at the fact that the conference was able to take place at all - which in itself is a great thing - and we should therefore congratulate the Portuguese Presidency and Commissioner Nielson, whose efforts helped to overcome the difficulties, intrigues and lazy defeatism of many people who assumed that this summit would be suspended, although it was going to fill an unjustifiable vacuum in the external relations of the European Union.
There was also satisfaction with regard to some of the tangible results of the conference in areas such as the cancellation of debt, the elimination of anti-personnel mines and the return of cultural goods pillaged by colonial powers.
Europe must now also commit itself to the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts, the provision of humanitarian aid for famines and the treatment of illnesses such as Aids or malaria which decimate the African population.