# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
Sixtieth session
Item 109 of the provisional agenda*
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Secretary-General
Contents
Introduction
In its resolution 50/53, entitled “Measures to eliminate international terrorism”, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to follow up closely the implementation of the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism (resolution 49/60, annex) and to submit an annual report on the implementation of paragraph 10 of the Declaration, taking into account the modalities set out in his report to the Assembly at its fiftieth session (A/50/372 and Add.1) and the views expressed by States in the debate of the Sixth Committee during that session.1
In paragraph 10 of the Declaration, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to assist in the implementation of the Declaration by taking, within existing resources, the following practical measures to enhance international cooperation:
“(a) A collection of data on the status and implementation of existing multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements relating to international terrorism, including information on incidents caused by international terrorism and criminal prosecutions and sentencing, based on information received from the depositaries of those agreements and from Member States;
“(b) A compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, based on information received from Member States;
“(c) An analytical review of existing international legal instruments relating to international terrorism, in order to assist States in identifying aspects of this matter that have not been covered by such instruments and could be addressed to develop further a comprehensive legal framework of conventions dealing with international terrorism;
“(d) A review of existing possibilities within the United Nations system for assisting States in organizing workshops and training courses on combating crimes connected with international terrorism.”
By a note verbale dated 31 December 2004, the Secretary-General drew the attention of all States to General Assembly resolution 49/60 and the Declaration annexed thereto and requested them to submit, by 31 May 2005, information on implementation under paragraph 10 (a) of the Declaration.
In the note verbale, the Secretary-General also noted that in the information to be submitted by States they might wish to give particular attention to paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 1269 (1999).
Furthermore, by a letter dated 31 December 2004, the Secretary-General invited relevant specialized agencies and other international organizations to submit information or other relevant material on implementation, pursuant to paragraph 10 (a) of the Declaration, by 31 May 2005.
As at 30 July 2005, replies had been received from Austria, Bahrain, Belarus, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Finland, Italy, Jamaica, Mexico, Oman, Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Several States referred to the information contained in their reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
The full texts of those reports can be found at http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/committees/1373.
Replies were also received from the following specialized agencies of the United Nations: the International Civil Aviation Organization, the International Maritime Organization, the International Monetary Fund, the World Health Organization and the World Meteorological Organization.
The International Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons also submitted replies.
The following intergovernmental organizations also replied: the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Council of Europe, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of American States and the League of Arab States.
Sections II, IV and VI of the present report contain information about measures taken at the national and international levels, based on materials transmitted by the Governments and the international organizations mentioned in paragraphs 4 and 5 above.
Section V describes recent developments related to General Assembly resolution 51/210.
Section VII deals with the publication of a compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism.
In its resolution 59/46, entitled “Measures to eliminate international terrorism”, the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to make a comprehensive inventory of the response of the Secretariat to terrorism as part of his report on measures to eliminate international terrorism.
Pursuant to that request, 39 Secretariat offices, departments and regional commissions, as well as programmes and funds, submitted information on their activities relating to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism, which is summarized in Section III.
With respect to paragraph 10 (c) of the Declaration, the present report does not contain an analytical review of existing international legal instruments relating to international terrorism.
Such a review was included in the report of the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session (A/51/336, paras.
Several suggestions for possible further action contained in that review are being acted upon through the implementation of Assembly resolution 51/210, as discussed in section V below.
Measures taken at the national and international levels regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism and information on incidents caused by international terrorism
Information received from Member States2
Austria
Austria indicated that it had signed, ratified and implemented the 12 universal counter-terrorism instruments.
It had also signed the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism, in May 2005.3
Austria accorded great importance to the counter-terrorism activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and had strongly supported the creation of the Global Programme against Terrorism.
In 2002, it had pledged to provide $1 million to that Programme.
At the regional level, Austria, along with Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and Spain, had prepared the text of the agreement on strengthening cross-border cooperation, especially in countering terrorism, organized crime and illegal migration, referred to as Schengen III, which was signed on 27 May 2005.
Austria is a party to the 1957 Council of Europe Convention on Extradition and its second Additional Protocol.
At the bilateral level, where no other treaty provisions existed, Austria's extradition practice was based on the Extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance Act of 4 December 1979, which allowed for the extradition of suspected or convicted terrorists on the basis of reciprocity even in the absence of an applicable treaty.
Austria relied on the Aliens Act of 1997 in ensuring that immigrants and asylum-seekers had not engaged in terrorist activities.
The Act regulates the entry, stay and residence of foreigners.
Bahrain
Bahrain provided the list of counter-terrorism instruments to which it was a party.
It also stated that a draft law on combating terrorism and a draft law amending Decree No.
4/2001 on the Prevention and Prohibition of Money Laundering had been presented to Bahrain's Parliament for approval.
Belarus
Belarus informed the Secretariat that it was a party to 12 counter-terrorism instruments and to the Treaty on Cooperation among States Members of the Commonwealth of Independent States in Combating Terrorism of 4 June 1999.3
In 2004, Belarus had ratified the protocol approving the statute on the procedure for organizing and conducting joint anti-terrorist measures in the territory of the States of the Commonwealth of 7 October 2002.
It had also acceded to the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
The House of Representatives of Belarus had passed, on 26 April 2005, an act amending and supplementing the Act on Measures to Prevent the Legalization of Funds Obtained by Illegal Means, aimed at strengthening the legal and regulatory framework for combating terrorist financing.
The Financial Monitoring Department of the State Monitoring Committee had been established and operated in accordance with Presidential Decree No. 408 of 14 September 2003.
The Department was mandated to take measures to combat the laundering of proceeds of crime and the financing of terrorism.
Belarus, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation and Tajikistan had signed, in Moscow, on 6 October 2004, the constituent documents establishing the Eurasian Group on Money-Laundering and Financing of Terrorism.
Belarus had submitted five reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Bulgaria
Bulgaria informed the Secretariat that it had ratified the main universal counter-terrorism instruments, as well as the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism and the Protocol amending that Convention.3
Bulgaria also stated that it had adopted, in 2002, an act amending and supplementing its Penal Code, which provides for special corpora delicti for terrorism and the financing of terrorism, consistent with the counter-terrorism instruments of the European Union and the United Nations, as well as relevant Security Council resolutions.
The amended Penal Code criminalizes forming, leading and being a member of a terrorist group, as well as preparing for or threatening to commit acts of terrorism.
It also allows the confiscation, in part or in whole, of the property of perpetrators of terrorist crimes and of persons financing their activities.
The 2003 Act on Measures against the Financing of Terrorism provides for the freezing of funds, financial assets and other property likely to be used for terrorist purposes.
The Act also prohibits the rendering of financial services, funds, financial assets or other property for the said purposes.
On 16 February 2005, the National Assembly of Bulgaria adopted a new Criminal Assets Forfeiture Act.
That Act regulates the terms and procedure for imposition of injunctions and forfeiture to the exchequer of any assets derived, directly or indirectly, from criminal activities, on condition that those assets had not been restored to the aggrieved party or had not been forfeited to the exchequer or confiscated under other laws.
The Criminal Procedure Code of Bulgaria contains special sections on extradition and legal assistance in criminal matters (articles 435 to 441 and 461 to 466), which conform to the international standards in the area of judicial cooperation.
These rules apply unless otherwise provided for in a treaty to which Bulgaria is a party.
Moreover, extradition and legal assistance could also be provided on the basis of reciprocity.
Bulgaria concluded bilateral agreements with South Africa and Turkey, in 2004 and 2005, respectively.
Cambodia
Cambodia presented the outline of its activities related to the implementation of counter-terrorism measures, which included legal and governing measures; information-gathering and information-sharing activities with national, regional and international authorities; an awareness campaign; and the strengthening of law enforcement.
Canada
Canada indicated that in addition to implementing Security Council resolutions related to terrorism, it had signed, ratified and implemented 12 counter-terrorism instruments.
It was also working towards signing and ratifying the recently adopted International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
Canada had ratified and implemented the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism.
Besides terrorist listing and freezing of terrorists' assets pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001), a number of terrorist-related prosecutions had been undertaken in Canada.
Since the adoption of the Canadian Anti-terrorism Act in 2001, one individual had been charged with participating in the activities of a terrorist group under the Criminal Code.
Prior to the adoption of the Anti-terrorism Act, terrorism-related prosecutions in Canada were dealt with under the relevant substantive offences, such as murder or hostage-taking.
In this regard, two major homicide prosecutions had been undertaken since 2002, relating to the destruction of an Air India flight in June 1985.
One prosecution had led to a conviction and the other to an acquittal.
Chile
Chile indicated that it had implemented the guidelines and measures contained in Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 1390 (2002) and 1526 (2004).
It was a party to all counter-terrorism instruments and had decided to sign the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
In 2004, Chile also ratified the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism.
In 1984, Chile adopted Act No. 18.314, which defined terrorist acts and established penalties for them.
The Act had been amended on various occasions in response to developments at the national and international levels.
In 2003, Act No. 19.906, which criminalized the financing of terrorism, had been promulgated.
That Act set out penalties of up to three years imprisonment for persons who solicited, collected or provided funds to be used for the commission of an offence defined as terrorist.
Amendments to Act No. 17.798, on arms control, were adopted in May 2005, providing, inter alia, for more severe penalties for offences such as the carrying of weapons and strengthening the requirements for weapons acquisition.
Chile had submitted four reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
It had also submitted reports to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).
Costa Rica
Costa Rica had established the Inter-Agency Committee of Terrorism, which was responsible for the distribution of information, coordination and policymaking in the area of counter-terrorism.
Three expert workshops on the drafting of legislation to implement universal counter-terrorism instruments and the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism were held in Costa Rica.
The 1974 International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea had been approved by the International Affairs Committee of the Legislative Assembly and had been submitted for approval by the special session of the Assembly.
The Inter-American Convention against Terrorism had also been approved by the International Affairs Committee and was awaiting adoption by the Assembly.
Costa Rica reiterated its call for the establishment of a post of a United Nations high commissioner on terrorism.
This proposal was designed to rationalize and better integrate the efforts currently being made by the various United Nations bodies such as the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the Ad Hoc Committee established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 51/210, the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The proposed office of the high commissioner on terrorism would incorporate the mandates and the human and financial resources for combating terrorism which are currently dispersed among a number of United Nations bodies.
It is suggested that the office would replace the Terrorism Prevention Branch, the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate and the Assessment and Technical Assistance Office of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Furthermore, it would incorporate the counter-terrorism mandates and funding allocated to the Office of Legal Affairs, the Department of Public Information and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Cuba
Cuba expressed the view that the granting of pardons to notorious terrorists of Cuban origin, namely, Luis Faustino Clemente Posada Carriles, Gaspar Eugenio Jiménez Escobedo, Guillermo Novo Sampoll and Pedro Remón Rodríguez, by the President of Panama in 2004 was unwarranted.
Cuba also observed that the United States of America was under an obligation to ensure that Posada Carriles and his accomplices Santiago Álvarez, Fernández Magriña and Orlando Bosch, among others, who had been responsible for terrorist acts in Cuba and other parts of the world, including in the territory of the United States, were brought to trial.
Cuba also stressed that Luis Posada Carriles must be extradited to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which had formally requested his extradition and had given all the legal guarantees for a fair and impartial trial.
Posada Carriles had been a fugitive from Venezuelan justice since 1985.
Denmark
Denmark informed the Secretariat that in 2004 the Danish Parliament had adopted Act No. 1434, on the enforcement of certain criminal law decisions in the European Union (EU).
The Act implemented three EU framework decisions: Council Framework Decision 2003/577/JHA of 22 July 2003, on the execution in the European Union of orders freezing property or evidence; Council Framework Decision 2005/214/JHA of 24 February 2005, on the application of the principle of mutual recognition to financial penalties; and the Council Framework Decision on the execution in the European Union of confiscation orders.
The three framework decisions were aimed at facilitating judicial cooperation in criminal matters among the EU member States, including on counter-terrorism matters.
On 22 October 2004, an Algerian national residing in Denmark was sentenced to four and a half years in prison for complicity in a robbery, the proceeds of which were to have been forwarded to a terrorist organization.
In November 2004, investigations were instituted in Copenhagen, against a Danish national of Moroccan origin who was suspected of violating section 114 (b) of the Danish Penal Code, concerning support to terrorism.
The suspect was believed to have distributed video material calling, among other things, for a holy war.
The investigations had not yet been concluded.
The Public Prosecutor for Serious Economic Crime was investigating two persons affiliated with the Al Aqsa Foundation organization.
That investigation related to a suspicion regarding the organization's possible links to the funding of terrorism in Palestine.
Finland
Finland indicated that the Protocol amending the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, as well as the relevant implementing legislation, had been approved by its Parliament on 13 May 2005.
Finland had signed the European Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism on 16 May 2005.
Italy
Italy provided a copy of the updated report that it had submitted to the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Jamaica
Jamaica provided a list of the counter-terrorism instruments that it had ratified or signed3 and indicated that it intended to become a party to the eight other universal counter-terrorism instruments, in compliance with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
Jamaica had passed the Terrorism Prevention Act of 2005,4 to implement the existing international treaties in relation to combating terrorism to which it intended to become a party.
In addition, it had amended its domestic legislation to enhance regulation of the financial sector by expanding the categories of institutions required to report financial transactions (i.e., the Bank of Jamaica (Amendment) Act of 2004).
Jamaica had amended its Extradition Act and the Mutual Assistance (Criminal Matters) Act and had included terrorist offences therein.
Jamaica was a participant in the Commonwealth Scheme and provided mutual legal assistance to a number of Commonwealth countries.
Mexico
Mexico informed the Secretariat that it was a party to 12 universal counter-terrorism instruments and inter-American treaties on the fight against terrorism,3 which strengthened its domestic legal framework in that area.
Mexico had submitted four reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee on measures that it had taken to combat and eradicate terrorism (see S/2001/1254, S/2002/877, S/2003/869 and S/2004/983).
At the national level, the Deputy Attorney-General's Office for Special Investigation into Organized Crime had been established.
The main objective of that Office was to conduct prosecutions in the event of acts of terrorism in Mexico and to participate, in coordination with the various agencies of the executive branch, in operations to identify and arrest alleged terrorists.
The legal provisions governing such coordination were included in the Political Constitution of the United Mexican States, secondary legislation and the international instruments to which Mexico was a party.
The key piece of secondary legislation was the Federal Penal Code, which specifically defined and penalized terrorism (article 139).
The rules of procedure of the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit had been amended in 2004, restructuring the Ministry's powers in the area of money-laundering.
A new agency, the Financial Intelligence Unit, had been established with powers to intervene in cases involving the financing of terrorism.
The amendments in question extended the system for the prevention of money-laundering and the financing of terrorism to include currency exchange centres and money transmitters.
In 2004, the executive branch had undertaken a comprehensive reform of the legislation in the area of the financing of terrorism, which included amending and supplementing various provisions of the Credit Institutions Act, the Act on Savings and Loan Associations, the Act on the Retirement Savings System, the Federal Act on Guarantee Institutions, the General Act on Mutual Insurance Institutions and Companies, the Securities Market Act, the Act on Investment Firms and the General Act on Credit Organizations and Related Activities.
Mexico had signed bilateral and multilateral customs agreements with the following countries: Belize, Canada, Costa Rica, Cuba, France, Guatemala, Israel, Nicaragua, Portugal, Spain, the Russian Federation and the United States of America.
These agreements regulated the exchange of information and cooperation among the customs departments of the signatory countries with a view to preventing, investigating and suppressing customs offences.
Morocco
Morocco provided5 a list of the counter-terrorism instruments that it had recently ratified.3 Morocco had consolidated its legislative arsenal through the enactment of Law No. 03.03 on the suppression of terrorism.
The provisions of that Law were derived from the counter-terrorism instruments.
Oman
Oman provided a list of the counter-terrorism instruments to which it was a party.3 It had submitted two reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee (see S/2002/87/Add.1 and S/2003/790).
In addition, Oman submitted the text of relevant articles of its Penal Code, the Control of Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, the Money-Laundering Act, the Alien Residence Act, the Omani Passport Act, the Identity Card Act and the Weapons and Explosives Act.6
Portugal
Portugal indicated that it had signed and ratified 12 counter-terrorism instruments.
It had incorporated into domestic law the obligations emanating from the relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1373 (2001).
Portugal had concluded several bilateral agreements to fight crime, including terrorism.
In 2001, it had signed such an agreement with the Russian Federation, and negotiations were ongoing to conclude similar agreements with Italy, Slovenia, Turkey and Ukraine.
Portugal had enacted a national law to fight terrorism (Law No.
52/2003 of 22 August 2003),7 which contained a definition of a terrorist group, organization or association.
The activities of individuals belonging to those groups, as well as the financing of the activities, had been criminalized and made subject to punishment.
The acts of terrorism and the acts of the financing of terrorism were considered predicate offences to money-laundering, in accordance with article 368˚-A of the Penal Code of Portugal and its Law No.
11/2004, which provided for the prevention and combating of the laundering of illicit gains.
The Portuguese Ministry of Justice had concluded a memorandum of understanding with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime concerning technical assistance.
In accordance with that memorandum of understanding, it held two meetings with the countries of the Organization of Portuguese-Speaking African States (Angola, Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau and Timor-Leste) in 2003 and 2004, in order to provide the necessary training to and identify the legislative needs of those countries in implementing the United Nations instruments in the areas of terrorism, corruption and organized crime.
Qatar
Qatar stated8 that it had enacted Law No.
28/2002, as amended by Law No.
21/2003, on combating money-laundering and Law No.
3/2004 on combating terrorism.
Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia provided a list of the counter-terrorism instruments that it had recently ratified.3 It had taken numerous measures to enhance the legislative framework to combat money-laundering, which included:
(a) The formation of a standing committee, consisting of representatives of a number of governmental agencies, which is responsible for handling all matters connected with money-laundering;
(b) The formation of money-laundering units in the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency and in Saudi banks, responsible for ensuring that no money-laundering transactions or suspicious activities take place and for notifying the competent authorities;
(c) The drawing up of a plan for the suppression of money-laundering by the standing committee for combating money-laundering and referral to the competent authorities for authorization;
(d) Endorsement of the 40 recommendations for combating money-laundering adopted by the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering and approval of its eight special recommendations concerning the financing of terrorism;
(e) The criminalization of money-laundering transactions and the provision of penalties under the Saudi Penal Code.
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Kitts and Nevis submitted the text of its Anti-Terrorism Act, enacted in 2002.9
Sudan
The Sudan provided a list of the counter-terrorism instruments to which it was a party.3
The Ministry of Justice had formed a committee to review the Counter-Terrorism Act of 2000 and the amendments thereto, so as to align it with international criteria.
The Governor of the Bank of the Sudan had also formed a committee to amend the law on money-laundering and align it with international criteria.
The Government of the Sudan had extradited a number of persons wanted in connection with their terrorist activities to Algeria, Egypt, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Saudi Arabia.
The Sudan had put the hijackers of the Libyan military aircraft in Khartoum on trial.
Sweden
Sweden referred to the three reports that it had submitted to the Counter-Terrorism Committee (see S/2001/1233, S/2002/691 and S/2004/476).
It also referred to the reports submitted to the Counter-Terrorism Committee by the European Union (see S/2001/1297 and S/2002/928) and by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (S/2002/34).
In addition, Sweden indicated that it had ratified 11 universal counter-terrorism instruments.3 Work was in progress on the ratification of the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection.
As of May 2005, two individuals had been convicted of the commission of a crime under the Swedish laws relating to the financing of terrorism.
Switzerland
Switzerland indicated that it had extended, until 31 December 2005, the following two temporary measures that it had previously adopted: the Ordinance concerning banning the Al-Qaida group and the organizations having connections with it, as well as the Ordinance on the duty of information and on the right of communication.
The ban not only targeted all activities carried out by the organizations, but also covered all acts performed in support of the organizations.
Switzerland's Federal Law on Secret Investigation had entered into force on 1 January 2005.
That Law improved the capabilities of the judicial police to infiltrate criminal circles, including those suspected of undertaking criminal terrorist activities or supporting terrorist organizations.
Also, a new federal law on DNA profiling had entered into force on 1 January 2005.
That Law would generally improve the efficiency of criminal prosecution in Switzerland, including in the domain of international terrorism.
Switzerland had arrested two persons in 2004 on charges of supporting and financing terrorist organizations, which had led to the extradition of the detainees to Serbia and Montenegro and to Spain in 2005.
In one case, the Federal Court of Switzerland had approved the provision of judicial cooperation to the United States of America concerning the financing of terrorism (order No.
In another case, the Court had rejected a request to free a person who had been imprisoned on the charge of having a relationship with Al-Qaida (orders No.
1S.3/2204 and 1S.4/2004).
In three additional judgements rendered by the Court, it did not accept the allegation that grave crimes involving violence (in particular assassinations) had a political character.
It was possible to make an exception exclusively when the crime — for example, the assassination of a tyrant — was the only practicable way of achieving important humanitarian goals.
This practice was also applicable to make a distinction between alleged terrorists and armed combatants at the service of a political resistance (Judgement No.
1A.80/2004, 1A.116/2004, 1A.4/2005).
Tunisia
Tunisia informed the Secretariat that it had ratified all the counter-terrorism instruments.
It had also ratified the Arab Convention for the Suppression of Terrorism and adopted mechanisms for its implementation.
Tunisia had acceded to the Convention on the Extradition of Offenders, the Convention on the Enforcement of Judgements, the Convention on Judicial Notices and Rogatory Letters and the Arab Riyadh Agreement on Judicial Cooperation, adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States.
At the national level, Tunisia had passed Act No.
75/2003, dated 10 December 2003, in order to support international efforts to combat terrorism and to prevent money-laundering.
The Act sought to achieve a fair balance between the society's right of self-defence and the need to deal resolutely with terrorism, by providing means for prosecuting and suppressing the perpetrators of crimes of this sort, on the one hand, and the individual's right to a fair trial that ensures the fundamental guarantees provided by law, on the other hand.
The Act sought to define the crime of terrorism, to distinguish it from offences that were treated similarly and to diminish the importance of motivations for the commission of terrorist offences.
In addition, it criminalized all forms of support and financing of persons, organizations and activities connected with terrorist offences and provided stern penalties for the perpetrators of those crimes.
To cut off sources of terrorist financing, Tunisian law had established rules of cautious conduct and minimum rules of accountancy to be adopted by all entities, organizations and structures in order to prevent such means from being misused to cover up the financing of persons, organizations or activities connected with terrorist offences or money-laundering.
Tunisia had established the Financial Analysis Committee to monitor questionable operations and transactions suspected of being connected with money-laundering operations and had made it a requirement for loan and other financial institutions and persons in certain professions to report to the Committee.
Tunisia had concluded 35 extradition agreements with Arab and other friendly States.
Turkey
Turkey informed the Secretariat that it had ratified all counter-terrorism instruments,3 including the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.
In accordance with article 90 of the Turkish Constitution, the instruments had acquired the force of domestic law.
The Turkish Penal Code and the Law on Fighting against Terrorism were the two principal laws that regulated terrorist offences and provided for their punishment.
Planning, preparing, financing, perpetrating and supporting terrorist acts and recruitment for terrorist and criminal organizations were established as serious criminal offences with heavy penalties under the Code and the Law.
The Law on the Prevention of Money Laundering and the Law on the Prevention of Benefit-Oriented Criminal Organizations were basic instruments that applied to the prevention and suppression of the financing of terrorist acts.
A working group had been established with the mandate of dealing solely with the crime of terrorist financing, to fully harmonize the Turkish legislation with the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.
Turkey had concluded bilateral agreements with 50 States concerning cooperation in the fight against terrorism, drug trafficking and organized crime.
Turkey also informed the Secretariat that PKK/KONGRA-GEL had intensified its armed activities and had orchestrated over 200 attacks since 1 June 2004.
In that period, the number of attacks had increased two- or threefold.
PKK/KONGRA-GEL was still using landmines and other types of explosives, especially with the aim of posing a threat to the security of transportation in eastern and south-eastern Anatolia.
Turkey had been the target of heinous acts of terrorism in Istanbul on 15 and 20 November 2003: the suicide attacks against two synagogues, the headquarters of HSBC Bank and the British Consulate General had been committed with the use of pick-up vehicles loaded with explosives.
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela provided a list of the counter-terrorism instruments and regional conventions3 to which it was a party.
It also provided the details of extradition treaties that it had concluded with Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, Italy, Peru, Spain and the United States of America.
Venezuela had submitted, in compliance with Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1455 (2003), reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
It had also submitted reports to the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism.
At the national level, Venezuela referred to its Special Law against Cybercrime and the General Act on Banks and Other Financial Institutions, both enacted in 2001.
Article 226 of the latter established a National Financial Intelligence Unit within the operational structure of the Office of the Superintendent of Banks and Other Financial Institutions.
The Unit operates as a central clearing house for receiving, analysing and classifying reports of suspicious activities submitted by the institutions, companies and individuals under its supervision and referring them to the Public Prosecutor's Office.
It also gathers financial information (both objective and subjective) on suspicious activities to assist the criminal investigation authorities.
Venezuela also informed the Secretariat that a draft Special Law against Terrorist Acts was in the process of approval by the Parliament.
In addition, Venezuela's draft Organic Law against Organized Crime, draft Organic Law on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, draft revised Organic Code of Criminal Procedure and draft Organic Law on the National Police were scheduled to receive a second reading under the legislative agenda for the first half of 2005.
Information received from international organizations
United Nations system
International Civil Aviation Organization
The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) provided an updated list of parties to the international air law instruments.3
ICAO had monitored and collected data relating to incidents of unlawful interference with international civil aviation, and provided a list of unlawful interferences that occurred in 2004.10
At its thirty-fifth session,11 the Assembly of ICAO had adopted resolution A35-11, entitled “Threat to civil aviation posed by man-portable air defence system”, aimed at strengthening the aviation community's efforts to address this serious threat.
The resolution urged all contracting States to actively participate in developing an international instrument for the purpose of identifying and tracing illicit small arms and light weapons, as referred to in General Assembly resolution 58/241.
In compliance with ICAO Assembly resolution A33-1, entitled “Declaration on misuse of civil aircraft as weapons of destruction and other terrorist acts involving civil aviation”, ICAO had continued the implementation of the Universal Security Audit Programme.
As at 31 May 2005, 78 audits had been conducted under that Programme.
ICAO had continued its efforts in developing and implementing measures aimed at enhancing the security of travel documents.
Revised specifications for machine-readable visas had been published in January 2005.
The technical reports comprising the ICAO “blueprint” for biometric identification in travel documents had been updated.
On the basis of the blueprint, a number of ICAO Member States had begun to develop their systems to issue “e-passports”.
International Maritime Organization
The International Maritime Organization (IMO) reported that the special measures to enhance maritime security, adopted on 12 October 2002 within the framework of the 1974 International Convention on the Safety of Life at Sea, as amended, had entered into force on 1 July 2004.
The measures were contained in a new chapter of the Convention and were supported by the International Code for the Security of Ships and Port Facilities.
The Code established detailed security-related requirements, consisting of part A (mandatory provisions) and part B (recommendatory provisions).
The measures covered the whole spectrum of security issues, such as attempts to commit piracy and armed robbery, attempts to board a ship as a stowaway or illegal migrant, and terrorism.
The measures applied to ships engaged in international trade and port facilities serving such ships and addressed the use of ships as weapons and as means for transporting persons intending to cause a security incident or their means for such an incident.
One of the primary requirements for ships and port facilities was to implement security measures designed to prevent weapons, dangerous substances and devices intended for use against persons or ships from being taken on board a ship or introduced into a port facility.
Chapter XI-2 of the Convention on the Safety of Life at Sea and the International Code for the Security of Ships and Port Facilities contributed to the achievement of the objectives of General Assembly resolutions 59/46 and 59/80 by addressing the use of ships in the context of counter-terrorism.
The above-mentioned measures were in force in 155 States.
Contracting States of the Convention were under treaty obligation to establish and maintain the necessary legislative and administrative infrastructure to give full effect to the provisions of chapter XI-2 of the Convention and the Code.
The States had the duty to monitor the compliance of ships flying their flags and port facilities located within their territories with the above-mentioned provisions and to take appropriate enforcement measures, as the circumstances required.
In addition, they had the right to take appropriate measures against ships entering their ports irrespective of the flag that such ships were entitled to fly.
The Legal Committee of IMO, at its ninetieth session (April 2005), had completed the revision of the 1988 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and the 1988 Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf.
The revisions would be submitted as draft protocols for adoption at a diplomatic conference on the revision of the Convention and the Protocol, to be held at IMO headquarters in London in October 2005.
The aim of the two protocols would be to strengthen the 1988 Convention and Protocol so as to provide an appropriate response to the increasing risks posed to maritime navigation by international terrorism.
The amendments would provide a legal basis for the arrest, detention and extradition of terrorists in the event of a terrorist attack against shipping.
World Health Organization
The World Health Organization (WHO) provided an updated report on the implementation of World Health Assembly resolution WHA55.15 of 18 May 2002, entitled “Global health response to natural occurrence, accidental release or deliberate use of biological and chemical agents or radio-nuclear material that affect health”.
It reported that between 1 May 2002 and 31 March 2005, 760 outbreaks of potential international concern had been detected and verified in collaboration with 138 affected countries.
International assistance had been requested for more than 70 of these events.
For more than 50, international teams had been deployed to provide field support with expertise from WHO and its Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network.
The activities had helped to refine the mechanisms for sharing expertise, supplies and resources among the member States of WHO.
International Atomic Energy Agency
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) provided an updated report on its plan of action for protection against nuclear terrorism.
The first three-year plan had been adopted by the IAEA Board of Governors in March 2002.
The plan comprised activities that contributed to the prevention of acts of terrorism, the detection of malicious acts and the response to such acts, and threats thereof, should they occur.
The plan covered the following activity areas: (a) physical protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities; (b) detection of malicious activities (such as illicit trafficking) involving nuclear and other radioactive materials; (c) strengthening of State systems for nuclear material accountancy and control; (d) security of radioactive sources; (e) assessment of safety- and security-related vulnerabilities at nuclear facilities; (f) response to malicious acts or threats thereof; (g) adherence to international agreements and guidelines; and (h) enhanced programme coordination and information management for nuclear security-related matters.
IAEA indicated that a proposal to continue the nuclear security plan of activities for the years 2006-2009 would be submitted to the IAEA Board of Governors in August 2005.
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) observed that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction did not specifically deal with the fight against terrorism.
However, the Executive Council of OPCW, in its decision EC-XXII/DEC.5, had reaffirmed that OPCW should play a role in anti-terrorism efforts.
To this end, the OPCW Technical Secretariat had established channels of communication in order to develop modalities of practical cooperation and was maintaining contacts with other relevant regional, subregional and international organizations in the field of counter-terrorism.
OPCW was supporting the worldwide study entitled “Strengthening international cooperation to combat trafficking and criminal use of chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear substances and weapons”, concluded by the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute.
Other international organizations
Collective Security Treaty Organization
The Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) observed that its Member States had compiled a list of terrorist and extremist organizations, which formed the basis for information exchange among their national law-enforcement agencies.
A draft procedure had been developed, and submitted for consideration by the CSTO Collective Security Council, to establish a consolidated list of terrorist and extremist organizations posing a threat to the collective security of its member States.
CSTO had conducted the Rubezh-2004 and Rubezh-2005 counter-terrorist exercises, which had enhanced the procedures of its statutory bodies and the operations of its Collective Rapid Deployment Forces in the Central Asian region for repelling any aggression by outside terrorist groupings.
In 2004, the CSTO member States had carried out the Kanal-2004 anti-drug operation, in the course of which not only drugs but also a significant quantity of arms and financial assets that could be used by terrorists was seized.
Work was under way to establish CSTO international interdepartmental centres providing joint training courses for the anti-terrorist personnel of member States.
An inter-State special-purpose information programme had been launched as a means of countering current threats and challenges through an international anti-terrorist media forum.
The forum's role would include, inter alia, involving civil society in taking action against threats.
The CSTO secretariat had been monitoring the ratification of 12 international counter-terrorism instruments by its member States.
CSTO had been making efforts for the improvement and harmonization of national legislation relating to the struggle against threats and challenges within the framework of the Parliamentary Group of States Members.
Council of Europe
The Council of Europe informed the Secretariat that its Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism had been adopted and opened for signature in May 2005.3
The Convention dealt with the prevention of terrorism and was aimed at covering some of the existing lacunae in international law.
Its purpose was to enhance the efforts of States parties in preventing terrorism and its negative effects on the full enjoyment of human rights, in particular the right to life, both by measures to be taken at the national level and through international cooperation, with due regard to the existing applicable multilateral or bilateral treaties or arrangements between States parties.
The Convention sought to achieve this objective, on the one hand, by establishing as criminal offences certain acts that might lead to the commission of acts of terrorism, including public provocation, recruitment and training, and, on the other hand, by reinforcing cooperation on prevention.
The Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism had also been opened for signature in May 2005.
The new Convention addressed such issues as the setting up of financial intelligence units, asset-sharing, recovery of assets, measures to counter laundering techniques, which targeted the non-bank sector and professional intermediaries who were used to invest criminal proceeds in the legitimate economy, and improved international cooperation.
Organization of American States
The Organization of American States (OAS) informed the Secretariat that the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism had come into force.3 It provided an outline of the activities carried out under the OAS counter-terrorism capacity-building and technical assistance programmes managed by the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism.
In implementing the new IMO Code for the Security of Ships and Port Facilities, 215 port security officials had been trained.
A project had been initiated to provide Member States with technical advice on their state of preparedness for audits relating to the Code.
In implementing specific aspects of the new ICAO security standards, 98 airport security officials had been trained.
Advice was given to 14 member States on the modalities for the integration into their national legislation of the requirements of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism and other international agreements.
It had begun a programme to help member States to develop, implement and improve professional standards for customs officials.
It had also drafted a proposal to develop a regional network of cyber-security alert centres.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) recalled the 2001 Bucharest Plan of Action for Combating Terrorism, which had recognized that the international counter-terrorism instruments, as well as relevant Security Council resolutions, constituted the basis for the global framework for the fight against terrorism.
It had established a framework for comprehensive OSCE action by participating States and the organization to combat terrorism, while fully respecting international law, including international human rights law.
The Plan of Action sought to expand existing activities that contribute to combating terrorism, facilitate interaction between States and, where appropriate, identify new instruments for action.
The Plan of Action also provided for the establishment of the Action against Terrorism Unit at the OSCE secretariat, within the Office of the Secretary-General.
The Action against Terrorism Unit had been further strengthened in 2004 and 2005 and continued to support the 55 participating States, the Chairman-in-Office and the Secretary-General in their activities aimed at preventing and fighting terrorism.
The overall objective of the Unit was to respond rapidly and efficiently, in coordination with internal and external partners, to requests from participating States for counter-terrorism assistance.
League of Arab States
The League of Arab States provided copies of replies that it had received from Bahrain, Lebanon, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, Oman and Tunisia.12 It also provided the texts of the following national laws relating to combating terrorism: Federal Act No. 1 (2004) of the United Arab Emirates concerning Combating Terrorist Acts;13 Act No. 75 (2003) of Tunisia;14 relevant articles of the Penal Code of Algeria (Articles 87 bis, 88, 123-125);15 the Act No. 6 (2001) of the Sudan on Combating Terrorism;16 relevant articles of the Penal Code of Oman, with amendments and annexes;17 and Act No. 03.03 of Morocco on Combating Terrorism.18
Comprehensive inventory of the response of the Secretariat to terrorism
The present section describes activities carried out by various departments, offices and other constituent parts of the Secretariat relating to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism.
The full texts of the replies received are on file with the Codification Division, Office of Legal Affairs, and available for consultation.
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
The activities of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) include the following.
Review of reports submitted by States pursuant to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)19
CTED provides expert advice to the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) in relation to States' implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) on threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts.
In this context, CTED analyses Member States' reports on their compliance with the resolution and identifies the needs and sources of assistance for the States concerned.
Furthermore, CTED responds to technical questions and requests for guidance from Committee members or Member States.
Best practices
CTED provides expert advice to CTC in its efforts to develop a set of best practices to assist Member States in implementing the provisions of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), in consultation with relevant international, regional and subregional organizations and United Nations bodies.
Visits to Member States
As mandated by Security Council resolution 1535 (2004), CTED, in close cooperation with relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, conducts visits to States, with their consent, in order to enhance the monitoring of the implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and to facilitate the provision of technical and other assistance.
CTED expects to be able to conduct one such visit per month.
Coordination with other Security Council committees and other United Nations bodies
CTED is enhancing its coordination and exchange of information with the experts that advise the sanctions Committee established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban, the Committee established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the Working Group established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1566 (2004).
Implementing a proactive communications policy
CTED, in close cooperation with the Department of Public Information, develops and implements a proactive communications policy, including a programme to provide information on the work of CTC and CTED to specific target audiences.
In addition, the CTC website is maintained and updated with all relevant documents.20 CTED monitors and analyses current events, developments, public opinion and press coverage on counter-terrorism-related matters.
Cooperation with international organizations
CTED liaises with international, regional and subregional organizations to improve the coordination of their counter-terrorism efforts and to involve those organizations in the process of providing technical assistance to States.
CTED also maintains an online directory of technical assistance programmes on matters related to the provisions of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) available to States.
CTED advises the Chairman of CTC about, inter alia, the format and documentation of and other matters relating to special meetings with international, regional and subregional organizations, as appropriate.
Department for Disarmament Affairs
The activities of the Department for Disarmament Affairs include the following:
(a) Monitoring the implementation of General Assembly resolution 59/80 on measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and preparing the Secretary-General's report on measures taken by international organizations on issues relating to the linkage between the fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction;
(b) Reviewing current publications and initiatives, providing background analysis, and proposing a series of options for the establishment and maintenance of a mechanism regarding the potential use of weapons of mass destruction in terrorist acts;21
(c) Providing substantive support for the work of the Committee established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including its experts, and assisting Member States in the implementation of that resolution.
The Department also undertakes certain counter-terrorism activities through its Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, including the organization of training and capacity-building courses for the law-enforcement community and parliamentary advisers on, inter alia, the relationship between illicit trafficking in firearms and terrorist activities.
Department of Management
The Department of Management, and more specifically the Office of Central Support Services, undertakes measures to strengthen security within the United Nations premises to, inter alia, prevent terrorist attacks.
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in particular its Security Focal Point, in the aftermath of the 19 August 2003 bombing of the United Nations Office in Baghdad, conducted a survey of all United Nations peacekeeping missions, with a view to identifying risks to United Nations personnel and premises associated with local and/or regional aspects of terrorism.
A second survey was carried out in early 2004.
Although the Department of Peacekeeping Operations field security does not have the task of suppressing or preventing international terrorism, it has the function of mitigating the risk associated with it.
Department of Political Affairs
The Department of Political Affairs coordinates the activities of the United Nations system on the issue of terrorism through the Policy Working Group on the United Nations and Terrorism, which has met periodically since its establishment by the Secretary-General in October 2001.
Its purpose has been to identify the longer-term implications and broad policy dimensions of terrorism for the United Nations and to formulate recommendations on the steps that the United Nations system might take to address the issue.
In addition, the Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch of the Department provides servicing and technical and advisory support to the following subsidiary organs of the Security Council:
(a) The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999);
(b) The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001);
(c) The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004);
(d) The Working Group established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004).
Department of Public Information
The activities of the Department of Public Information relating to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism consist of informing the public of the counter-terrorism work undertaken by the main bodies, agencies and programmes of the United Nations as well as engaging in efforts to dissuade local populations from embracing terrorism.
Department of Safety and Security
The mandate of the Department of Safety and Security does not extend to the prevention and suppression of terrorism.
However, the Department closely follows all terrorist-related events in the context of its responsibility for ensuring the safety and security of United Nations staff and operations worldwide.
Economic Commission for Africa
Social and economic policies of the Economic Commission for Africa relevant for the prevention of international terrorism include:
(a) Policies in favour of economic growth and in support of a growing middle class, in recognition of the economic benefits of peace, thus working as a barrier against local terrorist support;
(b) Policies which foster overall development and poverty eradication, thus making recruitment for terrorist groups more difficult, as there are viable alternatives to financial incentives and family support from these groups;
(c) Policies combating money-laundering, thus making the financing of terrorism more difficult.
Economic Commission for Europe
Activities undertaken or under consideration by the Economic Commission for Europe relevant to the prevention of terrorism include:
(a) The introduction of systems to prevent the theft of vehicles and their possible misuse for terrorist actions;
(b) The adoption of provisions aimed at preventing theft or misuse of dangerous goods by terrorists during transport;
(c) The adoption of conditions for the issuance of driving permits with a view to preventing their fraudulent use;
(d) The monitoring of activities relating to security undertaken by the International Union of Railways and the collaboration of rail police services;
(e) The adoption of measures relating to the security of supply chains, including the possibility for competent authorities to carry out proper risk management of inbound cargo for States to detect more easily fraudulent movement of goods in relation to possible terrorist actions and to provide for uniform procedures for security border controls.
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
The Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, although it is not directly involved in countering terrorism, carries out activities related to maritime and port security in South America and confidence-building among countries in the region in discharging its programme of work and in responding to specific requests from Member States.
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
The Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific is involved in the following activities relevant to countering the root causes of terrorism: (a) implementing projects to reduce poverty, generate employment and increase the cohesiveness of society; (b) promoting trade and investment; (c) encouraging adequate access to social services and information to ensure a minimal level of welfare while promoting human development and human rights; and (d) undertaking steps to develop the concept of environmentally sustainable economic growth as an effective and powerful tool for tackling poverty and environmental sustainability issues in the Asia and the Pacific region.
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
The Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, while it has no activities directly intended to combat terrorism, nevertheless initiated a number of projects aimed, in the long term, at reducing the threat of terrorism.
For instance, it prepares an annual report of the Secretary-General requested by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council on the economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan.
Executive Office of the Secretary-General
A main focus of the Executive Office of the Secretary-General, and in particular its Strategic Planning Unit, has been to gain acceptance of the terrorism-related measures set out in the Secretary-General's report “In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all” (A/59/2005) by ensuring support for the comprehensive United Nations counter-terrorism strategy proposed by the Secretary-General; advancing the efforts to reach a definition of terrorism; and building support for the finalization of the comprehensive convention on international terrorism before the end of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly.
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has affirmed that States are under an obligation, including by virtue of their commitments under United Nations human rights treaties, to take strong action against terrorism in order to safeguard human rights, including the rights to life and to personal security.
She has also stressed that counter-terrorism measures must be taken with strict respect for human rights obligations.
The Office of the High Commissioner (OHCHR), consistent with resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights and of the General Assembly on the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism (most recently General Assembly resolution 59/191 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/80), has:
(a) Examined the question of the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, taking into account reliable information from all sources;
(b) Made general recommendations concerning the obligation of States to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms while taking actions to counter terrorism;
(c) Provided assistance and advice to relevant United Nations bodies, as well as to States upon their request, on the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.
OHCHR, together with the Department of Public Information, published the Digest of Jurisprudence of the United Nations and Regional Organizations on the Protection of Human Rights while Countering Terrorism, a compilation of relevant findings of United Nations human rights bodies and others of Europe, Africa and the Americas.
Together with CTC and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, OHCHR has participated in joint regional and national workshops on counter-terrorism measures, incorporating the human rights element.
OHCHR supported the independent expert of the Commission on Human Rights on the protection of human rights while countering terrorism, who was appointed to a one-year mandate on 9 July 2004, and it supports the mandate established in April 2005 for a Special Rapporteur on this issue.
The United Nations human rights treaty bodies, to which OHCHR is providing substantive support, have considered the issue of counter-terrorism and human rights in their review of States parties' reports under the respective treaties.
Office of Legal Affairs
The Office of Legal Affairs provides legal advice to the Secretary-General and other offices within the Secretariat, as well as to Member States upon request, on a wide range of legal questions directly or indirectly related to the counter-terrorism activities of the Organization.
In addition, specific units within the Office contribute to the work of the Organization in this field by undertaking the activities described below.
Codification Division
The activities of the Codification Division involve providing substantive support to the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210 and to the Sixth (Legal) Committee of the General Assembly in its consideration of the agenda item “Measures to eliminate international terrorism”.
The efforts of these two bodies resulted in the adoption of three universal instruments to combat international terrorism, most recently the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, adopted by the Assembly in its resolution 59/290.
It also encourages the wider appreciation and dissemination of international law concerning the prevention and suppression of international terrorism.
The Codification Division regularly compiles and disseminates information on anti-terrorism measures taken by the United Nations and its Member States.
In particular, it prepares an annual report of the Secretary-General entitled “Measures to eliminate international terrorism”, as well as other publications related to terrorism, such as International Instruments related to the Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism and the Legislative Series publication National Laws and Regulations on the Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism.
The Division also provides expertise to and undertakes regular exchanges of information with other international or regional organizations seized of the preparation of international counter-terrorism instruments.
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
The activities of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea serve to underpin the development of both law and policy in suppressing and combating terrorist activities against shipping.
The Division informs the General Assembly of recent developments in the area of maritime security and in particular in relation to the prevention and suppression of acts of terrorism against shipping in the context of the Secretary-General's annual comprehensive report on oceans and the law of the sea.
Furthermore, the Division has assisted IMO in the development of amendments to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and its Protocol that are in conformity with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Treaty Section
The Treaty Section undertakes a number of activities to promote participation in treaties on terrorism.
It organizes treaty events, training workshops and other meetings at Headquarters and in Member States on treaty law and practice.
The 2005 annual treaty event, at which the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism will be opened for signature, is scheduled to take place from 14 to 16 September at United Nations Headquarters, during the High-level Plenary Meeting of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly.
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) does not have a responsibility for preventing and suppressing international terrorism and has not undertaken any specific counter-terrorism activities.
UNHCR has a mandate, under its 1950 statute and subsequent General Assembly and Economic and Social Council resolutions, to provide international protection for and to seek durable solutions for the problems of refugees.
In this context, UNHCR is concerned that efforts to fight terrorism should not suggest any automatic linkage between refugees and terrorists.
Such a linkage would be prejudicial to the institution of asylum.
The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees provides that international refugee protection should not be extended to those responsible for terrorist acts.
UNHCR has advocated in many forums that counter-terrorism measures must be in accordance with international law, in particular international refugee, human rights and humanitarian law.
United Nations Children's Fund
While the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) does not have programmes specifically aimed at the prevention and suppression of international terrorism, many of the activities it supports and carries out are directed at the provision of social services and the promotion of child rights.
In this way, UNICEF is working to mitigate social conditions that might lead to terrorist activities.
United Nations Development Programme
The core competencies of the United Nations Development Programme relevant to the emerging counter-terrorism agenda include the following: strengthening the capacity of the State to respect and uphold individual, group, and minority rights; supporting Member States in the constructive engagement of disaffected groups; supporting the formulation, implementation and humane enforcement of appropriate laws; and strengthening subregional mechanisms aimed at curbing illicit transnational networks.
United Nations Environment Programme
The activities of the United Nations Environment Programme do not directly address the prevention and suppression of international terrorism.
However, its Executive Director provides secretariat services for several international treaties that have been developed to control or manage hazardous substances.
Although they do not directly address terrorism, these treaties might be deemed to contribute to strengthening the capacities of countries to minimize the potential risks of the malicious release of hazardous substances into the environment for the purpose of causing terror.
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI) carries out analysis and technical cooperation activities worldwide in the fields of crime prevention and administration of justice.
Priority has been given to thematic areas such as transnational organized crime, security and international terrorism prevention, trafficking in human beings, juvenile justice and corruption.
The UNICRI Security Cluster is currently engaged, inter alia, in the implementation of two programmes on security measures during major events and a programme on the illegal trafficking and use of chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear substances.
In 2004, UNICRI completed a project entitled “Security of maritime transport” providing an analysis of current international regulations on the security of maritime transport and their effectiveness in preventing maritime terrorism.
UNICRI is also planning to launch initiatives in the area of exchange of information between law enforcement and intelligence services in order to strengthen the fight against terrorism.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is mandated to address the criminal policy and criminal justice aspects of terrorism and works in close coordination with CTC and CTED.
Two areas have been identified where UNODC has a specific transversal competitive advantage in delivering technical cooperation to tackle the links between crime, drugs and terrorism, as described below.
Reinforcing the rule of law and strengthening fair and viable criminal justice systems
UNODC has been mandated by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to reinforce the rule of law through the enhancement of the criminal justice system at large, which constitutes an essential component of any efficient counter-terrorism strategy.
The principle of the rule of law, including respect for human rights, is integral to all counter-terrorism assistance provided by UNODC, in particular for the substantive and procedural penal law aspects.
Strengthening and speeding up international cooperation against terrorism
UNODC emphasizes the importance of effective international cooperation to combat terrorism and organized crime in its technical assistance activities.
UNODC has provided assistance to Member States in developing treaty relations, in particular on the basis of the revised manuals on model treaties and model laws on extradition and mutual legal assistance in criminal matters.
Since October 2002, the work of the Terrorism Prevention Branch of UNODC has been largely focused on operational activities aimed at strengthening the legal regime against terrorism.
The Terrorism Prevention Branch has responded to requests for counter-terrorism-related assistance from over 60 countries through the provision of country-specific direct assistance and has also promoted the universal anti-terrorism instruments and Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) in a range of regional and subregional workshops.
Technical cooperation tools, including legislative guides, checklists and a database containing examples of relevant national legislation and model laws, have been developed by the Branch to ensure efficiency in the delivery of legislative assistance.
Effective follow-up to the technical assistance already provided and to commitments made during workshops, in particular the provision of implementation assistance, is a priority for its work in the coming period, in order to build on the momentum created while fostering sustainable, long-term impact through regular interactions with Governments.
United Nations Office at Geneva
The United Nations Office at Geneva organizes seminars, conferences and meetings focused on cooperation related to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism, including high-level consultations, with the participation of OSCE, the Council of Europe, the Council of the European Union, the European Commission, IOM and the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States
The Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States has undertaken vigorous advocacy to place the concerns of the most vulnerable countries at the forefront of the global agenda, since economic marginalization and social exclusion may often serve as breeding ground for terrorism.
United Nations Population Fund
The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) does not directly fund activities or measures to eliminate international terrorism.
However, in line with its mandate, UNFPA-funded activities contribute to poverty reduction in the broadest sense, and may thus contribute indirectly to the response of the Secretariat to terrorism.
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), incidentally to its mandate, undertakes the following activities relating to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism:
(a) Under the Agency's General Conditions of Contract for Procurement of Goods and General Conditions of Service Contract, the provider warrants that neither it nor any of its suppliers is engaged in any transactions with, and/or the provision of resources and support to, individuals and organizations associated with, receiving any type of training for or engaged in any act or offence described in article 2, paragraphs 1, 3, 4 and 5, of the 1999 International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.
Any breach of these terms entitles UNRWA to terminate the contract;
(b) In the Agency's schools, enrichment material advocating tolerance and peaceful conflict resolution was successfully introduced Agency-wide through the education programme.
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Occupied Territories
The functions and responsibilities of the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Occupied Territories are designed to support three main objectives: (a) underpinning the Middle East peace effort; (b) responding to the socio-economic needs of the Palestinian people; and (c) supporting the consolidation of an independent, viable and sustainable Palestinian State.
Among the many tasks undertaken to further these objectives, several of the Office's activities contribute to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism.
The Office's diplomatic role is to seek to advance the Middle East peace process by facilitating dialogue between the parties, with the aim of securing a final settlement to the conflict.
Currently, it is the only United Nations entity in the occupied Palestinian territory whose work feeds directly into the peace process.
In this capacity, the Office advises the Secretary-General on possible courses of action and regularly provides political analysis to Headquarters, the Quartet and local United Nations partners.
Furthermore, a key element in ensuring optimal United Nations support to the peace process is a clear communications strategy, which requires the dissemination of accurate information regarding United Nations policy positions, including its stand on the prevention and suppression of terrorism.
To that end, since 2000, the Office has issued numerous public condemnations of acts of terror undertaken in its area of operations.
Recognizing that socio-economic development is an essential underpinning of peace, one of the Office's primary functions is to ensure that appropriate levels and types of international assistance are provided to meet the needs of the Palestinian people.
Reform of the Palestinian Authority and its subsidiary institutions has been identified as a prerequisite for advancing the Middle East peace process.
To this end, the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Occupied Territories has been involved in promoting legislative, judicial and security sector reform and has actively supported and participated in initiatives designed to strengthen the rule of law.
Other United Nations entities
The following offices, departments, programmes, funds and commissions indicated that they had no information to report on the matter: the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of Human Resources Management, the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Development Fund for Women, the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, and the United Nations Office for Project Services.
Status of international legal instruments related to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism
Currently, there are 27 global or regional instruments pertaining to the subject of international terrorism.
Each instrument listed below is represented by the letter shown on the left, which is featured in tables 1 and 2 to reflect the status of the corresponding instrument:
Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on 14 September 1963 (entered into force on 4 December 1969): status as at 1 June 2005;22
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, signed at The Hague on 16 December 1970 (entered into force on 14 October 1971): status as at 1 June 2005;22
C. Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, signed at Montreal on 23 September 1971 (entered into force on 26 January 1973): status as at 1 June 2005;22
Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation, Supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, signed at Montreal on 24 February 1988 (entered into force on 6 August 1989): status as at 1 June 2005;22
E. Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, adopted by the General Assembly on 14 December 1973 (entered into force on 20 February 1977): status as at 23 June 2005;22
International Convention against the Taking of Hostages, adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 1979 (entered into force on 3 June 1983): status as at 23 June 2005;23
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, signed at Vienna on 3 March 1980 (entered into force on 8 February 1987): status as at 31 May 2005;23
H. Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, done at Rome on 10 March 1988 (entered into force on 1 March 1992): status as at 31 May 2005;24
Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf, done at Rome on 10 March 1988 (entered into force on 1 March 1992): status as at 31 May 2005;25
J. Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection, signed at Montreal on 1 March 1991 (entered into force on 21 June 1998): status as at 1 June 2005;22
International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings, adopted by the General Assembly on 15 December 1997 (entered into force on 23 May 2001): status as at 23 June 2005;23
International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 1999 (entered into force on 10 April 2002): status as at 23 June 2005;23
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, adopted by the General Assembly on 13 April 2005 (will be opened for signature on 14 September 2005);23
Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, signed at the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States in Cairo on 22 April 1998 (entered into force on 7 May 1999): status as at 31 May 2005;
Convention of the Organization of the Islamic Conference on Combating International Terrorism, adopted at Ouagadougou on 1 July 1999 (entered into force on 7 November 2002): status as at 22 December 2004;
P. European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, concluded at Strasbourg on 27 January 1977 (entered into force on 4 August 1978): status as at 24 June 2005;26
Protocol amending the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, adopted at Strasbourg, on 15 May 2003: status as at 24 June 2005;26
R. OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes against Persons and Related Extortion that are of International Significance, concluded at Washington, D.C., on 2 February 1971 (entered into force on 16 October 1973): status as at 21 June 2005;26
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, adopted at Algiers on 14 July 1999 (entered into force on 6 December 2002): status as at 24 June 2005;27
Protocol to the OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, adopted at Addis Ababa on 8 July 2004: status as at 24 June 2005;28
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism, signed at Kathmandu on 4 November 1987 (entered into force on 22 August 1988): all seven States members of SAARC (Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka) are parties to the Convention;
Additional Protocol to the SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism, adopted at Islamabad on 6 January 2004: status as at 16 May 2005;
W. Shanghai Convention on Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism, adopted at Shanghai on 15 June 2001 (entered into force on 29 March 2003): status as at 15 June 2005;
Treaty on Cooperation among States Members of the Commonwealth of Independent States in Combating Terrorism, done at Minsk on 4 June 1999 (entered into force on 3 October 2000 for Tajikistan, on 5 December 2000 for Kazakhstan, on 6 February 2001 for Kyrgyzstan, on 22 August 2001 for the Republic of Moldova, on 28 December 2001 for Armenia, on 18 April 2004 for Belarus and on 13 January 2005 for the Russian Federation): status as at 30 May 2005;
Y. Inter-American Convention against Terrorism, adopted at Bridgetown on 3 June 2002 (entered into force on 10 July 2003): status as at 21 June 2005;27
Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism, adopted at Warsaw on 16 May 2005: status as at 24 June 2005;26
Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism, adopted at Warsaw on 16 May 2005: status as at 24 June 2005.26
Table 1 Total participation in international instruments pertaining to international terrorism
a Includes the European Atomic Energy Community, which is not listed in table 2.
b Includes the Palestinian Authority, which is not listed in table 2.
c Includes the Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic, which is not listed in table 2.
d Includes signatures not subject to ratification.
Recent developments related to General Assembly resolution 51/210
By its resolution 59/46, the General Assembly reaffirmed the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210.
At its ninth session, held from 28 March to 1 April 2005, the Ad Hoc Committee finalized the text of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism29 and recommended it to the General Assembly for adoption.23
The work of the Ad Hoc Committee is expected to continue during the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, within the framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee.
The Chairman of the Sixth Committee convened informal consultations of the Sixth Committee from 25 to 29 July 2005 to provide further opportunity to the delegations and the coordinator of the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism to continue the consultations on the pending issues relating to the draft convention.
Information on workshops and training courses on combating crimes connected with international terrorism
IAEA pointed out that training and education were fundamental to the Agency's approach to enhancing physical protection systems in States.
Training courses, workshops and seminars that had been held on six continents had raised awareness and had provided hands-on experience of various subjects including the physical protection of research facilities, the practical operation of physical protection systems, and the engineering safety aspects of physical protection managing situations involving malevolent acts.
In the area of physical protection 60 courses had been conducted in the past three years.
ICAO pointed out that it was continuing the development of its programme for aviation security, designed for global application.
Ten aviation security training packages had been completed and were available for sale and distribution throughout the civil aviation community.
IMO pointed out that a subregional seminar on piracy and armed robbery against ships and maritime security for the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden had been conducted in Aden, Yemen, from 9 to 13 April 2005.
A seminar on safety, security and environmental protection in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore and an IMO/Association of South-East Asian Nations workshop on the review of the implementation of the International Code for the Security of Ships and Port Facilities were planned for September 2005.
IMO further recalled that 18 regional and 55 national seminars/workshops, as well as 32 country advisory missions on maritime security, had been delivered and approximately 3,800 people had been trained.
IMO had developed and published three model courses, for ship security officers, company security officer and port facility security officers.
The courses were available in English, French and Spanish.
OSCE indicated that its Office of the Coordinator of Economic and Environmental Affairs, in cooperation with UNODC, had organized national workshops on combating money-laundering and suppressing of the financing of terrorism in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.
The Office had organized additional workshops in Armenia, Georgia, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan to help those States to build the capacity of their financial intelligence units.
Following the 2004 Ministerial Council decision on enhancing container security, the Action against Terrorism Unit organized a technical expert workshop on container security, held on 7 and 8 February 2005, in which 170 persons participated.
Together with UNICRI, OSCE had addressed the problem of suicide terrorism as a threat increasingly affecting the OSCE region.
The workshop held on 20 May 2005 in Vienna had contributed to a better understanding of the phenomenon.
Publication of a compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
As part of the United Nations Legislative Series, the Secretariat has issued a second volume of National Laws and Regulations on the Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism, in two books: part II (A-L) (ST/LEG/SER.B/23) and part II (M-Z) (ST/LEG/SER.B/24).
The volume contains information received from Member States, including some submitted to the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Notes
1 See also the Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism (resolution 51/210, annex).
2 Information on the participation of States in multilateral agreements relating to the suppression of international terrorism is presented in section IV.
3 See table 2.
4 Available, in English, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
5 Morocco's reply was received through the League of Arab States.
6 The text of articles 48, 52-54, 93, 95-97, 131-132, 134, 149 and 199-201 of the Penal Code of the Sultanate of Oman; articles 41 and 60 of the Control of Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act; articles 4, 6, 9 and 13 of the Money-Laundering Act; articles 24-25, 27 and 31 of the Alien Residence Act; article 16 of the Omani Passport Act; article 15 of the Identity Card Act; and article 28 of the Weapons and Explosives Act are available, in Arabic with their English translations, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
7 Available, in French, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
8 Qatar's reply was received through the League of Arab States.
9 Available, in English, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
10 Available, in English, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
11 Held from 28 September to 8 October 2004 in Montreal, Canada.
12 See section II.A.
13 Available, in Arabic, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
14 Available, in Arabic, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
15 Available, in Arabic and French, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
16 Available, in Arabic, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
17 Available, in Arabic, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
18 Available, in Arabic, in the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs.
19 More than 600 reports have been analysed since resolution 1373 (2001) was adopted in September 2001.
20 http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/committees/1373/.
21 Recommendation 18 of the report of the Policy Working Group on the United Nations and Terrorism (A/57/273-S/2002/875, annex).
22 Updated information may be found at http://www.icao.int/icao/en/leb.
23 Updated information may be found at http://untreaty.un.org.
24 Updated information may be found at http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/ Conventions/index.html.
25 Updated information may be found at http://www.imo.org.
26 Updated information may be found at http://www.coe.int.
27 Updated information may be found at http://www.oas.org.
28 Updated information may be found at http://www.africa-union.org.
29 A/60/37, paragraph 19.
The General Assembly adopted the draft Convention in its resolution 59/290 of 15 April 2005.