# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
If we want to give weight to the processes of European enlargement, we must reassure our citizens, our fellow citizens who live in those areas, that our words are not just hot air but authentic projects which will genuinely affect their situation, and that, when we talk of law and security, we will provide them with the necessary means, conditions and systems.
We have already paid too high a price in deaths - too many civilians gave their lives in the raids in Puglia - and we have lost too many men from the forces of law and order.
In consideration also of the existence of the Stability Pact, we need to take practical steps to show that the enlargement of Europe will also mean greater security for our people.
Mr President, when it comes to this issue, I am in two minds.
On the one hand, it is only natural - and I was the rapporteur for enlargement to the east and internal security - that we need to worry about higher security standards, not only in the candidate countries, as we do in the EU itself, but of course in all other European countries.
We need a pan-European system of internal security, and here the Balkans are naturally a special cause for concern because we have assumed responsibility in Kosovo and the neighbouring regions.
On the other hand, however, we must take care not to classify certain peoples in a particular manner.
We are therefore against point 4 of the joint resolution which names Montenegro.
Of course, Montenegro also has internal security problems, as we do in the EU for that matter.
But Montenegro presently faces a huge threat; as you will have heard, and as officially confirmed by NATO yesterday, Milosevic has again started military operations against Montenegro.
We must be careful not to give him an excuse.
Therefore, solidarity in the fight against organised crime, yes, but please, no specific passage on Montenegro; just support for Montenegro in its struggle for greater freedom.
Mr President, I consider the consensus reached in this Chamber on the need for a new initiative to fight organised crime very important, in particular because of the realisation which spread from the Group on behalf of which I am speaking, that the dramatic events in Brindisi are not just an issue which is confined to the Region of Puglia, but that they draw on values, principles and objectives which are an integral part of the new European policy and on the question of justice and security for the citizens of the Union.
Parliament and the institutions of the Union must take due account of this perspective and provide a rational response to the fear and insecurity experienced by the citizens in the face of crime, and it must fight all aspects of crime, including those who resort to brutal violence with no qualms about killing the forces of law and order and defenceless citizens, and the supranational financial and economic criminal organisations.
The links between criminal groups in different countries and the increasingly wide geographical spread of crime call for a supranational response.
After all, security is one of Europe' s objectives in the Treaty of Amsterdam and was on the agenda of the European Council held in Tampere in the autumn of 1999.
We hope that substantial decisions similar to those proposed in Tampere will be taken regarding the creation of common investigation groups, a European police academy and a genuine European judiciary such as EUROJUS.
This is the path we must take, taking due account of the fight against crime taking place in the Balkan States in our relations with these countries.
Finally, may I also express my sympathy for the families of the victims and recognise before this Chamber the extreme sense of duty shown by those two officers in that tragic event which took place on 24 February.
The Commission has examined with great interest the resolution concerning the threat posed by the development of illicit activities of criminal groups operating in several countries of south-eastern Europe.
We share the preoccupation expressed in the resolution as to the risk of seeing the reconstruction and development efforts in the context of the Stability Pact being jeopardised by international criminal networks that engage mainly in trafficking in human beings, trafficking in drugs and arms as well as in smuggling of goods.
Clearly a lot of these criminal activities have serious negative consequences for the Community and its Member States.
As you are aware, the European Council has shown its strong determination to fight against organised crime and has demonstrated the need for a coherent and coordinated approach by adopting in June 1997 an Action Plan to Combat Organised Crime.
Although many actions envisaged aim to encourage cooperation between the fifteen Member States, the plan does not neglect the need also to develop wider forms of international cooperation.
The tangible result has been the conclusion by the Council in 1998 of the Pre-accession Pact on cooperation against crime with the candidate countries.
As regards the specific question raised by the resolution and related to the situation in the Balkans, the Commission agrees that there is a real danger of massive development of organised crime activities if no coherent and coordinated action is set up in this region associating the various donors as well as the international and regional actors.
The Commission considers that the Member States have a crucial role to play in providing their expertise and human resources in supporting specialised projects in the fight against various criminal activities in the Balkan region, including the fight against corruption.
The Commission considers that it can prove and provide a useful input to the Stability Pact by combining the Member States' expertise and the Community funds in order to set up well-targeted anti-crime projects and activities.
In this respect, the Commission is also ready to act as a coordinator and in close consultation with the special coordinator of the Stability Pact.
Furthermore, I have to underline that the Commission is preparing a proposal for a new specific financial instrument which will provide a global legal basis for the Community assistance to the whole region.
An official proposal will be presented to the Council by the end of this month and we hope that a new regulation will come into force as soon as possible, hopefully just after the summer break.
The Commission remains convinced of the crucial importance of making all the necessary efforts to support effective measures for the fight organised crime and is determined to develop, within this new framework, regional projects covering the field of justice and home affairs.
In addition, the Commission is already in a position to announce that, under its programming of the assistance envelope of regional programmes for 2000, around EUR 2 m have been earmarked for projects within the field of justice and home affairs.
Furthermore, as regards trafficking in certain goods such as the smuggling of cigarettes, and insofar as this traffic also affects the Community's territory and its financial interests, OLAF has set up multi-disciplinary and multinational task groups.
These groups work to combat organised crime whose transnational dimension has been demonstrated on several occasions.
They have been established to provide support and operational assistance that focuses its investigations on the sectors and products which are most vulnerable to fraud, which is the case for cigarettes.
The results of the activities of these task groups recorded over the last few years are particularly significant.
In 1996, for instance, cigarette smuggling, mainly in the transit regime, totalled ECU 800 m.
The overall financial impact of fraud detected in this area in 1997 was an estimated ECU 1.6 bn covering Community own resources and national revenue.
The number of inquiries against cigarette smuggling even increased in 1998, although the financial impact was lower than in the previous years.
This can be explained by the continuation of large international inquiries and the success in the fight against cigarette smuggling from Andorra and against the black market in Spain.
All in all we take these threats to the Community very seriously and will continue working hard to fight them.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
CITES
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:
B5-0243/2000 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Bowis, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES);
B5-0249/2000 by Mr Sjöstedt and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES);
B5-0260/2000 by Mr Davies and others, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES);
B5-0269/2000 by Mrs Roth-Behrendt, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES);
B5-0275/2000 by Mr de Roo and Mrs Isler Béguin, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES).
Mr President, first of all, I would like to apologise on behalf of Mrs Maij-Weggen, who submitted this resolution.
She has had to leave earlier on account of a death and funeral in the family.
It is not the first time in this House that the CITES Convention is being mentioned.
Over the years, this Convention, with its 148 signatories, has saved many plants and animals threatened with extinction.
This often followed robust campaigning on the part of the environmental and animal-protection lobby, campaigns which were adopted many times over by the European Parliament, the national parliaments and also, for example, by the American Congress.
Once again, it seems unlikely that the correct decisions will be taken at the CITES meeting in Nairobi and once again, we will be stepping in to prevent the wrong decisions from being taken.
In this intervention, I would like to focus on three risks.
The first risk concerns the fact that a number of southern African countries have proposed moving the African elephant from appendix I to appendix II, which means that the controlled hunt will be allowed.
Together, these countries would like to harvest more than 50 tonnes of ivory.
We urge the Commission and Member States not to go along with this.
The list of illegally traced ivory is already so extensive that a legal hunt would only exacerbate the problem.
In the light of the fact that over a twenty-year period, the entire population of the African elephant has plummeted from 1.3 million to 625 000, we have now reached a critical level, as is widely known.
A second risk which I would like to point out is Norway' s and Japan' s proposal to re-legalise the hunt for the minke whale in the North Atlantic and the Southern Pacific.
Again we are opposed to this, if only because these lovely animals are already being hunted down by both countries.
Re-legalisation would only further reward bad behaviour.
In addition, this minke whale is an endangered species and it would be preferable to keep to the arrangement to protect all whales.
Finally, I would like to give a third example.
Cuba has requested to move the hawksbill turtle back to appendix II.
This is the result of a typically isolated view of an animal generally threatened with extinction.
As this species mainly lays its eggs in Cuba, people think that there are plenty of them and would like to kill 500 of these tortoises per annum, only to serve them up at exclusive restaurants, with the shells being sold off to Japan.
This would be a tremendous incentive to continuing the illegal hunt.
Cuba should be ashamed of itself, making this proposal, and what is more, their own proposal does not even meet the ideology adopted by Cuba itself, to which, incidentally, I do not subscribe either.
In a nutshell, these are three examples from a series of proposals in Nairobi which cause us great concern.
We urge the Commission and Member States not to support this type of proposal but to keep CITES as it is.
Let us not start this century on a bad note but on a good note and work together to ensure that no more plants and animals are threatened with extinction.
Mr President, as the previous speaker said, this resolution is addressed to the parties to the CITES Convention meeting in Nairobi in April.
We are addressing them to try to preserve species under renewed threat, species like the Asian pangolin, the gorillas of the Congo, the elephants - through the sale of ivory - and the other species mentioned in the resolution.
I want to refer briefly to three essential measures which ought to be taken in Nairobi in the days ahead.
The first is providing information and raising awareness amongst the public, the buyers and sellers.
The second is sanction mechanisms against those who have not yet adopted legal measures to stop poachers, in particular, benefiting from impunity.
And the third is cooperation with developing countries, because sometimes trafficking and trading in threatened species is the only way to survive in their rural areas.
Mr President, protecting animal and plant species which are threatened with extinction is about more than just preserving the natural riches.
It is about a battle between civilisation and barbarism.
Maintaining bio-diversity is also about more than preventing the extinction of certain animal species, however important these may be, such as elephants and whales.
Since the individual species are unable to stand up for themselves, we need to do this for them, at home or elsewhere.
This means, for example, that the international transport of tropical animals must be regulated.
Even today, there are scandalous cases of abuse, both in legal and illegal transportation.
Over-exploitation and misuse cannot be explained by poverty alone.
They often involve ruthless traders who only have their own self-interests at heart.
Although we may not be aware of it, huge numbers of animals are also the victims of natural disasters and especially wars in Africa.
Animals are, by definition, not just there for our amusement.
It is only right that a civilised society should give their beastly fate more attention.
Mr President, at the previous CITES conference, the European Parliament almost unanimously adopted a resolution to accord the African elephant the highest status of protection.
The African elephant is still a threatened animal species, according to the IUCN.
Fourteen EU Ministers faint-heartedly abstained from the vote and, as a result, legalised the shooting of elephants in Africa.
The Dutch Minister was the only one to vote for the conservation of the elephant.
Between 10 and 20 April next, the fate of this elephant will once again feature on the agenda of the world community.
Kenya, the hosting nation, and India have tabled the proposal to grant the African elephant full protection once again.
Shooting elephants in order to sell their tusks to Japan and then giving the proceeds away - at least on paper - to protect wild animals is a perverse kind of logic.
Besides which, it does not work.
South Africa, Botswana, Namibia and Zambia want to shoot even more elephants now.
This blood money also ends up in the wrong hands.
I would call on the 15 Environment Ministers, including the 6 Green Ministers, to show courage and to grant the African elephant full protection once again on 30 March during the Environmental Council.
Full protection is also needed for the hawksbill turtle which is only to be found in Cuba.
In the space of three generations, more than 80% of the population has disappeared.
Regarding the African elephant and the hawksbill turtle, the European Commission gives priority to the blood trade with Japan.
This is scandalous.
Mr President, the European Community is not a party to CITES.
The present text of the Convention permits only individual countries to join.
The Gaborone amendment to the CITES text from 1983 would allow us to become a party to the Convention.
However, this amendment has not yet entered into force due to the insufficient number of CITES parties who have ratified it.
The Commission continues its diplomatic efforts to ensure that a sufficient number of ratifications are made in order to allow the Community to play a more proactive role in this important Convention.
Notwithstanding the fact that we are not yet a party, the Community possesses legislation to implement CITES.
This legislation is amongst the most thorough and comprehensive of its kind in the world.
The Commission's policy is based on both conservation and sustainable use, principles recognising that peoples and states are the best protectors of their own wild fauna and flora.
Concerning the specific matters in Parliament's resolutions, we agree on the need to step up enforcement measures in the field of wildlife trade in India.
We will approach the Indian authorities along the lines suggested, and continue to do all we can to support and further the objectives of CITES.
Concerning the proposals for the forthcoming Conference of the CITES parties, the Commission has yet to adopt a formal proposal.
However, our general orientation on the major issues is as follows:
On whales, the Community's position should be unambiguous.
No return to commercial whaling until the International Whaling Commission deems that the appropriate management controls are in place.
We should therefore oppose the Japanese and Norwegian proposals to restart the trade.
On African elephants, we favour the maintenance of the status quo until a clear picture emerges of the impact of the international trade that was permitted in 1997.
We should not support any of the proposals that have been made.
Concerning the Cuban sea-turtle proposals, the Community should oppose the resumption of the regular annual trade in shells.
We need, however, to hold a more open position on the disposal of the Cuban shell stockpiles until we know the position of the neighbouring countries to Cuba.
Finally, on sharks, there is cause for concern, and the proposal on basking sharks should, in particular, be supported.
Here, however, CITES will need to work closely with regional fisheries bodies and the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President, I see from my order paper that the vote on the situation in Iraq has been withdrawn.
Can I be told at whose request, and what reasons were given for withdrawing that?
It was not the vote which was withdrawn; on the contrary, the movers of the motions themselves withdrew both their motions.
If there is no motion to vote on, then obviously no vote can then be held.
I am not aware of the reasons which prompted the movers of the motions to do this - you must ask them yourself - but clearly, if they have been withdrawn, then we cannot vote on them.
Perhaps Mr Swoboda can briefly explain what is behind this.
Mr President, you are quite right, we have withdrawn the motions for resolutions.
If I may briefly explain, we withdrew them because we shall be holding a longer, more detailed debate on this subject during the next Strasbourg session.
I think that it makes more sense, given the worsening situation in Iraq, to hold a debate once the Council and Commission have made statements detailing their position rather than under the urgency procedure.
That was our reason for withdrawing them.
Mr President, may I confirm that what Mr Swoboda just said applies equally to the EPP-ED Group.
We have withdrawn our motion for a resolution for the same reasons, i.e. the debate scheduled for April.
Thank you, Mrs Grossetête, I think the reasons are now clear.
Mr Buttiglione wishes to raise a point of order.
Mr President, I withdrew my motion in spite of my conviction that we are mistaken not to take the opportunity to intervene, now that it is time to do so and we have the possibility of achieving a general consensus on the matter.
I would stress that this is the second time that the adoption of this motion has been deferred and I hope that events do not reach crisis level before we are able to attempt to influence the situation to bring about peace.
Thank you, Mr Buttiglione.
We shall now proceed to the vote.
Vote (continuation)
Mr President, although it would have been better if we had voted at lunchtime, I am happy to go ahead now.
Mr President, I support the proposal by my friend, the very honourable member, Baroness Ludford, with pleasure.
Let us proceed with the vote.
Mr President, I should just like to ask why the sudden change of mind by the members.
Mr Posselt, I suggest that you ask them yourselves later.
I do not want a public debate in plenary on the matter.
Before the vote on Amendment 53
Mr President, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, I wish to withdraw Amendments 53 and 55 relating to paragraph 17 of the report.
It does indeed seem that the wording of these two amendments could give rise to conflicting interpretations, especially in certain language versions.
I am against ethnic classifications, because that would stigmatise immigrants.
Amendments 53 and 55 called for the term "ethnic" to be deleted.
The use of the word "data" could be taken as referring to statistics on the incidence of racism and discrimination, which could be useful; but it could also be taken as referring to the introduction of files, with all the problems that implies and which we also discussed in relation to Eurodac.
Those are the reasons why I decided to withdraw these two amendments.
Thank you.
We have noted your remarks.
Mr President, I am grateful to Mr Sylla for withdrawing these two amendments.
But I wanted to ask him whether he does not think the same problem could arise with the part of the first sentence of Amendment 54 that has not been changed and which, in the English version I have before me, reads: "stresses that the EU must collect reliable ethnic data as a basis for review" .
I am concerned specifically with the terms "reliable ethnic data" and wonder whether Mr Sylla could perhaps table an oral amendment relating to this notion of "ethnic data" ?
The mover of the motion had the foresight to withdraw the motion before the vote.
We are not therefore voting on it.
(Parliament approved the motion for a resolution)
Mr President, I do not want to delay the proceedings, I just want to ask the Bureau to consider refusing to accept any more motions for deletion in the future which delete entire paragraphs so that we can avoid the problem which has arisen today.
I would ask for this to be considered.
Mr Swoboda, this is to do with the fact that, in our wisdom, we changed the agenda and, if I remember correctly, because I sit behind you, you too voted in favour at the time.
If you have now changed your mind, you must submit a motion to amend the agenda again and then I shall gladly proceed otherwise.
Mr President, I freely admit that I have room for improvement.
Mr Swoboda, that applies to both of us!
Mr President, on a point of order, I am very pleased that this report has gone through.
We spent a very long time voting on this.
Most of these amendments were put down either by members of the technical group of racists or by the EPP on positions that they lost in committee.
We should not be spending so long voting on amendments put down when they lost their position earlier on.
We could have done it much more quickly because the position has been quite clear.
You have touched on a fundamental problem which has to do with the way in which this has been entered on the agenda.
If, according to the agenda, these proposed amendments have been submitted in time, then the President will call them and deal with them as usual.
Mr Speroni wishes to raise a point of order.
Mr President, I do not know whether there has been an interpreting error, but Mr Evans called us the "technical group of racists" , whereas we are the Technical Group of Independent Members.
I am certain it was a problem of translation.
I am convinced of it.
Report (A5-0055/2000) by Mr Belder, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the Commission communication [COM(1999)256 - C5-0094/1999 - 1999/2099(COS)] on countering racism, xenophobia and antisemitism in the candidate countries
(Parliament approved the motion for a resolution)
Report (A5-0067/2000) by Mrs Read, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on Europe - An Information Society For All: Commission initiative [COM(1999)687 - C5-0063/2000 - 2000/2034(COS)] for the Special European Council in Lisbon on 23/24 March 2000
(Parliament approved the motion for a resolution)
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this is the first explanation of vote which I have given in many years and my first explanation of vote as chairman of the EPP-ED Group.
Unfortunately, our Group was unable, for a number of fundamental reasons, to vote in favour of the Ludford report on countering racism and xenophobia in the European Union.
We take the view that a good cause, namely the fight against racism and xenophobia, is being abused for extraneous objectives and that the report deals with topics which have nothing to do with racism and the fight against racism and xenophobia.
Most of our group therefore abstained or voted against.
Our reasons were as follows.
Firstly: the Ludford report flouts and violates the underlying principle of subsidiarity by calling in points 4, 6, 27 second indent, 11 and 20 for measures such as the recruitment of third country nationals to public office or formal requirements to change curricula and teacher training programmes.
Secondly: the report deals with matters which have absolutely nothing to do with the subject of the report by calling in points 19, 22 and 30 for measures such as rights for third country nationals to vote in local and European elections.
Thirdly: the Ludford report addresses matters which lie outside the time framework of the report and have nothing whatsoever to do with the report.
And I want - and I would prefer if more people listened, especially those who are about to leave - I want to highlight the absurdity of this report and I regret having to say this about this report in particular.
Its absurdity lies in the fact that not only fewer than one-third of the members voted, but a statement was made about a Member State of the European Union, namely Austria, a statement to the effect that Parliament subscribes to the sanctions of the fourteen Member States.
Parliament decided by a large majority, following a passionate debate in February in Brussels, not to subscribe to these sanctions and today, with such a small minority, with so few present, we are subscribing to these sanctions.
There are two reasons for this: first, because it is an issue which is extraneous to the subject of the report and, secondly, because we are dealing with an issue which was decided a long time ago by a large majority.
I consider that unacceptable.
My Group has therefore been compelled either to abstain or to vote against the report.
(Applause)
Mr President, I voted against this report because I judge a good bottle of wine by its contents, not its label.
This report may well have an anti-racism label, but it contains an indigestible brew of ideologically confused nonsense and does not merit the title of an anti-racism report.
This report is beyond improvement and I warn the House not to continue making a fool of itself with such absurd reports, because the issue of anti-racism is too important to be used as the basis for some sort of ideological show battle.
Although we do not agree with many of the recitals in the report on countering racism and xenophobia, we voted for that report because it takes a stance against discrimination and in favour of the rights of minorities.
Yet we certainly do not go along with the way Parliament is congratulating itself.
First of all, because most of the proposals to promote the rights of minorities and immigrants remain vague and are not binding.
Secondly, because of the hypocrisy involved in pretending to stand up for immigrants and minorities while conducting an anti-immigrant domestic policy, if only in the form of hunting down immigrants who do not have proper papers.
Finally, the report says nothing whatsoever about the deep-rooted economic and social reasons, in particular the rate of unemployment and the worsening poverty among a growing section of the population, that encourage demagogues of the racist and xenophobic extreme right to stir up unrest.
Mr President, I am speaking on behalf of the Spanish delegation to the Group of the European People' s Party to explain why we abstained in the vote.
Abstention does not normally mean taking a clear position but in this case it does.
We abstained because, on the one hand, we support the symbolism and principles of the fight against racism and xenophobia, and some of the points in this report contain important statements, for example, paragraph 8, on the functions of the European Racism and Xenophobia Information Network and paragraph 24, which invites the Member States to prioritise some very specific issues in this fight, to mention only two.
But, on the other hand, by contrast with the Haarder report which we voted for this morning, this report is long on radical demagoguery and short on legal rigour.
Now this Parliament, as co-legislator, should know that any statement it makes has either legal value or, as in this case, quasi-legal value, and that is why greater care must be taken.
Let me give you just one example of this: paragraph 22, which seeks to give substance to European citizenship, by granting rights to vote in European and local elections to third country nationals resident in the Community.
That obviously violates the Treaty right away.
It is badly drafted.
And I could give further examples of this kind of thing to justify our abstention.
Mr President, I should like to give a very brief explanation on behalf of the Austrian delegation of Socialists.
We voted in favour of this report because we believe that, a few statements notwithstanding, it is a good report, and I find the way in which parts of this report have been described during the explanations of vote totally unjustified.
We abstained on point 10.
We would have preferred a statement in keeping with the European Parliament' s resolution on Austria.
But as this point was accepted nonetheless, we voted in favour of the report on account of its fundamentally positive thrust.
Mr President, I am a firm supporter of the fight against any form of racism and xenophobia, but I abstained from the vote on Mrs Ludford' s resolution because I see it as one of those hotchpotch resolutions that tries to cover all manner of things and sometimes contradicts itself.
I do not think this kind of resolution does any credit to our Parliament.
- My Group and I are pleased to have voted for and supported the Ludford report which is concerning the important subject of the fight against racism and xenophobia.
Those who have voted to oppose family unity; to oppose encouragement for ethnic minorities to participate in elections; against a policy force that reflects Europe's diversity and against multi-ethnic parliaments are to be deplored and condemned.
The British Labour members and the PSE Group voted in favour of Amendment 2 to delete paragraph 17, not because we opposed the sentiments and intentions, but as it was open to possible misinterpretation or charges of ambiguity.
The fight against the racists and xenophobes in our society, those who seek to divide Europe, is one that must and will be won.
.
(SV) We conservatives support most of the measures against racism and xenophobia in the Ludford report.
We are, nonetheless, abstaining from voting in the final vote because we believe that labour market legislation is an area to which the subsidiarity principle ought to be applied, as mentioned in paragraph 17.
- (FR) The Ludford report on countering racism and xenophobia, like the Haarder report on human rights in the European Union that is also before us, seem inspired by some malevolent spirit that is prompting them to go beyond the legitimate protection of the rights linked to human dignity and to methodically destroy, one by one, all the bastions of citizenship, regardless indeed of whether it is national or even European.
Both reports give the impression of aiming to defend the rights of an indiscriminate individual, who could be living anywhere at all on this planet, rather than the rights of individuals situated in time and space, who have inherited certain traditions, who uphold their own values, i.e. precisely the citizens of our respective countries, who have sent us here to protect them, and for no other purpose.
I think the approach taken in these reports is a kind of violation of our terms of reference.
For instance, the Ludford report proclaims equality between European citizens and third country nationals and goes so far as to propose that non-nationals can be employed as European officials in the same way as Member State nationals, or that they enjoy the same rights of unchecked freedom of movement and family reunification as EU nationals.
The differences are being ironed out at every level, for the Haarder report also supports equal rights for same-sex couples and the traditional family.
The two reports also join forces in calling for the right of immigrants to vote and stand for election in local and European elections.
I think that second category is highly significant.
For even if supposedly practical reasons could sometimes be trumped up for calling for their participation in local elections, the significance of their participation in European elections is purely ideological.
Its aim is to show that the future Europe must not be a super-nation (even if there is a super-state) but, on the contrary, an open field, a crossing point where the rights taken away from the nations would be redistributed all over the world.
Another revealing point common to both reports is that they call for the proposed new 'rights' to be enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of EU citizens, now being drafted, on which I gave my views the day before yesterday during the debate on the Duff­Voggenhuber report.
And, of course, they insist that, in future, this document must be legally binding on the Member States.
That is another aspect that shows that this Charter, if it really was adopted in the form called for by the European Parliament - but which we will oppose absolutely - would have the effect of a mechanism for reducing the powers of the nations.
Here as ever we see that the European level is the point of least resistance in face of pressure groups, of extraneous minorities, even of foreign interests.
And once again we draw the same lesson: the citizens must keep a close guard on their powers and only delegate them where necessary to transparent institutions, devoted to their defence and over which they have full control.
- (DA) We are in favour of the humanitarian angle from which the report has been drawn up.
We are in favour of the report focusing upon the breeding grounds for racism and xenophobia in Europe.
We think it is important to combat racism and xenophobia by guaranteeing citizens the rights to education, access to the labour market etc.
It is also positive that the report should recommend that citizens of third countries should have better opportunities for integration.
For the aforesaid reasons, we have chosen to vote in favour of the report, since we basically think it is extremely important to combat racism and xenophobia.
We would emphasise, however, that we cannot support the means of combating racism and xenophobia that the report recommends.
We believe that measures such as drawing up a common asylum policy and establishing EURODAC - which would cause asylum seekers to be viewed with suspicion - would not further the fight against racism and xenophobia.
- (FR) I congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of her work on the European Commission' s report on the implementation of the European Year Against Racism (1997).
Recent events in Austria demonstrate that it is, alas, still necessary today to combat racism, antisemitism and xenophobia.
As the report points out, we really must express "horror at the entry into Government in Austria of Jörg Haider' s Freedom Party" .
Let me take this opportunity to repeat that we must keep up the pressure on the Austrian Government and continue to encourage public debate.
For there is indeed a strong risk that people will simply become used to the situation.
I repeat: the great risk is that it will become part of everyday life.
This open breach of the founding principle of our European Union, namely unconditional respect for fundamental rights, must not create a precedent.
Throughout Europe, extreme right-wing parties are hoping to exploit the entry into power of this coalition with its fascist connotations.
So it is our duty as European democrats to remain vigilant, to tempt this government into a foolish mistake that will lead to its fall.
I personally am prepared to take this fight to the bitter end.
Like the rapporteur, I believe that the ethnic, religious, cultural and linguistic diversity of Europe is a source of vitality and that it is essential for Europe' s future economic prosperity and social success.
That is why the public authorities of the Member States and the EU institutions must actively promote racial equality and take concrete action to achieve greater ethnic diversity among their staff.
I also agree that leading the fight against racism and xenophobia and the promotion of equal opportunities should be an explicit responsibility allocated to one European Commissioner.
One other proposal deserves our full attention.
The report urges the Member State authorities to include, as formal requirements of school curricula and teacher training programmes, the teaching of Europe and its role in the world, including slavery and colonialism, and the history and culture of minority communities, the dangers of racism, xenophobia and intolerance, including the Holocaust and antisemitism, and the imperative of racial tolerance and the value of diversity.
Coming back to Austria, one reason why it has come to this extreme situation is perhaps that this country does not have a sufficiently objective memory of the past.
Let me conclude by asking for consideration to be given, in the framework of the IGC, to possibly amending the Treaty of Amsterdam, specifically its Article 7 which concerns action against any Member State guilty of a "serious and persistent breach" of fundamental freedoms and rights.
in writing.
(PT) We cannot fight racism and xenophobia only by legislating against them.
What we really need are measures aimed at effecting a sea change in the underlying causes of the conditions which allow these phenomena to spread.
The report we are debating deals with a series of points we fully agree with, aiming principally at guaranteeing the fundamental rights of the citizens of third countries who choose one of the Member States of the European Union as a place of work and residence.
It is especially worth highlighting the need to give the citizens of third countries resident in the European Union political rights, by granting them the right to vote in local and European elections.
For those reasons, our vote is in favour of the report.
- As a former Minister in the UK for race relations I am very much aware of the need to look constantly for ways of improving relations between all groups and interests in the population.
This requires a careful mixture, firstly of education, and only when absolutely necessary, of legislation.
This report totally fails to provide a balanced approach.
It is gesture politics at their worst with the clear ideology of the author taking precedence over good sense.
It is damaging through its stridency.
It gives no credit for the great achievements in race relations in EU states.
It offers only a defeatist agenda, not one of a positive nature.
It insults those who are trying to improve a situation and therefore it is offensive to many.
In short, it is an abuse of the opportunities offered by our Parliament to debate and determine issues like this which are vital and important and deserve better than this approach.
Those of us who really care know the great difficulties of this subject.
We simply cannot support such an appalling set of proposals, particularly as Baroness Ludford's approach could have the unfortunate result of turning the majority against the minority rather than harmonising relations.
This report would undermine rather than improve race relations.
That cannot be a desirable outcome.
- (FR) Sarah Ludford' s report is a masterpiece of morbid and destructive rage against the identities of the peoples and nations of Europe, their rights to be different, their rights to make their own choices, to be their own masters, to refuse social, cultural and institutional disintegration.
This pathological, fanatical and obsessive 'anti-racist' mania is being used merely as a psychological lever in the process of colonising Europe and forcing its people into submission.
The sole purpose of this frenzied attempt to heap guilt on the Europeans, who are in fact generous, welcoming, open to other cultures, anything but racist or intolerant, is to make them accept the unacceptable, to persuade them to submit in silence to a mass, general colonisation, to a new society in which they will become no more than a subjugated minority.
The moral inquisition, propaganda and constant psychological conditioning to which we are being subjected are worthy of the most despicable methods applied in the communist regimes' 're-education' camps.
But this report will at least have the merit, thanks to the Baroness and her cronies, of letting us find out who the new collaborators are.
Stand up and be counted!
- (FR) Europe is facing real difficulties today.
Like it or not, it is not the path of glory it aspired to be for the citizens of the Member States.
It reflects what it is, namely a remote and restrictive machine whose sole purpose seems to be to enact finicky legislative rules obviously aimed at centralisation and standardisation.
It is against that background that this year, as ever, we are once again debating human rights in the world and in the Union, accompanied this time by a debate on countering racism in the European Union and the candidate states.
That could have allowed us to inject a little 'soul' into a system sadly in need of it.
But that was not to be.
The rapporteur, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs and the plenary have served us up documents that smell of death.
These pseudo-defenders of the rights of man have quite simply forgotten that man is not a concept, a point in a political programme.
The human being has a dignity, a mission that are far superior, if not contrary, to what is being put before us today.
Respect for the human being means recognising that his legitimate rights correspond to legitimate obligations, that he must exercise his freedom responsibly, that his natural dignity presupposes moral points of reference.
It is not a question of restricting that freedom but, on the contrary, of becoming aware that man lives within a family and national community, that his humanity imposes rules on him, failing which civilisation becomes synonymous with barbarism.
I would not so much say that the European Parliament has missed an opportunity as that it has once again been true to itself, libertarian and, in the final analysis, liberticidal.
- (FR) I could not vote for the report by Baroness Ludford and I want my abstention to be perceived as an expression of strong contempt, because of the incongruities and exaggerations contained in certain passages of this report.
Various exaggerated statements and demands, especially those concerning third country nationals residing in the Member States of the European Union, are of a provocative nature and lead to reactions that the report terms racist.
Yet the majority of the citizens of our Member States often cannot understand why it should be absolutely essential for third country nationals residing in the EU to enjoy the same rights as them, including the right to vote, when there are no reciprocal rights at all for EU nationals residing in those third countries.
I know that in making these points I risk being demonised by the media and falling into the trap some sections of the report are setting for those among us who still dare express their opinion in the face of the exaggerations on which Baroness Ludford' s report bases what it sees as a rise in racism and xenophobia.
- (FR) Today, the European Parliament is presenting us with the new man in a new world.
The Ludford report is not an account of the good or bad situation as regards racism in the European Union; it is the political programme of an extreme left-wing libertarianism that, in the end, shows little concern for the natural rights of man.
In fact, reading this document would suggest that the countries of Europe, especially the Member States, are hellish places where the most elementary rights are trampled under foot daily, where the governments and their authorities, including, and I quote, "the police, justice and immigration services" , pursue totalitarian and inhumane policies.
Oh how wonderful it must be to live in China, in Cuba or in North Korea!
Faced with these tyrants, the European Union is keeping vigil: since it is close to the people, and so concerned with their happiness, that it manages their daily lives, it will know how to promote new and hitherto unknown rights; since its foundations and the way it works are so democratic, it will know how to create this new Europe freed of all sin; it will know how to be the undisputed guide that can lead all its followers towards 'a brighter future' .
This is not serious.
Communities, whether national or European, need points of reference that are not exclusive but that guarantee enduring relations.
Our nations are often pluri-secular, they have always attracted populations and ethnic groups different from their own, who have added their value to that of their hosts.
This happened without problem, because our nations presented these newcomers with identified systems within which they could easily find their bearings and their place.
Mrs Ludford is proposing a society with no model, where the law of the strongest would be bound to prevail.
Freedom means a just and identical law for all; for each individual or each group to have its own law spells anarchy and barbarism.
The European edifice will not be built simply by the addition of those who make it up; it will be the result of a concordance of views about its destiny and the ways to achieve it, or it will not be built at all.
Today, the Ludford report puts us at a remove from that Europe.
Report (A5-0055/2000) by Mr Belder
Mr President, the only reason we voted for this report is to reaffirm that we are opposed on principle to any form of racism, xenophobia and oppression of minorities, within or outside the European Union.
However, that vote does not mean we agree with all the recitals and all the proposals in it.
At the same time, we do not think the states that already belong to the European Union are in a position to teach lessons to countries that are only at the stage of applying for accession, given the extent to which the ignominy of racism and xenophobia is being propagated in most of the Member States of the European Union itself, by demagogues from the extreme right, even and including some within this Parliament.
- (FR) The European Commission presented this communication on countering racism in the candidate countries in response to the request by the Vienna European Council of 11 and 12 December 1998.
I welcome the communication, which reflects the European Union' s resolve to help the candidate countries to combat racism, xenophobia and antisemitism with determination, and to satisfy the Copenhagen criteria relating to human rights, the sine qua non for accession to the European Union.
The profound process of transformation that has been under way in Central and Eastern Europe since 1989 has had its impact on the rise of racism, xenophobia and antisemitism.
The high unemployment rate (formerly an unknown social phenomenon, but now officially recognised), which resulted from the economic reforms, is making people feel more insecure.
All this creates fertile ground for the rise in forms of racism.
There is a risk that the changes resulting from the implementation of the Community acquis will further accentuate the social tensions in the candidate countries.
So it is vital to take vigorous action without delay to help these countries to tackle these problems.
This could be done through programmes such as PHARE (and more specifically "PHARE-Democracy" , now incorporated in the "European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights" ) and the MEDA programme for Turkey, which can provide back-up during these changes.
The European Observatory of racism and xenophobia which will open its doors in Vienna on 10 April this year must also make a relevant contribution to continuing the fight against racism, xenophobia and antisemitism in the candidate countries.
The report highlights one very acute problem in the candidate countries, the problem of respect for the rights of minorities.
I am thinking particularly of the Roma, who face intolerable discrimination in several Central and Eastern European countries.
I am also thinking, obviously, of the problem of the institutionalised discrimination against the Kurdish people.
Let me take this opportunity to remind you that Mrs Leyla Zana, a Turkish parliamentarian of Kurdish origin, is still being held in Turkish jails after a parody of a trial.
So far, all the pressure exerted by the European Parliament has had no effect on the Turkish authorities' position.
Sadly, Mrs Zana' s case is no exception!
Turkey needs to make considerable progress in relation to respect for the Kurdish population.
That is the condition for its accession to the European Union and there can be no compromise on that!
ECB foreign reserve assets
The next item is the report (A5-0042/2000) by Mr Goebbels, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the European Central Bank recommendation for a Council Regulation (EC) concerning further calls of foreign reserve assets by the European Central Bank (BCE 0001/1999 - C5-0202/1999 - 1999/0817 (CNS)
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the European Union has equipped itself with a politically independent Central Bank, responsible for safeguarding price stability.
The ECB must, at the very least, be financially independent.
Pursuant to the Treaty, the Bank' s initial capital is fixed at EUR 5 billion while foreign exchange reserves are fixed at EUR 50 billion.
As the European System of Central Banks is currently composed of only 11 national central banks, the capital released is only EUR 3.9 billion, while currently transferred reserves come to only EUR 39.46 billion.
Of that, 15% are in gold, while the remaining 85% consist of US dollars and yen.
It should be noted that interest on its own capital is the European Central Bank' s only reliable source of income.
In the short term, this income varies with interest rates.
The ECB' s other source of income is the interest on its official reserves.
However, from that income the ECB has to deduct the interest it pays on its liabilities in euros vis-à-vis the national central banks.
The foreign exchange reserves that appear on the ECB' s balance sheet are given in national currencies, while the liabilities vis-à-vis the national central banks are given in euros.
At present, given the interest rate differentials between the euro on the one hand, and the US dollar and the yen on the other, the net income from interest is positive.
However, in the event that interest rates vary, and to the extent that the source of income is highly sensitive to interest rate differentials, the share of income accruing from interest could fall very quickly and even produce a loss.
Since the ECB holds currencies to offset liabilities in euros, it would also run a foreign exchange risk if the euro appreciated substantially against the reserve currencies it is holding.
An internal ECB calculation indicates that the foreign exchange value at risk could exceed the ECB' s current capital.
A 10% depreciation of the US dollar and the yen against the euro, accompanied by a 10% fall in the price of gold, would wipe out all the ECB' s existing capital.
The Treaty provides for a mechanism whereby the ECB can forearm itself against any erosion of its capital.
The European Central Bank can partially or totally retain the monetary income from the Eurosystem.
Nevertheless, a central bank that depended on being bailed out repeatedly would not be very credible.
In fact, the European Central Bank will probably close its 1999 financial year with a deficit of more than EUR 200 million.
So it is imperative to resolve this structural problem as quickly as possible.
On 14 April 1999, the European Parliament endorsed an ECB recommendation on doubling its capital in the long term.
The recommendation under consideration today seeks to authorise the Governing Council to effect further calls of foreign reserves, raising the ceiling to EUR 100 billion.
So it is simply a question of authorisation in principle to increase reserves as needed, without being pressurised by exceptional events.
The ECB might, for example, make use of this procedure to augment them on a case-by-case basis, particularly during a period of large-scale intervention, but also, possibly, because of potential portfolio losses, the portfolio being revalued every quarter according to market rates.
In this context it must be noted that the total reserves of the Eurosystem come to more than EUR 350 billion.
As President Duisenberg maintained at his last hearing before the European Parliament, the ECB does not intend to intervene on the foreign exchange markets to try to influence the external value of the euro.
In the event of another international financial crisis, which remains possible given the irrational exuberance of the markets, there could be a need for concerted intervention by the main central banks.
To enable the ECB to be a party to agreements such as those known as the Plaza or Louvre agreements, the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs felt it was clearly necessary to advise Parliament to vote for the recommendation.
I have not proposed what might be called a political resolution to my colleagues.
Personally, as I said a while ago, I feel that Parliament votes on too many resolutions and that this inflated number of resolutions reduces the value of other, politically essential resolutions.
In this case it is a question of saying yes or no.
A massive yes vote also sends out a political message.
We want the ECB to be able to pursue its main objective of safeguarding price stability in total independence - including material independence.
At the same time, and here Mr Duisenberg is being too evasive for my liking, we also want the European System of Central Banks to give its unequivocal support to the European Union' s general economic policies.
We want the Central Bank to play its full part on the international scene and to make an active contribution to defining new rules that will enable the international financial system to operate without crises.
We are confident that the Governing Council will make optimum use of the foreign exchange reserves in the Eurosystem in the event of tension on the markets.
No one claims that the deterrent effect of the foreign exchange intervention instrument is proportional to the amount of reserves.
However, credibility is enhanced by the option of being able to mobilise additional assets at any time without delay.
It would be warranted, however, for such internal ECB transfers, which will not be included in detail in the Eurosystem' s weekly consolidated financial statements, to be disclosed a posteriori.
The European Parliament also assumes that the ECB President will explain the decisions taken by his Council when he appears before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and, indeed, during plenary debates.
The Central Bank has everything to gain from this improved transparency with regard to consolidating its credibility.
Mr President, I will close my statement by emphasising, speaking for myself and addressing myself to the ECB, that the ECB is there to serve the women and men of Europe, to serve the economy as a whole.
So its role is not just to satisfy the expectations of the financial markets.
Mr President, I should like to carry on from the point at which the rapporteur stopped in his report, for which I thank him, and point out once again that, compared with the plethora of resolutions which do not equate with the priorities of this House, increasing foreign reserve assets is an important resolution.
What is the legal basis for today' s debate?
According to Article 3 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks, owning and managing official foreign reserve assets is one of the tasks of the ECB.
This task is carried out in parallel by the ECB and the national central banks, whereby the national central banks transfer part of their reserves up to the equivalent of 50 billion euros to the European Central Bank, in accordance with Article 30.1 of the Statute.
It was decided at the time, in Article 30.4 - which is why today' s discussion comes as no surprise - that the ECB could call up further foreign reserve assets beyond the limit set in Article 30.1.
This call must be issued in the form of a regulation by the EU Council.
The ECB is currently calling for a further increase of 50 billion euros.
We, the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats and the entire Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, as the rapporteur has already said, welcome this proposal.
The reasons are set out in detail and time is already marching on, but allow me to say that we consider that this increase is needed.
First, because it will help to increase the financial independence of the ECB, and the independence of the European Central Bank is instrumental to the stability and unassailability of the currency.
The return on the capital paid up so far and the official reserves currently represents the ECB' s only source of income for financing its operations.
We know that it sustained a loss in 1999.
We must therefore admit that a lack of funds robs the ECB of the ability to formulate an independent and transparent policy.
Its financing requirements must be covered so that its independence cannot be called into question.
Secondly, we are in favour of this increase because it will help to foster the credibility of the ECB on the markets.
If the ECB is financially independent and self-sufficient, this will increase its credibility on the international markets and, by extension, strengthen the euro en route to the third stage on 1.1.2002.
Thirdly: this increase will enhance the ability of the ECB to react and adapt.
In the event of a serious imbalance on the markets, possibly doubling its reserves gives the European Central Bank the potential to carry out its task in the form of a stability policy more effectively.
It gives it the possibility to react more flexibly because it has the necessary funds at its disposal.
Our report also introduces an additional model for strengthening the transparency of this procedure and I would therefore ask that you vote in favour of increasing the reserves.
Mr President, in this draft legislative resolution, Parliament approves the ECB' s recommendation for a Council regulation concerning the continued calling in of foreign reserve assets.
The following reasons are given: first, the Treaty makes provision for this.
If it is not applied in the form of a regulation, this could be construed as a difference of opinion between the ECB and the Council.
Secondly, the ECB should gain in financial independence.
Thirdly, the foreign exchange intervention instrument will be made more credible and the capacity of the ECB to adjust to various scenarios will be fostered.
Of course, there can be no objection to any structural improvement of the ECB' s financial situation.
The only question is whether or not pouring more money into it will solve the problem once and for all.
Before an answer can be given, the following questions at least must be considered:
Firstly: does it make political and economic sense to apply the sort of restrictive monetary policy which the ECB applies and which is more restrictive than the FED?
Secondly, does the increase in interest rates for top refinancing facilities and deposit facilities applied on 9.2.2000 not run counter to economic growth?
Thirdly, are more decisive measures to reduce unemployment permanently not the most tried and tested means of guaranteeing price stability?
Fourthly: in addition to a supply-orientated economic policy, should greater emphasis not be placed on a demand-orientated economic policy, i.e. strengthening the European internal market through reduced import tax rates in the Member States?
Fifthly, is it so wrong to assume that the exchange rate set when the euro was introduced had more to do with political wishful thinking than economic reality?
Sixthly: what specific grounds are there for assuming that the ECB will probably sustain a loss in 1999?
Having answered these questions, our Group felt unable to vote for the proposal for a resolution.
Not because the ECB has too few foreign reserve assets, but because it is wrongly organised structurally and will therefore complain endlessly of these liquidity problems.
Mr President, the European Central Bank is recommending to the Council that it double its foreign reserve assets.
To that end, it puts forward two very different kinds of argument.
The first dwell on its own concerns about financial administration, given that the increase in its staff appears proportional to the fall in income from its assets, income one might in fact have hoped would be sufficient to make it self-supporting.
In a flash of lucidity, the ECB has declared that a central bank with a structural deficit would quite simply not be credible.
That is true, and it gives some cause for anxiety about the administrative ability of those who so quickly need to raise the ceiling level.
The second argument is that the ECB needs to enhance its capacity to intervene on the markets in a general context of the depreciation of the euro - contrary to the soothing forecasts we were originally favoured with - and of repeated attacks by the financial centre of one EU Member State which, it has to be said, was wise enough not to join the single currency.
So it did not take long before the supposed instrument of EU independence and economic power so cruelly demonstrated its inadequacies.
It is rather shattering to read in the report that, should the political authorities - Parliament and the Council - refuse to help to bring about a structural improvement in the financial position of the ECB, the latter would no longer be regarded as independent by the markets.
It is clear to see where the ECB' s priority lies; it has acquired the habit of facing the policy makers with a fait accompli and its main aim is to gain the respect of the financial centres, to which it evidently attaches more value than to the confidence of the people.
No, really, we care little whether the ECB does or does not double its nuisance value.
We would have preferred some genuine self-criticism on the part of those who are genuinely responsible, namely the governments of the Fifteen, and a policy reversal, which would enable the people of the Member States to free themselves from the fate of standardisation that is being prepared for them by an ill-assorted group made up of technocrats who believe in the divine right of federalism and of globalised speculators.
Mr Goebbels points out that rejection by Parliament could be construed as indicating profound disagreement with the soundness of the policy pursued by the European Central Bank.
That is reason enough for us to vote against this text.
Mr President, we have good reason to be puzzled by the European Central Bank' s request to double the ceiling of its calls of foreign reserve assets from the national central banks.
At first sight it may seem acceptable to raise the current ceiling from EUR 50 billion - in fact it is 39.5 billion because certain countries have not joined the single currency - to EU 100 billion, when we remember that the national central banks will still have EUR 300 billion of own official reserves available.
However, the fact that this operation is to take place so soon after the date when the single currency was launched clearly shows that the value of the reserves was seriously underestimated at the time.
Why?
Aside from a few technical explanations relating to details, such as the exact number of ECB staff, there is only one valid reason that can be cited: the euro-optimism surrounding the launch of the euro, as it was called at the time, led people to believe that the single currency would naturally be strong and that the question of reserves was, therefore, secondary.
They all seem to be becoming rather more realistic again now.
But the whole business is not yet closed, for the explanatory memorandum in the draft regulation, like the explanatory statement in the European Parliament' s report, are rather disturbing, pointing out as they do, in passing, that the aim of raising the ceiling is, and I quote, to enhance the Bank' s "ability to adapt to different possible scenarios" .
Since this does not refer to a scenario where the value of the euro is rising - if that were so, there would obviously be no need for additional reserves - it must mean a scenario where its value is falling.
The European Parliament' s report seems even more alarmist when it refers in so many words to the potential instability of the euro which, according to the rapporteur, does not need to be demonstrated.
This slip of the pen will no doubt displease Mr Duisenberg who, for his part, keeps reiterating day after day that the euro is fundamentally stable.
Yet it is a revealing slip of the pen.
For it is, in effect, not realistic to believe that an artificial currency can inspire the same confidence as a currency solidly established among the people.
Mr President, on behalf of my colleague, Mr Solbes, I would like to make the following comments.
The Commission has been consulted by the Council - as it has been by Parliament - about the recommendation of the European Central Bank concerning further calls of foreign reserve assets to the ECB.
The Commission has adopted its opinion on this recommendation on 8 March, which reads as follows: "Noting the rights of initiative of both the Commission and the ECB, the Commission has agreed with the initiative taken by the European Central Bank.
The Commission supports the doubling of the limit for calls of foreign reserve assets by the ECB to the extent that these further calls serve to replenish holdings of reserve assets up to the initial limit of EUR 50 billion fixed in the ESCB Statute" .
The Commission has therefore adopted a favourable opinion on the ECB' s recommendation.
Should Parliament adopt the report of Mr Goebbels in its present form, this would mean that Parliament' s and the Commission' s views converge, which I would welcome.
Thank you, Commissioner Nielson.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 7.35 p.m.)