# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 123
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
Budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
* The lateness in the submission of the present report was due to additional technical and substantive consultations.
Report of the Secretary-General*
Contents
Abbreviations
BONUCA United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic
CRM Customer Relationship Management
ECM Enterprise Content Management
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization
IMIS Integrated Management Information System
MINURSO United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
MINUSTAH United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
MONUC United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
OIOS Office of Internal Oversight Services
ONUB United Nations Operation in Burundi
UNAMA United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
UNAMI United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
UNAMSIL United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
UNDOF United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
UNFICYP United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
UNIFIL United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
UNLB United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi
UNMEE United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
UNMIK United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
UNMIL United Nations Mission in Liberia
UNMISET United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
UNMOGIP United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
UNOCI United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire
UNOGBIS United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
UNOMIG United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
UNOPS United Nations Office for Project Services
UNTOP United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding
UNTSO United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
Overview
Status of peacekeeping
Since 2001, the Secretariat has consistently implemented reforms in planning, deploying and supporting peacekeeping operations, in line with the recommendations of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (A/55/305-S/2000/809) and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (see A/55/1024 and Corr.1 and A/C.4/55/6).
The performance report of the support account for the period 2003/04 (A/59/714) details all the achievements that have been attained by the Secretariat in this respect.
These achievements were made possible with the additional resources for the support account approved by the General Assembly.
As shown in table 1, pursuant to the recommendations of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, 687 posts were approved in the support account to plan, deploy and support 16 active peacekeeping operations (including UNTSO and UNMOGIP, which are funded from the regular budget of the United Nations) and the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, with an overall budget level for 2001/02 of approximately $2.8 billion.
During the three financial periods from 2002/03 to 2004/05, the level of staffing under the support account increased to 761 posts in the areas of procurement, medical services and treasury operations in the Department of Management; in the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman; and as a result of the transfer of 27 Resident Auditor posts from mission budgets to the direct management of OIOS, the establishment of a Middle East regional audit office in Nicosia and the establishment of hubs in Vienna and Nairobi for regional investigations focusing on peacekeeping operations.
The level of staffing under the support account has not kept pace with the developments in peacekeeping over the past 15 months, however.
During the period from November 2003 to June 2004, the Security Council authorized four new missions with complex and multidimensional mandates (UNMIL, UNOCI, MINUSTAH and ONUB).
During that period, the Council also approved revisions to two ongoing missions, UNAMSIL and UNMISET, beyond the originally foreseen termination of their respective mandates, as well as logistical and administrative preparations for a prospective peacekeeping operation in the Sudan.
In October 2004, the Council authorized the expansion of MONUC from 10,982 to 16,882 military and police personnel, an increase of approximately 54 per cent.
As a result, the overall approved peacekeeping budget level in 2004/05 for 16 active missions, including UNTSO and UNMOGIP, has risen to $3.9 billion.
With the expansion of MONUC, a prospective mission in the Sudan and additional appropriations for UNMIK and UNFICYP, the final overall peacekeeping budget level in 2004/05 is expected to be approximately $4.7 billion and is projected to further increase to around $5.2 billion for the financial period 2005/06.
The size and complexity of the current peacekeeping missions will result in individual annual budgets as high as $900 million to $1 billion.
In addition, within the approved level of resources in the support account, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations provides backstopping for the two special political missions, UNAMA and UNAMIS, for which the Department has substantive responsibility, and the full range of administrative and logistical support services to the 11 special political missions managed by the Department of Political Affairs.
During the past two years, the number of such missions has increased, from 9 in 2003/04 to 13 in 2004/05, including complex operations such as UNAMA, UNAMI and UNAMIS.
The increase in the number of military and police personnel authorized by the Security Council during the financial periods from 2001/02 to 2004/05 and projections for 2005/06 is reflected in table 1.
In figure 1 these increases are compared with the capacity of the support account in terms of number of posts.
The consistent increase in the number of peacekeeping operation personnel directly affects the level of backstopping required from Headquarters.
Table 1 Overview of financial and human resources for peacekeeping operations from 2000 to 2006
a Pursuant to the recommendations of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (A/55/305-S/2000/809.
b Projected.
c The overall budget level for peacekeeping missions for the period 2004/05 is a projection, as the revised budget for MONUC and the revised appropriations for UNMIK and UNFICYP are still to be approved by the General Assembly at the first part of its resumed fifty-ninth session.
Figure 1 Personnel authorized by the Security Council versus support account posts
The level of contingents (troops and military observers), civilian police and formed police compared with the number of support account posts from 2000 to 2006 is also illustrated in figure 1.
In response to these new operational exigencies, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has prioritized its available resources to ensure that the establishment of new missions meet the time frame of 30 to 90 days or the time lines set by the Security Council.
Additional capacity was provided through use of vacancies in missions on a temporary and ad hoc basis while the more long-term sustained requirements of the Department were analysed and determined.
In order to comprehensively and promptly meet the operational needs of all the field missions and to ensure proper management of such complex and high-budget operations, certain capacities at Headquarters, particularly within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, need to be further strengthened.
The reforms implemented in planning, deploying and supporting peacekeeping operations during the past three years and the commitment and dedication of all peacekeeping staff, supplemented by the temporary and ad hoc use of mission vacancies during 2004/05, have helped bring peacekeeping to its current level and performance.
It is no longer viable to continue the temporary and ad hoc use of vacancies in missions, as those posts are needed by the missions concerned and recruitment by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to fill them is currently under way.
All the departments, particularly the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, affected by the surge in peacekeeping operations have carefully analysed their sustained resource requirements in this regard.
In the light of the surging peacekeeping demands on the Organization by Member States, sustaining the contribution of Headquarters to efficient and effective peacekeeping is no longer possible with the same level of resources in the support account.
In addition, there is a requirement to address issues of conduct, including the prevention and identification of misconduct of peacekeeping personnel and the establishment of mission-based investigative structures to handle disciplinary and sexual exploitation and abuse cases.
Therefore, the continuation of 761 existing posts, as well as the addition of 100 posts and the transfer of 10 Resident Auditor posts from mission budgets are required.
Of the 110 new posts proposed for 2005/06, 49 are in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, 45 are in the Office of Internal Oversight Services and 16 are in other departments.
The new posts proposed by the respective departments are summarized in table 2.
Table 2 Proposed new posts by department
The identification of these requirements follows an extensive review of both the existing posts and the additional posts requested in the support account budget.
Without the additional resources proposed, the departments would not be able to provide the level of managerial direction and operational support that the current missions require in order to achieve their mandates as authorized by the Security Council.
Moreover, the additional resources are needed to achieve further progress planned towards rapid deployment and improved efficiency and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
The planned progress for the financial period 2005/06 is further elaborated by the indicators of achievement for each of the departments receiving support account resources, which are set out in the results-based-budgeting frameworks in section II below.
The Secretariat will continue to review the capacity of the support account against the overall peacekeeping level.
Should the overall budgetary requirements and the complexity of peacekeeping operations decrease, and taking into account the needs arising from the liquidation of missions, the Secretariat will reassess the level of the support account and accordingly make recommendations to the General Assembly on the resources required.
Analysis of resource requirements
The variance of $29,132,900, representing a 24 per cent increase over the level of resources approved for 2004/05, is due mainly to the requirement for 100 new posts and 10 Resident Auditor posts transferred from mission budgets ($20.5 million), and to an increase of $8.7 million in non-post resources.
The increase in non-post resources is reflected primarily in the requirements for general temporary assistance, consultants, facilities and infrastructure, communications and information technology.
The increase in general temporary assistance is due primarily to the additional requirements for the Department of Management and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
In the Department of Management, resources are required to undertake a pilot project within the Procurement Service to effect efficiencies in freight-forwarding operations, to assist the Archives and Records Management Section to clear backlogs relating to the cataloguing of files transferred from closed missions and for the Administrative Law Unit in the Office of Human Resources Management to deal with sexual exploitation and abuse cases referred from peacekeeping missions.
In the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, resources are required to develop a field finance training course module and standardized budget templates for large and complex as well as medium-size and small missions and for temporary assistance to fill vacancies in field missions resulting from the surge in peacekeeping operations.
The increase in consultancy requirements is attributable primarily to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, where provision is made for expertise to develop tools to capture best practices and to transfer/manage knowledge for the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section and to conduct an independent review of the reform and restructuring of the Department.
Provisions are also required by the Department of Management for expertise to develop management tools to monitor human resources management in the peacekeeping missions and for the development, configuration and implementation of two new information management systems, namely, the Customer Relationship Management programme (CRM) and the Enterprise Content Management programme (ECM).
The additional requirements in facilities and infrastructure and in communications are directly associated with the proposed new posts.
The increase in requirements for information technology relate to the development of a budget formulation database system in the Peacekeeping Financing Division, Department of Management, and to the provision for the purchase of additional information technology equipment associated with the proposed new posts.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations proposes resources for the maintenance and enhancement of the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section's website and the development of the new information technology projects, namely, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations portal and ECM.
C. Results-based budgeting
Logical framework for peacekeeping
Results-based budgeting in the United Nations uses a logical framework that defines and links objectives, expected accomplishments, outputs and inputs.
The results-based budgeting frameworks for the support account and peacekeeping missions are summarized in figure 2.
Figure 2 Results-based budgeting logical framework for peacekeeping operations, 2005/06
Objective
The objective of the support account is to ensure efficient and effective peacekeeping.
This objective, aligned with the objectives of the peacekeeping missions as derived from the relevant Security Council resolutions, is linked to the related purpose of the United Nations of maintaining international peace and security (see Charter of the United Nations, Chap.
I, Art.
Expected accomplishments
Within the objective, the offices work towards one or more of the following expected accomplishments:
• Expected accomplishment 1: Ability of the Security Council, the General Assembly, other intergovernmental bodies and troop- and police-contributing countries to make fully informed decisions on issues regarding peacekeeping
• Expected accomplishment 2: Rapid deployment and establishment of peacekeeping operations in response to Security Council mandates
• Expected accomplishment 3: Increased efficiency and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
Indicators of achievement
Indicators of achievement demonstrate what progress is to be made towards each of the expected accomplishments in the financial period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006, as detailed in the results-based budgeting frameworks for the individual offices (see sect.
II below).
Outputs
Outputs represent the contributions of organizational units to the expected accomplishments in the 2005/06 financial period.
Inputs
Inputs represent the resource requirements that enable the organizational units to carry out activities that produce the planned outputs.
Improvements
The budget proposal includes improvements in results-based budgeting that take into account the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (see A/58/759 and A/58/760), as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 58/298 of 18 June 2004.
The expected accomplishments have been sharpened in an attempt to better capture the desired outcome involving benefits to end-users.
The results-based budgeting frameworks incorporate a higher percentage of clearly measurable indicators than in the three previous financial periods.
The number of measurable indicators as a percentage of the total has increased from 21 per cent in 2002/03 to 47 per cent in 2003/04 to 70 per cent in 2004/05 and to 85 per cent in 2005/06.
The percentage of indicators with baselines has also increased: from 18 per cent in 2004/05 to 27 per cent in 2005/06.
The percentage of outputs that are measurable has evolved from 14 per cent in 2002/03 to 55 per cent in 2003/04 to 70 per cent in 2004/05 and to 75 per cent in 2005/06.
All outputs have been presented in the form of nouns instead of the past tense of verbs, which were used prior to 2005/06.
To the extent possible, outputs have been defined as a service or product provided to an end-user outside the support account structure rather than as a service or product delivered between organizational units of the support account.
End-users of the support account are mainly the General Assembly, the Security Council, Member States and troop- and police-contributing countries, other intergovernmental bodies and the peacekeeping missions in the field.
Output reference information is included in the respective budget proposals for non-post resources, such as consultants and official travel, under each office in order to highlight the link between resources, expected accomplishments and outputs.
Budget parameters
Posts
The 2004-2005 and 2006-2007 standard salary costs for New York have been applied to all posts at United Nations Headquarters and the 2004-2005 and 2006-2007 standard salary costs for Vienna and Nairobi have been applied to the posts in the regional investigation hubs at those duty stations.
A staff turnover factor of 5 per cent has been applied to all continuing Professional posts and 1.5 per cent to posts in the General Service and related categories.
For new posts, delayed recruitment factors of 50 per cent and 35 per cent have been applied to Professional and General Service posts respectively.
With regard to the Resident Auditor and Resident Investigator posts in the respective peacekeeping missions, an average salary cost and an average of common staff costs, both computed by category and grade level, along with turnover factors based on past performance in the specific mission, have been applied.
Provisions for post resources are presented under the relevant office to facilitate the linkage to resources in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Management.
Non-post resources
Provisions for the maintenance of information technology equipment are based on the Information Technology Services Division's standard service-level agreements, which vary from level A (unit cost $1,200) to level C (unit cost $550).
A standard desktop computer and printer are provided for all new posts.
Provisions for the purchase of new desktop computers and laptops are based on an average cost of $1,300 and $1,800 per unit respectively.
In addition, the present budget continues the non-inclusion of provisions for infrastructure costs relating to the local-area network and the Optical Disk System, at $700 and $300 per person respectively.
Provisions for accommodation, rental of office equipment, office supplies, furniture and communication equipment are based on standards used in the programme budget for 2004-2005.
However, the provision for the rental of office premises is based on an average cost of $10,600 per person per annum, which represents the most recent cost data available.
Requirements for office supplies, rental of office equipment, furniture, communication services, supplies and equipment as well as information technology services, supplies and equipment for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Management are shown at the overall departmental level.
E. Information on the rejustification and reclassification of posts
In paragraph 12 of its resolution 58/298, the General Assembly requested information with respect to posts that would have been vacant for at least 12 months by 30 June of a given year.
In accordance with the Assembly's decision, the number of posts rejustified for the 2005/06 period is shown in the human resources requirements table for each office.
Rejustification of posts is included under the analysis of resource requirements.
A total of six posts projected to be vacant for 12 months as at 30 June 2005 are rejustified in the present budget.
In paragraph 19 of its resolution 57/318 of 18 June 2003, the General Assembly requested that information on details of the upward and downward reclassification of posts, as well as the breakdown of appointments to posts reclassified upward, as between internal and external candidates for the past two years and annually thereafter, be included in the next support account report.
No posts were reclassified in the 2004/05 period and none are proposed for reclassification in the 2005/06 period.
Results-based budgeting frameworks and analysis of resource requirements
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Office of the Under-Secretary-General
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a Includes one P-4 Corrections Officer and one P-4 Legal Officer posts that constituted the Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Unit.
The Unit was transferred from the Civilian Police Division to the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General during calendar year 2004.
b In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements
(Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Justification of new posts
Office of the Under-Secretary-General
Senior Political Adviser (P-5)
Developments in peacekeeping over the past several years, in particular increased dialogue with all peacekeeping partners, including troop contributors, and with Member States in general and increasing integration with United Nations system partners, the Bretton Woods institutions, other key stakeholders, have significantly augmented the workload of the Office of the Under-Secretary-General.
Consequently, the need for better policy coordination and policy development and the establishment of policy priorities was made evident.
The increased requirement is currently managed by the Special Assistant to the Under-Secretary-General (D-1).
The current workload of the Office and the breadth of issues to be followed and managed have affected the Special Assistant's ability to provide the required level of support in all areas.
In order to supplement the substantive capacity of the Office, a Senior Political Adviser is requested in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General to provide policy support to the Under-Secretary-General to ensure a coherent and coordinated approach to peacekeeping policy issues in the context of the dynamic and evolving demands of multidimensional peacekeeping.
In particular, the incumbent will be responsible for assisting the Under-Secretary-General in developing an agenda of policy issues requiring the attention and decision of senior department managers and in coordinating intradepartmental policy meetings and working groups to develop policy options for decision by senior managers in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Under-Secretary-General.
Given the integrated nature of peacekeeping demands, the incumbent will also be responsible for liaison with the secretariats of the Senior Management Group, the Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs, the Executive Committee on Peace and Security and related interdepartmental meetings, as well as for coordinating the Department's input to those meetings and developing policy related to multidimensional peacekeeping when input and collaboration from other parts of the United Nations system are required.
The Senior Political Adviser will be involved in coordinating the Department's contributions to reports of the Secretary-General, such as his annual report, the follow-up to the Millennium Declaration and the report of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, and policy papers from other parts of the United Nations system.
The incumbent will also represent the Under-Secretary-General and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations at various policy meetings and conferences, as necessary.
The position is required at the P-5 level because of the expertise, skills and experience required for contact with Member State representatives, other areas of the Secretariat and field missions.
Given the range of issues requiring the Under-Secretary-General's attention, in particular those requiring extensive coordination with peacekeeping partners external to the Department, the approval of this position is considered essential to the effective functioning of the Office of the Under-Secretary-General.
Without this additional capacity, the Under-Secretary-General's ability to oversee the management and coordination of the current level of peacekeeping operations will be reduced and may also affect the Office's ability to attain progress as measured by the indicators of achievement and to deliver the planned outputs as set out in the results-based budgeting framework for the financial period 2005/06.
Personnel Conduct Unit
The need for an increased focus on all aspects of the management of issues of misconduct involving peacekeepers has been made apparent by recent events in some of the peacekeeping missions.
It is proposed to establish a dedicated capacity at Department of Peacekeeping Operations headquarters, a new Personnel Conduct Unit, to address conduct issues relating to all categories of peacekeeping personnel.
The primary aim of the Unit will be to help to prevent and identify misconduct and to ensure compliance with and enforcement of United Nations standards of conduct as well as prompt action and follow-up on all cases of misconduct.
The Personnel Conduct Unit will be located in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General, with the Chief reporting to the Director of Change Management (D-2).
Its placement in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General reflects the importance of the issue to the Department.
As a member of the Senior Management Team, the Director of Change Management will ensure that issues relating to personnel conduct continue to receive priority attention.
The work of the Personnel Conduct Unit will include a focus on reviewing and recommending the revision of policies, procedures and guidelines relating to personnel conduct and establishing data management systems.
In respect of the conduct of civilian staff, the Unit will work closely with the Office of Human Resources Management in the Department of Management on the review and revision of policies relating to personnel conduct, particularly in areas where gaps currently exist, for example in respect of assistance to victims of misconduct and victim and witness protection.
The Unit will also work with Member States on policies relating to uniformed personnel.
The Office of Human Resources Management will continue to retain the sole authority to initiate disciplinary procedures, based on the recommendations of the Department concerned, in respect of civilian staff, as outlined in administrative instruction ST/AI/371.
Accordingly, in cases of possible misconduct, a preliminary fact-finding investigation must be conducted, which is the primary responsibility of the head of the mission and the overall responsibility of the head of the department.
The Personnel Conduct Unit will provide technical advice to missions during such a preliminary investigation or to a board of inquiry.
The Unit will be an internal capacity for the Department and peacekeeping missions enabling them to manage issues related to the conduct of mission personnel from a preventive perspective, aimed at minimizing the number of such occurrences over time.
The Office of Internal Oversight Services continues to exercise its mandated authority to independently conduct investigations of reported cases and to report its findings to the Secretary-General and legislative bodies.
The establishment of the Unit will require eight new positions: Chief, Personnel Conduct Unit (D-1), Senior Policy Adviser (P-5), three Disciplinary Officers (P-4), Reports Officer (P-2), Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) and Data-entry Clerk (General Service (Other level)).
Chief, Personnel Conduct Unit (D-1)
The position of Chief (D-1) is requested to oversee and manage the operations of the Personnel Conduct Unit and to provide overall guidance and direction.
The incumbent will propose for the Under-Secretary-General and the Director of Change Management policies and strategies relating to conduct for review.
This will be done in close collaboration with the Under-Secretary-General for Management, who has the overall responsibility of recommending to legislative bodies policy changes on all issues relating to human resources, as well as changes to the Staff Rules and Regulations.
The incumbent will represent the Department in meetings with permanent representatives of troop- and police-contributing countries on disciplinary issues and participate in negotiations with Member States on conditions relating to personnel conduct in agreements with the United Nations.
The incumbent will represent the Department on disciplinary issues in senior interdepartmental policymaking bodies and ensure coherence between the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to address conduct issues and the related efforts of other United Nations entities.
The incumbent will liaise with other offices and units in the Department and with other departments and offices at Headquarters, as well as with heads of mission and senior management on disciplinary issues.
Senior Policy Adviser (P-5)
The difficulty in managing misconduct issues in peacekeeping operations has put emphasis on the need for coordinated policy guidance.
Gaps remain in the areas of prevention, identification, response to misconduct, monitoring and reporting.
In addition, there is a necessity to engage in consultations with Member States on changes in policies and guidelines relating to the conduct of uniformed personnel serving in peacekeeping operations.
The policy- and strategy-related activities of the Personnel Conduct Unit will focus on reviewing and revising existing policies, procedures and guidance and establish data management systems.
A Senior Policy Adviser (P-5) is therefore requested to provide policy guidance and strategic direction to both the disciplinary officers at Headquarters and the personnel conduct officers/units in peacekeeping operations on addressing personnel misconduct.
The incumbent will also ensure the coherence of discipline-related policies, procedures and guidelines relating to civilian, civilian police and military peacekeeping personnel, monitor the effectiveness of the enforcement of United Nations standards of conduct for all categories of peacekeeping personnel, coordinate the identification of specialist assistance when required and undertake preliminary investigations when requested to do so by peacekeeping operations.
In addition, the incumbent will ensure interdepartmental coordination of disciplinary actions relating to individual cases and monitor the decisions of Member States and the Secretariat affecting disciplinary issues relating to peacekeeping personnel.
Disciplinary Officer (3 P-4)
In the Personnel Conduct Unit, the activities relating to the provision of technical advice as well as the monitoring of compliance with the Department's policies in field missions will be conducted by the disciplinary officers.
Three Disciplinary Officer posts (P-4) are therefore proposed to provide technical advice on establishing mechanisms to prevent, identify and respond to personnel misconduct in peacekeeping operations, including related training activities.
One Disciplinary Officer post is requested for civilian matters, one for civilian police matters and the third for military matters.
The incumbents will liaise with personnel conduct officers/units in peacekeeping operations on individual cases of personnel misconduct to ensure the application of departmental disciplinary procedures.
The incumbents will also review preliminary fact-finding reports (civilian personnel) or board of inquiry reports (uniformed personnel) received from the field prior to forwarding them to the relevant authorities for action.
In the case of civilian personnel, the incumbent will liaise with the Office of Human Resources Management on disciplinary actions to be taken.
For uniformed personnel, the incumbents will track action taken by Member States in cases of misconduct.
In addition, the incumbents will establish and maintain an information management system relating to personnel misconduct and assist in identifying specialists to conduct preliminary fact-finding reviews in peacekeeping operations, as required.
Reports Officer (P-2)
One Reports Officer (P-2) is requested as part of the Unit to assist in creating and maintaining a data management system for all categories of personnel misconduct, including reporting formats.
Under the supervision of the disciplinary officers, the incumbent will prepare narrative and statistical reports on all aspects of personnel conduct, as required, conduct research relating to conduct issues and maintain links with relevant research organizations on such issues.
The incumbent will also assist in the design of awareness and training material to prevent misconduct.
Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level))
One Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) in the Unit will provide administrative support to the Chief of the Unit and the Senior Policy Adviser.
Data-entry Clerk (General Service (Other level))
One General Service (Other level) Data-entry Clerk is requested in the Personnel Conduct Unit to maintain records relating to personnel conduct and report generation in order to respond to the requirements of legislative bodies, Member States and senior management.
Peacekeeping Best Practices Section
HIV/AIDS Policy Adviser (P-4)
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in its comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects (A/54/839, para.
128), recognized the concerns of Member States regarding medical aspects of peacekeeping operations, including the high risk of transmission and contraction of HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases facing United Nations peacekeeping and other personnel in the field.
The efforts made by the Secretariat in this regard were welcomed by the Security Council in its resolution 1308 (2000).
An HIV/AIDS Policy Adviser, established from January 2003, is temporarily seconded to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), which provided the Medical Support Section with much-needed capacity to develop and implement training programmes for peacekeeping personnel on issues related to preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS and to develop and implement predeployment orientation for all peacekeeping personnel on HIV/AIDS awareness.
The implementation of those training programmes has been carried out by the 10 HIV/AIDS policy advisers/units and focal points in the peacekeeping missions.
Given the seriousness of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, there is a critical need to have continued capacity in order to provide overall departmental policy guidance and continuous comprehensive response to the issue.
In addition, there is a need to coordinate the work of the policy advisers in the missions and that of other United Nations agencies, partners and non-governmental organizations in the fight against the pandemic.
The current temporary nature of the resource capacity will not suffice to address this requirement given the full-time nature of the functions and the expanding responsibilities related to HIV/AIDS advisory support for expanding and new missions.
The post of HIV/AIDS Policy Adviser (P-4) is therefore proposed for the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section to continue the efforts of the Department and strengthen its capacity in this area.
The adviser will develop, coordinate and support the implementation of the HIV/AIDS programmes for civilian and uniformed personnel in all missions led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
He or she will also provide policy guidance to the Under-Secretary-General on HIV/AIDS-related issues, give briefings for Department personnel at troop- and police-contributor meetings and coordinate closely with mission HIV/AIDS policy advisers and focal points, the offices and divisions of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Medical Support Division, Member States, UNAIDS and other relevant United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations, as required.
The provision of funding for this capacity would enable the Department to maintain the consistent implementation of a strategy across all missions aimed at reducing the spread of HIV/AIDS and to respond to allegations that peacekeeping operations are responsible for spreading the virus.
The Department would also maintain the momentum that has recently been established in its ability to systematically mainstream the issue in the different dimensions of peacekeeping operations, without which the training and planning of programmes and approaches of HIV/AIDS could return to being uncoordinated or, at best, being coordinated in a piecemeal manner.
The capacity would lead to an informed reporting mechanism, accountability, oversight and assessment of programmes.
Missions would benefit from the guidance and technical support provided by the post and the Department would have a focal point that would liaise with Member States and United Nations agencies.
Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Unit
The Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Unit was established in March 2003 in the Civilian Police Division to provide effective operational support to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the peacekeeping operations on rule of law issues, in particular in the areas of criminal law, justice and corrections.
The Unit was then staffed with a Corrections Policy Officer (P-4) and a Legal Officer (P-4).
The deployment of rule of law personnel to five new or evolving operations has placed further demands on Department of Peacekeeping Operations headquarters to provide policy guidance to judicial and correctional components in the field and also to work in an integrated manner with partners from within and outside the United Nations system.
Given that rule of law is of a cross-cutting nature, touching on the areas of criminal law, justice and corrections and is of significant relevance to the activities of various components, such as the civilian police and human rights components in peacekeeping operations, it was decided to move the Unit to the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General during calendar year 2004.
Chief, Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Unit (P-5)
In his report on the implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (A/58/694), the Secretary-General stressed the need to strengthen the Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Unit so as to expand the Department's ability to provide effective support to existing missions on justice and corrections issues.
It is proposed that the Unit be strengthened through the creation of the post of Chief of the Unit (P-5).
The post will provide substantive leadership and overall guidance in the Unit and offer policy guidance to counterparts in the field (several of whom are at the D-1 and P-5 levels).
The incumbent will ensure that the leadership of the Department is consistently aware of important rule of law developments relevant to peace operations.
The post will augment the Unit's capacity to develop high-level partnerships within the United Nations system and with external entities in order to further support field operations.
The additional capacity proposed will ensure that the Unit has appropriate leadership with the technical knowledge, skills and experience required to ensure the importance of rule of law as a fundamental function of the Department.
Without this capacity, there would be increased risk that the functions of the Unit would continue to be marginalized rather than being given priority in new and existing missions.
A senior-level post will provide the depth of experience and leadership required to work with the Police Adviser on policy and on key strategic initiatives, thereby ensuring a high profile for this particular issue in the Department's planning and management of peacekeeping operations.
In addition, Member State representatives will have a point of contact on rule of law issues.
Judicial Officer (P-3)
A Judicial Officer (P-3) is requested for the Unit to enhance the Department's ability to provide policy-level guidance and support to its judicial rule of law components in the field.
The incumbent will focus on the analysis of lessons learned and the development of best practices and guidance materials.
The incumbent will also participate in the process of identifying and approving staff for rule of law positions in the field.
This position will help strengthen the Department's partnership and coordination mechanisms within the United Nations system and with external organizations.
Corrections Officer (P-3)
The position of Corrections Officer (P-3) is requested to enable the Unit to provide policy-level guidance in support of correctional components of peacekeeping operations.
The officer would analyse field practices, including lessons-learned studies, and develop policy, best practices and guidance materials.
The incumbent will also manage the process of seconding staff from Member States, identify and clear staff for Corrections Officer posts in the field and support the operation of the rule of law knowledge network.
The incumbent will also assist in establishing and strengthening partnership and coordination mechanisms within the United Nations system and with external partners.
Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level))
An Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) is requested to provide administrative support to the Unit and to assist in backstopping other functions in the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section.
The incumbent will organize meetings and videoconferences of the United Nations Rule of Law Focal Point Network, develop and organize the Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Unit's system for collecting and disseminating rule of law materials and conduct research on matters that do not require legal or correctional expertise.
The backstopping of other functions in the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section will involve administrative tasks, documentation and printing, planning and organization of meetings/seminars and other secretarial/administrative functions.
Executive Office
Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level))
The ongoing personnel management functions in the Executive Office include administration of the rotation of staff between the field and Headquarters on mission assignment, the rotation of seconded military and police officers and the administrative tasks involved in the travel of representatives of Member States to attend training programmes given by the Training and Evaluation Service of the Military Division.
The Executive Office currently has seven General Service (Other level) posts, three of which are performing the functions of Recruitment Assistant, Finance and Budget Assistant and Administrative Assistant in the Executive Office.
The remaining four posts currently perform administrative functions related to personnel management.
With a total of 622 posts currently approved in the Department, this arrangement represents a ratio of 1 General Service staff member per 155 posts.
The request for 49 additional posts in the Department will increase the ratio of staff to be supported per administrative assistant to 168.
An additional Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) post is requested in order to strengthen the capacity in the Executive Office, improve the ratio of General Service posts utilized for personnel management functions and reduce the ratio to 135 staff for each post, which is considered a reasonable workload.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The estimate of $6,839,000 provides for the salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for the 41 continuing posts and the 15 new posts based on standard costs.
The increase of $1,885,300 relates to the additional 15 posts and to a change in standard salary costs.
The amount of $242,500 is requested for the replacement of staff on maternity and sick leave in the Department ($146,700) and for temporary assistance at the P-4 level for a period of six months ($95,800) to establish pilot communities of practice aimed at connecting staff with similar job functions across field missions, allowing them to share best practices in real time as part of the knowledge management programme in the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section.
The individual will act as a network facilitator of a pilot community.
After evaluating the feasibility of expanding the number of networks, he or she will draft rules of engagement and guidelines, identify potential members, promote and market the community as a tool and serve as moderator for the internal Department of Peacekeeping Operations network.
The Peacekeeping Best Practices Section does not currently have the capacity to carry out this project within the time frame set for the completion of the project, and therefore general temporary assistance resources are requested to temporarily augment its resources.
The project would be sustained using existing resources.
The increase over the resources approved in the current 2004/05 period relate to the new requirements in the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section.
The amount of $449,000 is requested for the consultancy requirements in the immediate office of the Under-Secretary-General, the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section and the Executive Office, as detailed in the following table:
In the Office of the Under-Secretary-General, a provision of $350,000 is required to conduct an independent review of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as requested by the Special Committee in its report on peacekeeping operations and its Working Group at the 2004 substantive session and endorsed by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in the context of its comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects (resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004).
In the context of the knowledge management programme, the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section requests an amount of $54,000 for a consultant to advise it on various approaches to and tools for knowledge management, including possible pitfalls and strengths of tools and technology.
The consultant will also ensure that the various tools and approaches selected are compatible.
The amount of $45,000 is requested by the Executive Office in order to carry out a people management training course for senior managers at an external site.
The course is considered key to upgrading management skills and strengthening management culture within the Department, as well as integrating staff in various areas.
The increase over the resources approved in the current period relate to the independent review of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations requested by the General Assembly and the fact that requirements for the knowledge management programme in the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section are different and higher than the costs for 2004/05.
A total amount of $390,700 is requested for the travel requirements in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General, which are detailed in the following table:
The immediate office of the Under-Secretary-General requires a provision of $56,000 for consultation with external entities and attendance at conferences and presentations on peacekeeping issues.
In the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section, a total amount of $154,700 is requested for a team of two staff members to conduct lessons learned studies in two peacekeeping missions ($16,000), for the conduct of six seminars/workshops on cross-cutting themes such as discipline; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; corrections; the judicial process; and gender ($88,700); political consultations with external entities, including the African Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the World Bank, on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the rule of law and corrections ($38,000); and three staff members to represent the Department in three conferences and seminars on general peacekeeping issues ($12,000).
An estimate of $180,000 is requested in the Executive Office for travel related to the exchange of staff members from missions to Headquarters for a period of three months ($125,000) and training-related travel for the upgrade of substantive and technical skills in the areas of aviation safety, aircraft accident investigation, dangerous goods transportation, communications, information technology, human resources and finance management ($55,000).
The staff exchange programme, implemented in 2002, has proven to be a valuable tool for introducing Headquarters and mission staff to both sides of peacekeeping operations.
The understanding of the requirements and complexities of the operations gained from the programme is expected to deepen the knowledge of the participants, which will be of value in their respective functions.
The increase over the resources approved in the current period relate to new requirements in the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section.
The estimate of $160,500 is requested for subscriptions ($85,500) and training course fees ($75,000).
The increase over the resources approved in the current period relate to additional requirements for subscriptions.
Office of Operations
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Justification of new posts
Africa Division
Peacekeeping operations in the African region have increased significantly compared with the previous fiscal periods, with currently 6 of the 16 active missions (including UNTSO and UNMOGIP, which are funded from the regular budget) deployed in the region, representing a total budget of $2.8 billion (75 per cent of the overall peacekeeping budget) at 31 December 2004.
In addition, it is anticipated that a new multidimensional and complex mission in the Sudan will be established in the first quarter of 2005.
The budget level will increase further by the end of the current fiscal year in June 2005, with revised financial requirements for an expanded MONUC and the mission in the Sudan.
The current structure of the Africa Division comprises one Director (D-2), who is supported by two Principal Officers (D-1).
The Director directly oversees missions in West African and East African regions.
One Principal Officer leads a team that supports MONUC, ONUB and MINURSO, and the other is responsible for general and policy issues relating to peacekeeping in Africa, in particular the question of African peacekeeping capacity.
The current structure is not sustainable given the additional workload, the need for substantive leadership, the wider policy issues affecting all missions, new directions such as modalities for cooperation with regional organizations and the volume of day-to-day line functions resulting from the growth in missions managed by the Division.
The Division is in the process of reorganizing its structure into three regional teams corresponding to Central, West and East Africa.
The Central Africa team will be led by one of the Principal Officers and will provide operational support to MONUC, currently the largest United Nations peacekeeping operation, ONUB and MINURSO.
The combined budget of the missions in the Central Africa team is about $1.4 billion.
The second Principal Officer will lead the West Africa team and provide operational support to UNAMSIL, UNMIL and UNOCI, with a combined budget of approximately $1.4 billion.
The East Africa team will provide support for UNMEE, the peace support mission in the Sudan and the African Union's operations in the Darfur region of the Sudan.
The mission in the Sudan will be similar to MONUC in terms of complexity and logistical challenges and the budget level supported by this team will be in the region of $1.0 billion.
The East Africa team will also contribute to the enhancement of African peacekeeping capacity and maintaining an advisory partnership with the European Union in matters relating to peace and stability in Somalia.
For managerial and backstopping purposes, one of the Principal Officers will also be designated to serve as Deputy to the Director.
Principal Officer, Africa Division (D-1)
One additional Principal Officer (D-1) is proposed to strengthen the managerial and operational capacity of the Africa Division to cover the substantive and multidimensional missions in East Africa and to lead the East Africa team.
The new post will have direct line responsibilities in managing the East Africa team and will cover the significant political and managerial responsibilities of the missions in the region, as well as the initiatives and issues related to enhancing the African capacity for peacekeeping.
The mission in the Sudan, which will be part of this team, has the potential of becoming the largest peacekeeping operation with the longest duration in the region.
As team leader, the incumbent will be responsible for the policies, planning and management of two or more operations, for leading senior-level interdepartmental task forces and, more broadly, for ensuring inter- and intradepartmental coordination and a regional approach to African peacekeeping issues.
The Principal Officer will also liaise with major stakeholders and Security Council members.
This additional capacity will enable the Director to reassign day-to-day line responsibilities for all of the missions in Africa and to focus on strategy, overall policy development, leadership and management of the Africa Division.
The reorganization will improve the Director's ability to focus sufficient attention on those issues and be relieved of day-to-day line management of missions in the West and East African regions.
An Africa Division with strengthened managerial and accountability capacities will ensure that the Division is able to respond to the increasing requirements of the current missions, and in Africa in general, and to effectively attain the achievements and outputs as detailed in the results-based budgeting framework and the mandates as approved by the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Political Affairs Officer (3 P-4 and 1 P-3)
The current professional staffing in the Africa Division comprises one D-2, two D-1, three P-5, five P-4, three P-3 and one P-2 posts funded from the support account and the regular budget.
It is estimated that a large multidimensional peacekeeping mission will require a supervisory P-5 post and two support posts, a P-4 and a P-3.
The two current large and multidimensional peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and in Liberia (UNMIL) each have one P-5, one P-4 and one P-3 posts dedicated to their support.
The third P-5 post of the Division is leading the backstopping functions for the mission in the Sudan and provides support for strengthening of the African Union's operations in the Darfur region.
UNMEE and MINURSO, although small in budget terms, require extensive support and dedication for their political challenges and reporting requirements.
Each of those two missions currently has one P-4 post supporting it.
The surge in peacekeeping operations is reflected mostly in the African region, with two new missions in the 2004/05 period (UNOCI in West Africa and ONUB in Central Africa) and a third one in the Sudan (East Africa), which will be established in the first quarter of 2005.
Each of the new missions will require a Political Affairs Officer at the P-4 level for their support and a P-3 post to provide assistance and support to the P-4 post.
Although ONUB is a medium-sized operation, its complexity will require a P-3 post to provide assistance and support to the P-4 post.
Based on the structure, there is a gap in the current staffing capacity of the Africa Division.
In order to provide the most effective support to all the missions under its responsibility, the Africa Division will require the addition of three P-4 and one P-3 posts.
One Political Affairs Officer (P-4) requested for the East Africa team will perform the functions of desk officer dealing with the Sudan, with a particular focus on the North-South peace talks led by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
The incumbent will prepare assessments on political developments, draft reports of the Secretary-General and letters and briefings for the Security Council and troop-contributing countries.
The incumbent will also liaise with Member States, especially Security Council members, other United Nations agencies, regional organizations and non-governmental organizations.
The incumbent will provide guidance and advice to substantive counterparts in the mission at varying levels on a day-to-day basis.
One Political Affairs Officer (P-4) requested for the West Africa team will perform the functions of desk officer in charge of UNOCI.
The incumbent will prepare assessments on political developments, draft reports of the Secretary-General and letters and briefings for the Security Council and troop-contributing countries, as well as coded cables to the mission.
The incumbent will also be responsible for all matters relating to civilian police, the rule of law, human rights and public information/media.
This post will be supported by an existing Political Affairs Officer at the P-3 level.
One Political Affairs Officer (P-4) requested for the Central Africa team will perform the functions of desk officer for ONUB.
In addition to the regular functions of the desk officer, the incumbent will be responsible for matters relating to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, police and military reform, security and humanitarian issues.
The incumbent will also liaise with Member States, especially Security Council members and troop-contributing countries, other United Nations agencies, regional organizations and non-governmental organizations.
In addition, the incumbent will provide guidance and advice to substantive counterparts in the mission at varying levels on a day-to-day basis and assist ONUB in developing frameworks for budgets and performance reports.
One Political Affairs Officer (P-3) requested for the Central Africa team will perform the functions of desk officer in support of ONUB.
The position will provide assistance and support to the P-4 Political Affairs Officer.
In addition to the functions of desk officer, the incumbent will be responsible for all matters relating to human rights, elections, transitional issues and institutional reform.
Administrative Assistant (2 General Service (Other level))
Two Administrative Assistants (General Service (Other level)) are requested to provide administrative support to the East and West Africa teams of the Division.
Situation Centre
Operations Officer (3 P-2)
The Operations Room of the Situation Centre is currently structured around three desks.
The first desk monitors events in Europe, Latin America and East Africa, the second desk monitors events in Central and West Africa and the third desk monitors events in Asia and the Middle East.
The necessity of the third desk was linked directly to the increased workload resulting from the surge in peacekeeping operations and was made possible through the temporary use of vacant posts from field missions.
While this ad hoc arrangement was envisioned as a temporary measure during the start-up phase of the new missions, it has become clear that the full range of communication exchange, emergency response and information collection cannot be provided with only two desks.
The staffing in the Situation Centre comprises 18 posts (1 D-1, 1 P-5, 4 P-4, 11 P-3 and 1 P-2).
The Operations Room utilizes 2 P-4, 11 P-3 and 1 P-2 posts.
The two P-4 posts perform the functions of Coordination Officers, supervising the work of 11 P-3 Operations Officers and 1 P-2 and overseeing all information collection and processing efforts.
The remaining two P-4 posts perform the functions of Information Management Officers by providing tools and guidance for improving information collection and dissemination between Department of Peacekeeping Operations headquarters, field missions, Member States and peacekeeping partners.
The two Information Management Officers provide technical expertise to the Situation Centre in the areas of information technology and as such cannot be utilized as Operations Officers.
The Situation Centre will require three additional Operation Officer posts (P-2) in order to maintain the three-desk structure.
The desks are as follows:
• Desk 1: MINUSTAH, UNFICYP, UNMEE, UNMIK, UNOMIG, the Sudan and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia;
• Desk 2: MINURSO, MONUC, ONUB, UNAMSIL, UNMIL, UNOCI, Angola, Bakassi Peninsula, BONUCA and UNOGBIS;
• Desk 3: UNAMA, UNAMI, UNMOGIP, UNDOF, UNIFIL, UNTSO and UNTOP.
The allocation of posts in the Operations Room is made on a rotating basis.
The long-established staffing level for maintaining the Situation Centre's round-the-clock monitoring capacity is five Professional posts for each duty desk.
Six Operations Officers will work in support of the three desks during a 12-hour shift for seven days and will be off the following week.
This represents 84 hours per week and 168 hours per month, which is the equivalent of a full monthly workload with a regular eight-hour shift.
While the first six officers are on leave, six others, who will also work 12-hour shifts for seven days, will replace them.
The 12-hour shift schedule will utilize 12 posts in the Operations Room.
The remaining three posts will serve as back-up during the absence of any Operations Officer from the three desks, will complete operational assessment reports, including the identification of hot spots and the evaluation of trends for the senior managers, and will maintain mission profile databases.
Without the three additional posts, the Situation Centre would be unable to continue to operate three duty desks for around-the-clock monitoring of events in the field missions and other areas of interest or to maintain the 24-hour communication link between senior staff members at Headquarters, field missions, humanitarian organizations and permanent missions.
At the current level of mission activity, this would result in delayed responses between Headquarters and the field missions, as well as hampered coordination with humanitarian and other organizations in emergency situations.
The staffing in the Operations Room of the Situation Centre includes five posts at the P-3 level that have been filled by officers seconded from Member States.
The Military and Civilian Police Divisions of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations have been strengthened significantly as a result of the recommendations of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, and both divisions now have desk officers dedicated to the support of their respective components in current peacekeeping operations.
Close coordination has been instituted between the Situation Centre and those desk officers.
This negates a requirement for dedicated military and police expertise in the Situation Centre.
Moreover, the focus of the daily Situation Centre reports has been expanded to capture the full range of activities in multidimensional peacekeeping operations, including civil affairs and humanitarian and human rights activities.
Hence there is a need for a broader range of skills and qualifications among the Situation Centre Operations Officers, who are preparing the operational updates and briefings.
The Situation Centre therefore intends to make the five posts available for incumbency to all candidates through a regular selection process.
This initiative reflects developments in recent years that have changed the skill requirements in the Situation Centre.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The amount of $9,747,900 provides for the salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for the 60 continuing posts and 10 new posts.
The increase of $1,180,200 relates to the additional 10 posts and to a change in standard salary costs.
The travel requirements in the Office of Operations are as follows:
Office of Mission Support
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Justification of posts
(i) New posts
Administrative Support Division, Administration and Travel Section
The main functions of the Travel Unit of the Administration and Travel Section in the Personnel Management and Support Service include the management of the of the travel requirements of all military, civilian police and civilian personnel.
The operational requirements of the Unit have been significantly affected by the expansion of peacekeeping operations and special political missions, in which the number of civilian staff and military and civilian police personnel grew from 66,806 in the 2003/04 period to a projected level of 88,000 in the 2005/06 period.
The Travel Unit is currently staffed with 1 P-4 and 1 P-3 Administrative Officers, supported by 1 General Service-Principal level and 12 General Service (Other level) Administrative Clerks.
The increased workload created by the surge in peacekeeping operations in the current period has been handled by using temporary resources from peacekeeping missions.
With the expected expansion in the number of personnel in the 2005/06 period and the termination of the temporary and ad hoc use of mission vacancies, it is proposed to strengthen the Unit through the addition of one P-3 post and one General Service (Other level) post in order to ensure timely delivery of service to effectively cope with the increased workload.
Administrative Officer (P-3)
One additional Administrative Officer (P-3) is requested in the Administration and Travel Section of the Personnel Management and Support Service to administer the deployment of military observers and civilian police observers to all field missions.
During the period 2003/04, a total of 6,000 military observers and civilian police were deployed in the missions.
It is anticipated that 2,500 military observers and 6,500 civilian police will be deployed during the 2005/06 period relating to the three newly established missions and the new mission in the Sudan.
The incumbent will also coordinate and design Web-based software applications, negotiate with permanent missions and administer reimbursement for air tickets and excess baggage charges.
Additional administrative functions will include the review and analysis of personnel resources, budget proposals and performance reports.
Administrative Clerk (General Service-(Other level))
One additional Administrative Clerk (General Service (Other level)) is requested in the Administration and Travel Section to assist in making travel arrangements for Headquarters staff on official business and short-term mission travel, as well as to assist in processing travel of staff on assignment or appointment to special missions.
The incumbent will also carry out administrative processes related to the issuance of laissez-passers, the settlement of travel claims and the recovery of travel advances from the Accounts Division.
Recruitment and Placement Section
During the 2003/04 period, 2,700 posts were approved for the civilian personnel requirements relating to the surge in peacekeeping operations.
In order to meet the related personnel management needs, the Recruitment and Placement Section has relied on temporary resources from field missions.
The Section is working on establishing rosters of pre-cleared, available and qualified candidates in the 16 main occupational groups employed in peace operations in order to facilitate the timely deployment of qualified and available civilian personnel and to meet the existing and anticipated increase in staffing requirements for the period 2005/06.
The development and sustainment of the rosters have required the support of five posts (3 P-3 and 2 General Service (Other level)) through temporary use of mission vacancies.
In order to meet the existing requirements following the end of temporary support from field missions, it is proposed to strengthen the capacity of the Recruitment and Placement Section with an additional Recruitment Officer (P-3).
Recruitment Officer (P-3)
Over the 2003/04 surge period (October 2003 to 31 December 2004), the General Assembly approved 2,502 new posts in four new and two expanding missions.
In addition to the management of normal staff turnover and requirements in existing peacekeeping and special political missions, the Section is faced with an increased workload linked directly to the establishment of a new peacekeeping operation in the Sudan.
One Recruitment Officer (P-3) is requested in the Recruitment and Placement Section to assist in meeting these additional and ongoing requirements.
The incumbent will be expected to serve as the focal point for the screening and vetting of applicants to be included in the roster of pre-cleared candidates in a certain occupational group and to coordinate the recruitment activities for field missions or offices under his/her purview.
Human Resources Planning Section
Human Resources Assistant (General Service-(Other level))
In its report on the follow-up audit of the policies and procedures of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for recruiting international civilian staff for field missions, the Office of Internal Oversight Services stressed the need to regularly review and update the rapid deployment roster by removing and/or replacing the names of those staff members who are declared to be unavailable (A/59/152, para.
One Human Resources Assistant (General Service (Other level)) is requested in the Human Resources Planning Section to assist in managing and maintaining the rapid deployment roster database and in administering of the roster.
This includes organizing periodic update activities to obtain up-to-date information on those selected for the roster.
The incumbent will also assist in reviewing and monitoring the guidelines and modalities governing the rapid deployment roster, as well as assist in implementing actions taken on the lessons learned through the use of the rapid deployment roster mechanism in the start-up of new and expanding missions, ensuring coordination between the Personnel Management Support Services and other areas of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations at Headquarters and in the field.
Finance Management and Support Service
The Finance Management and Support Service is currently organized into two sections: the Financial Support Section, which provides budgetary and financial support to the missions, and the Memorandum of Understanding and Claims Management Section, which provides support to missions for the drafting, reviewing and managing memorandums of understanding and related claims.
The present budget proposes the strengthening of the two sections with three additional P-3 posts, one in the Financial Support Section and two in the Memorandum of Understanding and Claims Management Section.
The Financial Support Section comprises six P-4 and six P-3 posts, which provide support to 16 peacekeeping missions (including UNTSO and UNMOGIP).
The anticipated establishment of the mission in the Sudan will require a dedicated capacity for its financial and budgetary support.
In the Memorandum of Understanding and Claims Management Section, it has become evident that many of the traditional troop-contributing countries with extensive experience in peacekeeping have been overstretched by the recent increase in peacekeeping operations.
Thus there has been an increase in the number of new troop-contributing countries, which has necessitated the conduct of detailed briefings and clarifications of the memorandums of understanding and contingent-owned equipment processes for those countries.
Finance Officer (P-3)
One additional Finance Officer (P-3) is therefore requested in the Financial Support Section, unit III, to provide financial and budgetary support to the new mission in the Sudan.
The recent increase in peacekeeping operations and special political missions has created escalating requirements in the areas of budget monitoring, control and performance monitoring in the Unit that cannot be absorbed by the current staff.
Finance Officer (2 P-3)
Two additional Finance Officer posts (P-3) are requested in the Memorandum of Understanding and Claims Management Section, unit II, and the Finance Management and Support Service, unit I, to perform the functions of desk officer for MINUSTAH, ONUB and UNOCI.
The incumbents will coordinate and participate in the negotiations on memorandums of understanding, prepare and finalize the memorandums of understanding, and conduct briefings and provide clarifications on contingent-owned equipment matters.
The incumbents will also process contingent-owned equipment, letter-of-assist and death and disability claims for reimbursement in respect of troop-contributing countries.
Logistics Support Division
Aviation Safety Unit
The increase in the number of peacekeeping missions and the geographical size of the new missions has increased the demand for aircraft to meet the deployment and patrol requirements.
The number of aircraft managed by Logistics Support Division has increased by 50 per cent compared with the 2003/04 fiscal period.
As a result, there is a need to conduct more safety assistance visits to missions in order to ensure compliance with the Department's aviation safety programme.
Aviation Safety Officer (P-3)
One additional Aviation Safety Officer (P-3) is requested in the Aviation Safety Unit of the Operational Support Service in the Logistics Support Division to increase the capacity of the Unit to provide oversight of a larger number of operators.
The additional staff will enable the Unit to work towards accreditation under the ISO 9000 quality management standards, further improving its ability to meet the Department's aviation safety requirements.
Movement Control Unit
The functions of the Movement Control Unit include administering the rotation of military and civilian police contingents, managing the movement of all materials from the United Nations Logistics Base to peacekeeping missions and moving field personnel between missions.
In calendar year 2004, 120,000 military and civilian personnel drawn from 100 troop-contributing countries rotated through the missions.
This required the use of 319 aircraft and 52 ships.
The total number of military and civilian police personnel in United Nations peace missions had increased by 35 per cent by the end of the calendar year 2004.
The Movement Control Unit, with a staffing level of a Chief of the Unit (P-4) and five Movement Control Officers (P-3), is experiencing difficulty in handling the increased workload and providing adequate service in a timely manner.
The present report proposes the strengthening of the Unit with an additional Movement Control Officer (P-3) post.
Movement Control Officer (P-3)
One additional Movement Control Officer (P-3) is requested to provide administrative support to the Unit.
The post is requested to reinforce the management and coordination of the flow of an increasing number of personnel and of the volume, value and sources of material support to new missions.
The incumbent will also be involved in forecasting, budgeting and accounting for expenditures related to strategic movement.
Communications and Information Technology Service
The Communications and Information Technology Service provides support to personnel in field missions, including the maintenance and improvement of the information technology infrastructure, both hardware and software, the maintenance of adequate communications capacity as well as the maintenance and support of broadcasting media equipment.
The Service is also actively involved in the start-up and deployment phases of peacekeeping missions, ensuring the availability of appropriate equipment in the missions.
The new requirements resulting from increased demand for the deployment, maintenance and support of broadcasting equipment have made apparent the Department's need to have a dedicated capacity for the development of procedures and policy and the identification and dissemination of best practices and standards to the field in the area of broadcasting.
Communications Officer (P-4)
An additional Communications Officer (P-4) is proposed in the Operations Section of the Communications and Information Technology Service.
The incumbent will be responsible for the global oversight and management of all public information operational support functions.
The incumbent will act as the primary point of contact with the Peace and Security Section of the Department of Public Information and with public information components in peacekeeping missions.
The incumbent will determine the priorities for distribution of radio production and broadcast equipment, develop standard operating procedures for the technical aspects of public information operations and act as the focal point for the coordination of activities with Department of Public Information partners.
The need for the post is further accentuated by the fact that most of the radio equipment in the new peacekeeping missions is new and requires specialized expertise for their support and evaluation.
Such expertise is not currently available in the Department of Public Information or the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Combining the functions in one post will create efficiencies in the management of operational support for public information activities.
Computer Information Systems Officer (P-3)
The Information Systems Section of the Communications and Information Technology Service requests an additional Computer Information Systems Officer (P-3) to support the functional requirements for centralized/consolidated systems to meet the increasing demands in business process automation.
The incumbent will ensure the alignment of the Department's information systems and applications with the Secretariat's information and communication technology strategy.
The incumbent will ensure that systems meet the prior conditions required for cost-effective implementation by identifying the requirements and will review the functionality that field systems should provide.
In addition, the incumbent will perform a cost-benefit analysis of various options such as in-house development of a system and/or purchase of an off-the-shelf commercial application package, ensure that systems efforts are not duplicative throughout missions; and provide adequate training and support.
He/she will also be responsible for coordinating third-party information and communication technology service delivery agreements (i.e., quality assurance, systems deployment, administration, support and training).
Air Transport Section
The number of aircraft currently managed by the Air Transport Section has increased from 104 in the 2003/04 period to 157 in the current period, representing a 50 per cent increase.
With the expansion of MONUC and the establishment of the mission in the Sudan, the number of aircraft is expected to grow further to 228 (45 per cent) in the 2005/06 period.
The operational costs of the aircraft have followed a similar pattern.
The air transport requirements currently account for approximately 30 per cent of the total operating costs of peacekeeping missions.
The International Civil Aviation Organization, in its review of the aviation activities in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations conducted in July 2000, made several recommendations aimed at improving and strengthening the management and organizational structure of the Air Transport Section.
One of the recommendations made at the time, when the fleet comprised 100 aircraft, was to augment the number of personnel in the Section to at least 12 qualified professionals.
The Section currently has eight Air Transport Officer posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4 and 5 P-3).
It is therefore proposed to strengthen the capacity of the Air Transport Section with two additional P-4 posts and one additional P-3 post.
Air Transport Officer (2 P-4 and 1 P-3)
The Aircraft Management and Contracts Unit of the Air Transport Section proposes an additional Air Transport Officer (P-4).
The incumbent will provide advice to the Chief of the Section on mission air operations and contract management and will formulate budgetary requests for resources.
The incumbent will be the principal liaison with the Procurement Service and will ensure that sound planning and justification are applied to each mission's aviation plan and determine and apply methods of managing the analysis of mission air operations.
The incumbent will also ensure that lessons learned are developed into revised policies or guidance and will apply technical, industrial and market developments to achieve conformity within the United Nations and to benefit the mission.
An additional P-3 post is requested in the Aircraft Management and Contracts Unit to ensure that aviation is safely and effectively justified for current and future mandated operations.
The incumbent will perform technical analyses relating to the selection of aircraft, airfield services and infrastructure.
He or she will also be responsible for management of contracts for government-provided and commercially acquired air assets.
The incumbent will provide aeronautical guidance to ensure mission compliance with Department of Peacekeeping Operations, ICAO and Civil Aviation Authority standards and to ensure that the missions adopt and comply with commonly agreed aviation standards and operating procedures.
The Office of Internal Oversight Services, in its audit on safeguarding air safety standards while procuring air services for the United Nations peacekeeping missions (A/59/347), noted the infrequency of visits to vendor sites owing to budgetary or human resources constraints.
Those visits aim at confirming the conclusion of the documentation review and are an essential part of the aviation industry practice.
In order to strengthen the quality assurance capacity in the Air Transport Section of the Logistics Support Division, an additional Air Transport Officer, Quality Assurance and Standards (P-4), is proposed to prequalify air carriers for registration and to ensure compliance with Department of Peacekeeping Operations aviation requirements.
He or she will also undertake vendor inspection and mission aviation quality assurance visits, review contractor performance evaluation reports and initiate corrective actions for peacekeeping aviation.
The incumbent will provide advice to field programme managers on aviation standards.
Without those posts, the Section would be unable to sustain its required basic quality assurance and contract management functions.
Vendors would not be sufficiently evaluated prior to entering into a contractual agreement, which could result in failure to note significant lack of expertise and technical capacity on the part of the vendor.
Air transport is becoming crucial for the support of expanding and new peacekeeping missions and, given the magnitude of the resources allocated for its support, it is essential to significantly increase the Secretariat's capacity to ensure that air operation activities in missions are efficiently planned, their requirements are clearly defined and the contracting and implementation of aircraft leases are managed in an effective and economical manner.
It is also necessary to ensure that the expertise provided at Headquarters is adequate, that the aircraft selected meet aviation standards, including safety standards, and that contracts awarded to vendors are well managed.
Medical Support Section
Medical Officer (P-4)
Two entities contribute to the health of United Nations personnel in peacekeeping operations: the Medical Services Division of the Department of Management, which develops and promulgates health policies for the United Nations Secretariat and field missions; and the Medical Support Section in the Logistics Support Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which implements those policies and oversees medical support for peacekeeping missions through planning, coordinating, executing and monitoring health services in the field.
This distinction of functions was reflected in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (A/55/977, para.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations faces two major challenges that affect the health of peacekeepers.
First, personnel from different troop- and police-contributing countries are deployed with varying degrees of health.
Second, peacekeepers continue to be very vulnerable to preventable diseases like malaria and lassa fever, which remain important causes of morbidity and fatality in peacekeeping missions.
Both reasons give rise to relatively high levels of personnel attrition in the missions, which directly affects the operational effectiveness of deployed contingents and increases the medical expenditures of both the Organization and the respective contributing country.
A reliable medical surveillance system is necessary in order for the Department to better quantify the extent of medical issues and to identify risk and causative factors that will allow it, in consultation with the Medical Services Division, to develop a targeted strategy to address current vulnerabilities and deficiencies.
In addition, the increase in the number of mission personnel to be supported, from 75,400 (including military, police and civilian personnel) in the current period to approximately 80,000 in 2005/06, requires extensive oversight and evaluation to ensure the quality of medical support services.
Medical services are currently provided by 20 hospitals, and approximately 140 clinics provided by troop-contributing countries and 45 United Nations clinics deployed across all peacekeeping missions.
The current staffing of the Medical Support Section comprises one P-5, two P-4, one P-3 and one General Service posts.
Given the present level of peacekeeping operations and their expected expansion, those limited resources have been utilized to resolve day-to-day operational and administrative and logistics issues, with little capacity to address force health protection and concerns about the quality of medical support services.
The Medical Support Section therefore requests an additional Medical Officer (P-4) to oversee medical quality assurance issues.
The incumbent will implement a disease surveillance and health information system for peacekeeping missions.
This involves assessment of health threats and preparation of medical guidelines and briefs for the Department as well as troop- and police-contributing countries.
In addition, the incumbent will monitor and analyse health management indicators to ensure that expensive health services remain relevant and cost-effective in all missions.
The incumbent will develop guidelines to ensure the quality of health services, pharmaceuticals, blood and medical products provided to mission personnel.
A medical quality assurance programme is essential to ensure that medical services in peacekeeping missions meet United Nations standards and to ensure that the Organization's obligation to provide for the health and welfare of its personnel is not compromised.
The request for this post is further justified by the increase in the number of mission personnel to be supported from 75,400 to approximately 80,000, by 20 hospitals and approximately 140 clinics provided by troop-contributing countries deployed in all peacekeeping missions, which will require extensive assessment to ensure the quality of their medical support services.
Management indicators are necessary to ensure that such expensive services remain relevant and cost-effective through each phase of a mission.
The introduction and maintenance of a surveillance system is therefore essential to ensure that medical services continue to meet United Nations standards.
The current system relies on complaints or feedback reaching the Medical Support Section.
Contingent-owned Equipment and Property Management Support Section
The United Nations, through its Contingent-owned Equipment and Property Management Support Section, manages approximately $850 million worth of United Nations-owned equipment and approximately $3.5 billion of contingent-owned equipment.
The Contingent-owned Equipment Unit and the Property Management Support Section are managing those assets.
The Supply Section of the Specialist Support Service is responsible for a wide range of technical management functions, including the delivery of services (rations, fuel and airfield services), the acquisition of equipment and material (i.e. security equipment, accoutrements, furniture and other general items) and the control and management of United Nations-owned equipment and contingent-owned equipment.
The specialized asset accounting for contingent-owned equipment and United Nations-owned equipment are complementary but distinct activities.
The Contingent-owned Equipment Unit within the Supply Section provides management guidance and technical oversight of contingent-owned equipment asset accounting, which involves the coordination of: the recording and reporting of predeployment inspections; the arrival of troop contributor inspectors and follow-on equipment and sustainment; and verification inspections in order to confirm that equipment has been provided and is performing in accordance with the terms of the memorandum of understanding with the respective troop-contributing country.
Contingent-owned equipment asset accounting is a logistical function and is distinct from, but complementary to, the process of establishing the financial arrangements for contingent-owned equipment reimbursement.
In 2004, the Property Management Unit provided overall management, guidance and technical oversight in connection with United Nations-owned equipment in excess of $850 million.
To streamline these two distinct areas of management specialization, it is proposed to create a new contingent-owned equipment and Property Management Support Section.
It will combine the current contingent-owned equipment and Property Management Unit and be responsible for the promulgation of sound policies and procedures and the provision of guidance to field missions.
The achievement of those goals will directly contribute to a number of the outputs indicated in the results-based budgeting framework.
The challenges for the new section are significant.
In the area of contingent-owned equipment, these include the lack of a forum for the exchange of best practices among contingent-owned equipment units in field missions and at Headquarters and the lack of a single focal point for the coordination of the logistical aspect of matters related to contingent-owned equipment at Headquarters.
Another challenge is the development of proposals relating to the logistical aspects of contingent-owned equipment for the revised Contingent-owned Equipment Manual, in cooperation with the Finance Management and Support Service and including consultations and coordination with other Secretariat entities and peacekeeping missions, to be presented to the contingent-owned equipment working group.
Upon the endorsement by the General Assembly of the recommendations of the working group, it will be the Section's responsibility to set coherent policies, procedures and guidelines and ensure their implementation in the peacekeeping missions.
Similarly, the challenges faced in relation to United Nations-owned equipment are equally formidable.
A total of some 250 staff in the peacekeeping missions are performing functions in the areas of property control, receiving and inspection, claims and disposal, with each area representing a segment of asset lifespan.
Unfortunately, the lack of proper coordination and management of these differing functional areas has led to a lack of direct liaison between counterparts at Headquarters and the missions and incompleteness of the data entered into the inventory management systems, leading in turn to inaccurate reporting and lack of clarity.
Chief, Contingent-owned Equipment and Property Management Support Section (P-5)
The creation of the proposed new section, headed by a Chief at the P-5 level, will unify these two specialized areas, lead to synergies and operational efficiencies and will provide clarity with respect to focal points across missions and Headquarters.
In addition, it is foreseen that the responsibility to formulate, negotiate and manage letters-of-assist concerning the provision of goods and services provided by Member States will reside in this Section.
To establish the Contingent-owned Equipment and Property Management Support Section, one new P-5 post is requested to provide oversight and direction.
The incumbent will be the focal point for policy development, dissemination and implementation, ensuring that there is uniformity in all missions.
The incumbent, in consultation with the Military Division, the Civilian Police Division and missions, will coordinate the sourcing of contingent-owned equipment and United Nations-owned equipment and the provision of self-sustainment services necessary to satisfy the logistical support requirements of missions during the memorandum of understanding establishment phase.
The incumbent will provide overall guidance to missions in the implementation of procedures and guidelines to ensure that effective control and verification mechanisms are in place for the management of memorandums of understanding.
The incumbent will also consolidate the record-management systems for contingent-owned equipment and United Nations-owned equipment, develop enhanced logistical procedures for integrating contingent-owned equipment, United Nations-owned equipment and self-sustainment services provided by the United Nations, the troop-contributing country or the police-contributing country to satisfy the operational requirements of missions and promote integration in the planning and execution of logistical support in missions and at Headquarters.
The Contingent-owned Equipment and Property Management Support Section will have a total of five Professional (1 P-5, 2 P-4 and 2 P-3) and seven General Service (1 Principal level and 6 Other level) posts.
Without the approval of this position, the Section would suffer a lack of leadership, management and coordination with the focal points in the field.
Given the value of the assets at stake, estimated at some $3.5 billion for contingent-owned equipment and $850 million for United Nations-owned equipment, the lack of coordination and guidance could result in mismanagement and inaccurate representation of the value of the assets as a result of inaccurate inventory management.
With the eventual introduction of the Galileo system of inventory tracking and management, there will be an even more apparent need for the overall management of the entire inventory system, which will continue to be one of the main priorities of the Division.
Engineering Section
Environmental Engineering Officer (P-3)
During the 2003/04 period, the United Nations Environment Programme conducted studies of the environmental conditions and challenges faced by peacekeeping missions and initiated the production of environmental guidelines, which are currently being finalized.
Those guidelines, once submitted to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, will be distributed in early 2005 to all missions.
The implementation of the guidelines will require a specialized educational and experience profile that does not currently exist in the Department.
Furthermore, environmental protection and the attendant safeguards is an area that has only recently come to the forefront of the Department's operations and that will grow in importance.
The Department has not carried out any dedicated environmental protection activities owing to resource constraints.
The Engineering Section of the Logistics Support Division therefore requests an Environmental Engineering Officer (P-3) to implement and monitor the environmental protection programmes in the field.
The incumbent will monitor and advise missions in the areas of pollution prevention, waste minimization and management, including best practices to be employed for dealing with the hazardous waste that is invariably and unavoidably generated in peacekeeping operations.
The incumbent will also be responsible for conducting surveys in missions pertaining to the effectiveness of the implementation of environmental programmes and for assessing the need for additional resources in terms of the knowledge, personnel or equipment necessary for the development of policy and for the effective implementation of the Department's environmental programmes in the missions.
The incumbent will provide advice to the peacekeeping and special political missions on environmental training requirements.
Cartographic Section
Cartographic Assistant (General Service (Other level))
The Cartographic Section of the Logistics Support Division requests an additional Cartographic Assistant (General Service (Other level)) to provide support in connection with reproduction works and services, in particular maps of peacekeeping missions for the daily Security Council consultations and for the frequent briefings of the senior management of the Department.
The incumbent will also be responsible for maintaining the cartographic database and specialized software/hardware to ensure interoperability between the Department and the field missions.
These functions have been funded using resources under general temporary assistance since 1998.
(ii) Posts vacant for more than 12 months
In the Finance Management and Support Service, the position of Finance Officer (P-4) is being rejustified.
The post is required to provide expert results-based-budgeting guidance to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political Affairs and peacekeeping and special political missions as well as acting as the Department's results-based-budgeting focal point.
The incumbent will work with headquarters and field personnel to enhance and strengthen the Department's capacity in mission planning and results-based management, including integration with the budgetary process.
The incumbent may also be required to undertake special projects related to planning and budgeting tools.
The staff member who previously encumbered the post left the Service at the end of June 2004.
After a thorough review of the functions and requirements of the Service and following a redistribution of tasks within the Office of the Chief, a review of the duties and responsibilities of this post was initiated to appropriately reflect the change in requirements.
The Office of Human Resources Management is currently reviewing a request for reclassification of functions.
Once approved, the post will be advertised in Galaxy.
The functions of the Finance Officer post were carried out by a staff member hired on a temporary basis.
In the absence of funding for this post, the Service would be unable to fulfil the need to provide results-based-budgeting guidance to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, peacekeeping missions and special political missions.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The estimate of $44,867,600 provides for the salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for the 332 continuing posts and the 18 new posts, based on standard costs.
The increase of $3,413,300 relates to additional 18 posts and to a change in standard salary costs.
The estimate of $335,100 provides for temporary assistance in the Finance Management and Support Service in the amount of $65,000 for the development of a field finance training course module and $32,000 for the development of standardized budget templates for complex, medium-size and small missions; and for temporary assistance in the Recruitment and Placement Section of the Personnel Management and Support Service for the following: (a) 12 person-months (P-3) to undertake the function of filling vacancies in missions under the incumbent's purview ($155,000); (b) 12 person-months (General Service (Other level)) to provide administrative support with respect to recruitment and placement processes ($83,100).
Temporary assistance is required in the Recruitment and Placement Section to prevent backlogs in the processing of personnel actions relating to the international staff recruited and to be recruited in the newly established missions, for which 2,072 personnel actions had been processed as at 31 December 2004.
The consultancy requirements for the period 2005/06 are as follows:
The amount of $24,000 is requested in the Personnel Management and Support Service to modify and improve the online skills inventory and career tracking questionnaire and to develop and launch an online mobility roster.
The enhancements to the skills inventory will complement the personal history profile in Galaxy by focusing on acquired skill sets rather than a description of work experience.
The mobility roster will capture all staff from downsizing missions and those available for new assignments.
The roster will help the Service to better meet the increasing demands placed on the Department for qualified, experienced and versatile staff and to align the downsizing and surge phases among the various missions.
A provision of $32,000 is requested for the development of a human resources reporting system for field personnel that will provide a comprehensive framework for data analysis, data mining and data monitoring.
The system will be a suite of applications interlinked with Galaxy and the Integrated Management Information System through the human resources data warehouse and an enhancement to the Nucleus application, through which field managers can access vetted rosters of candidates.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in collaboration with the Office of Human Resources Management, has initiated the development of a joint orientation package for staff assigned to field missions or changing duty stations.
The package includes distance learning courses focusing on providing staff with the skills needed to both work and live in the field missions.
The amount of $96,000 is therefore requested for 12 months of consultancy services to develop online courses to meet the career development needs of staff in the field mission.
The courses will focus on time management, decision-making, problem-solving, gender issues and budget preparation.
They will be offered in addition to the ones developed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations since 2003 through the use of a consultant who specializes in training design, training development and Web-based skills.
The combination of required skills does not exist in-house.
A provision of $69,000 is requested to conduct three one-week personnel management training programme courses at UNLB, UNFICYP and at the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre in Ghana for 60 staff members.
The courses are customized for the staff in missions and target work groups (as opposed to individuals) and focus on areas such as cross-cutting skills, including planning and programme management.
The programme is customized to meet the specific needs of staff in the missions and at Headquarters.
It is distinct from the four-day people management training programme offered by the Office of Human Resources Management in the sense that the latter is intended to build supervisory skills and the skills taught relate solely to human resources management.
The variance results from the fact that most of the requirements for the 2005/06 period are distinct and lower in cost than the ones approved in the current 2004/05 period.
The travel requirements for the 2005/06 period are as follows:
The estimate of $20,500 provides for 10 briefings, focusing on contingent-owned equipment and memorandums of understanding, of new and emerging troop-contributing countries in three different regions (Africa, Middle East and Asia).
The amount of $8,000 is requested for one staff member of the Medical Support Section to visit one vendor in Germany in order to conduct the review of the medical component of the strategic deployment stocks managed by the vendor ($4,000) and for travel to Europe and within the United States of America to evaluate vendors and establish a systems contract for drugs and blood ($4,000).
A provision of $19,000 is requested in the Air Transport Section to carry out visits to vendors to finalize vehicle systems contracts and to convene a forum on fleet management at UNLB.
The amount of $22,600 is requested in the Supply Section to carry out vendor visits in order to evaluate the contractor's supply chain and quality control process and for two staff to attend meetings on contingent-owned equipment and property management issues to be held at UNLB.
A provision of $43,000 is requested for three visits by staff in the Aviation Safety Unit to review and report on service providers and to visit national aviation bodies as part of the air safety procedures ($19,500), for travel to prospective air services companies prior to registration to inspect aircraft history, usage and other technical requirements ($19,500) and for the Chief of the Aviation Quality and Assurance Unit to attend meetings with the World Food Programme to review practices and standards ($4,000).
A provision of $39,500 is requested for two trips by the Assistant Secretary-General and one staff member to visit troop-contributing countries in Asia and Europe or Latin America and for the travel of one staff member in the Personnel Management and Support Service to Nairobi, Buenos Aires and Sydney, Australia, to coordinate with national authorities of troop-contributing countries the launching of the Police Military Staff Travel and Rotation System (PMSTARS) extranet.
PMSTARS is a comprehensive Web-based application for the nomination, deployment, travel and rotation of military observers and civilian police monitors to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
The application was developed by the Personnel Management and Support Service in consultation with the Military and Civilian Police Divisions.
PMSTARS allows Member States to monitor all stages of the deployment of their military observers and civilian police monitors through controlled access.
In the current period, workshops on the launching of the PMSTARS extranet will be conducted for European, Middle Eastern and Asian countries.
The estimate of $72,000 provides for attendance at the annual Chief Aviation Officer seminar ($8,000), the annual engineering seminar to be held at UNLB ($8,000), a follow-up conference of the accommodation working group to be held at UNLB ($4,000), two working group on emergency telecommunication conferences in Dubai by a Senior Communications Officer in the Communications and Information Technology Service ($6,600), two conferences of the Inter-agency Telecommunications Advisory Group ($6,600), the International Computing Centre Management Committee meeting ($6,600) and the Communications and Information Technology Service planning conference by two senior staff ($6,600); for the travel of one personnel management staff member to UNMIK to coordinate a major upgrade of check-in, check-out and field attendance systems and of one personnel management staff member to Bonn, Germany, for five days to launch the process of transmitting data from the United Nations Volunteers management system to Nucleus ($6,600); and for the travel of one career development staff member to Geneva to organize and facilitate the inter-agency career development round table ($4,000) and to support monitoring, liaison and coordination with partners with which the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has signed memorandums of understanding to make available a standby capacity of civilian experts in specialized occupational groups (such as civil aviation, fuel management, civil engineering and local community development) in both developed and developing countries, in response to interest expressed by Member States to enter into such arrangements ($15,000).
The amount of $303,800 is requested for travel related to training in the areas of finance ($8,000), results-based budgeting ($8,000), predeployment training ($72,000), management and leadership ($97,600), personnel management ($39,000), the establishment of integrated mission training cells ($8,000), improvement of the integration between military and civilian components of field missions ($63,200) and training of trainers ($8,000).
A provision of $66,000 is requested for the production of training materials, including commercial CD-ROMs, for the distance-learning course and for the rental of facilities at the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre in Ghana.
The reduction in resources requested relates to lower requirements for training supplies.
Military Division
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Justification of new posts
Training and Evaluation Service
Training Officer (P-4)
The resources of the Training and Evaluation Service are currently fully utilized to meet the requirements of predeployment training for contingents to be deployed to new missions and to expanding existing missions.
This arrangement leaves very limited resources for the other functions of the Service, such as developing standardized training modules and focusing on personnel conduct issues.
The increase in peacekeeping activities has created greater requirements for the training of civilian police contingents.
Those requirements are further accentuated by an increased role of the civilian police in areas relating to the rule of law in peacekeeping missions.
The Service therefore requests an additional Training Officer (P-4) to focus on police training.
The incumbent will develop and disseminate standardized United Nations peacekeeping training material for use by police-contributing countries and field missions for all levels: civilian police, staff officers and mission leadership.
In addition, the incumbent will coordinate and direct training activities to support the capacity of police-contributing countries for peacekeeping and to support national and regional training initiatives.
The incumbent will also act as Course Director and conduct and evaluate at least three peacekeeping training activities per year.
The current burden on the resources of the Service has been increased by the requirement to deliver training programmes in support of departmental policies relating to personnel conduct and sexual exploitation and abuse.
In the absence of funding for this post, the Training and Evaluation Service would be unable to fully respond to the increasing requirements for the training of civilian police in addition to its ongoing responsibilities.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The amount of $12,464,200 provides for the salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for the 79 continuing posts and 1 new post based on standard costs.
The increase in resources relates to the new post and to a change in standard salary costs.
The consultancy requirements for the period 2005/06 are as follows:
The provision of $62,500 is requested for the employment of four consultants during a period of one month per consultant to carry out the assessment of four missions and to provide reports on the ability of military and civilian police components in specific field missions to contribute to the implementation of Security Council resolutions.
The policy on chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear threats was developed during the 2003/04 period using the expertise of a consultant.
Following the approval of the policy by the Department's senior managers, the provision of $26,200 is requested for a consultant to lead the process of implementation of the chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear policy.
For a period of three months the consultant will provide expert advice on specific mission situations, including the installation of possible warning and reporting procedures (equipment and software), and mission-specific advice on plans for the possible evacuation of mission personnel, including contaminated personnel, will support missions in developing local chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear threat assessments and will develop internal training programmes in that area.
The Department does not currently have such expertise.
The variance relates to the requirements for the implementation of the chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear policy in peacekeeping missions, for which no provision was made in the current period, offset by lower requirements for mission assessment.
The official travel requirements are as follows:
The Military Division requests an amount of $44,800 to attend seminars focusing on the feasibility of the military aspects of peace agreements and the structures and tasks of military components and an amount of $14,000 for one officer to meet with senior personnel of the African Union in order to strengthen their capacity to support United Nations peace and security objectives and to give organizational, conceptual and operational advice with an aim to better integrate actions by African institutions into international responses to peace and security issues.
An additional provision of $1,463,000 is requested for the travel of instructors and participants from Member States to take part in peacekeeping training activities, the provision of assistance to mission training cells, cooperation and coordination with regional and national peacekeeping training centres and the development of training modules and to attend seminars and other peacekeeping activities.
The variance relates to an increase in training-related activities ($163,000).
The Division is planning to conduct 1 additional military peacekeeping training course/seminar for troop-contributing countries, 1 additional specific peacekeeping training course/seminar for countries contributing civilian police and 10 additional visits to peacekeeping training centres and to sponsor 50 more participants from emerging countries in peacekeeping training courses because of high demand from Member States.
The visits to the peacekeeping training centres are proposed to ensure that the content and delivery of the training are in accordance with United Nations standards.
The increase in training-related travel is offset by a reduction in non-training-related travel activities by $114,600, most of which will be covered by peacekeeping budgets.
The estimate of $637,000 provides for the production of training materials (revision, translation, publishing and distribution of publications), the rental of conference facilities during the conduct of workshops and training sessions and various training supplies).
The increase in resources is the result of a 12 per cent increase in the training activities owing to high demand from Member States for peacekeeping training programmes.
Civilian Police Division
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a Excludes 1 P-4 Corrections Officer and 1 P-4 Legal Officer posts that are constituted the Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Unit.
The Unit was transferred from the Civilian Police Division to the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General during calendar year 2004.
b In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Justification of new posts
Office of the Civilian Police Adviser
Deputy Police Adviser (D-1)
The senior management team of the Civilian Police Division comprises 1 D-2 (the Civilian Police Adviser) and a Senior Police Adviser (P-5) who acts as deputy as required.
The Police Adviser is the primary adviser to the Under-Secretary-General on all police issues and, as such, the Police Adviser represents the Department in conferences and seminars and in meetings with external entities, including humanitarian organizations and non-governmental agencies.
Such representation activities are estimated to account for over 30 per cent of the Police Adviser's time.
With the increase in peacekeeping operations, it is anticipated that the demand for representation will increase further.
Currently, in view of the demands on the Police Adviser and the increasing time spent on representation, the Senior Police Adviser (P-5) manages the Division in the absence of the Police Adviser.
It is proposed to establish the position of Deputy Police Adviser, at the D-1 level, to provide adequate overall management and leadership in the Division and to perform the line functions allowing the Senior Police Adviser to focus on mounting personnel, operational and informational issues.
The post of Deputy Police Adviser (D-1) is proposed to assist the Police Adviser with all responsibilities, especially in the provision of generic and mission-related civilian police advice on a wide variety of issues to the Secretary-General through the Under-Secretary-General, to police commissioners in the field missions, to other departments within the Secretariat and to other United Nations agencies.
The Deputy will support the Police Adviser in setting targets in the mandate implementation plans devised for new missions and existing ones, in supporting the management of the police components of the existing missions and in the establishment of selection and recruitment priorities.
The incumbent will also assist in representing the Division at a senior level at various international forums, seminars and other similar events concerning peacekeeping and will represent the Division in meetings with Member States through the permanent missions.
This position is requested to strengthen the management in the office and will be encumbered through a secondment from a Member State.
In the absence of funding for this position, the direction of the Civilian Police Division would suffer from a lack of consistent leadership and the Division would be unable to meet the substantive requirements for setting targets for mandate implementation, policies for the new missions and the renewal of or redirection of existing ones.
Moreover, the current Senior Police Adviser would have to continue to act as deputy for the Civilian Police Adviser, for a greater amount of time and would be unable to focus on line functions relating to personnel, operations and information.
This would have an impact on the level and effectiveness of the support provided to the peacekeeping operations.
Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level))
The current ratio of General Service to Professional staff in the Civilian Police Division is 1 to 4.5.
An additional Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) is therefore requested to provide administrative support and to improve the current ratio of General Service to Professional staff, which is currently strained.
Strategic Policy and Development Section
The Office of Internal Oversight Services, in its report on the evaluation of the impact of the recent restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (A/58/746), recommended that the Department finalize the organizational streamlining of the Civilian Police Division, including formally defining the responsibilities and reporting lines of section chiefs.
It is proposed to organize the Division into two sections: the Mission Management Support Section, focusing on personnel, daily operations, information and assistance to the Office of Mission Support; and the Strategic Policy and Development Section, focusing on the essential formulation of strategic policy and integrated concepts of operations, which is vital to facilitate the attainment of the Department's goals on police-related matters, including the multiple aspects within the growing complexity and broadness of police mandates, notably those concerning capacity-building issues.
The Section will integrate assessment, research, planning, training, liaison and certification activities, among others.
The Mission Management Support Section is proposed to be headed by the senior police officer seconded to the existing Senior Police Adviser's post (P-5).
The Strategic Policy and Development Section, which will be critical to institutional memory, the development of comprehensive concepts, benchmarking, partnership and creation of excellence in policing areas, especially in the context of good governance and the rule of law, is proposed to be managed by a civilian post.
Chief, Strategic Policy and Development Section (P-5)
The position of Chief of the Strategic Policy and Development Section (P-5) is proposed to ensure the Division's proper management and representation on core areas of its business, including strategic policy, development, planning and liaison.
The incumbent will assist in the development of strategic policies in partnership with entities in the United Nations system, including the Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme, and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as with Member States.
The incumbent will also be responsible for developing proposals to strengthen cooperation with regional and subregional organizations, namely the European Union, the Economic Community of West African States and the African Union, on police-related functions.
In that capacity, the incumbent will coordinate, review and conceptualize the overarching police policies in areas such as the relationship between peacekeeping and peacebuilding on the one hand and security and development on the other, as well as the role of the police in the contexts of the rule of law and security sector reform efforts.
The incumbent will also act in the first-line management of efforts to develop and help sustain a new standing United Nations capacity of civilian police experts.
Without this post, the streamlining of the Division would not be effectively implemented and core areas of new, complex police mandates could not be attended to.
The enhancement of capabilities in support of comprehensive capacity-building initiatives through the development of integrated strategic policies would be hampered, thus seriously impeding the Division's ability to respond to current and increasing demand for its engagement in peacebuilding and peacekeeping activities.
Operations Planning Officer (P-4)
One additional Operations Planning Officer (P-4) is requested to strengthen the Division's ability to develop new policies and planning for future civilian police challenges and new operations, in particular in three regional groupings: Europe and Latin America, Asia and the Middle East, and Africa.
The incumbent will carry out assessments of civilian police operations, including the setting and review of benchmarks for mandate implementation and enhanced police reform and restructuring activities.
The incumbent will help create new concepts of operations and mandate implementation plans and will review existing plans to ensure that all plans are adapted to the new environments.
The Operations Planning Officer will also be involved in evaluations, developing generic quick-impact projects, defining civilian police job profiles for small-, medium- and large-scale peace operations and preparing a framework for standardization of international practices, including a community-based policing programme that can be adapted for all civilian police components as required.
The recent increase in peacekeeping operations and the increased role of the civilian police in areas relating to the rule of law have demonstrated the need for the Division to have a capacity to strategize and plan with a broader scope for future police operations.
The non-approval of this post would affect the Division's ability to promptly and effectively respond to police requirements in peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
Mission Management and Support Section
Police Generation Officer (P-4)
During the calendar year 2004, the Civilian Police Division provided support for the deployment of 7,500 civilian police officers.
It is expected that an additional 10,000 deployments will be supported in 2005.
The police generation functions of reviewing qualifications and recruiting civilian police officers necessitate the support of the existing Information Technology Officer (P-4) and Mission Managers (4 P-4 and 3 P-3).
This task requires the careful vetting of candidates through the use of detailed job profiles to recruit candidates with adequate skills and experience.
It is necessary to create a dedicated capacity in order to contain these efforts within a dedicated position, to interact with Member States in an ordered and centralized manner and to properly manage records of performance, including disciplinary matters.
The Police Generation Officer post (P-4) is therefore requested to provide support to all aspects of police generation, including the selection, recruitment, deployment and rotation of individual United Nations civilian police officers and formed units.
The post will create an effective selection capability to secure the adequate quality and thus a more rationalized and cost-effective field-based strength of a cadre of police officers.
In addition, the incumbent will manage all aspects of the on-call roster of police experts based on ongoing commitments by Member States.
The incumbent will be responsible for managing the selection assistance teams and ensuring a standardized and coordinated approach to Member States on all of these issues.
The Police Generation Officer will report to the Chief of the Mission Management and Support Section.
In the absence of funding for this capacity, the Division's overall performance will continue to be adversely affected by the current ad hoc, reactive approach that distracts all of the functional sections in the Division to varying degrees from their core functions as a result of having so many personnel directly exposed to police selection and recruitment efforts.
The inability to generate qualified and tested personnel in a timely and efficient manner would ultimately slow the implementation of mandates in the field and jeopardize the credibility of civilian police components in the field in the longer term.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The estimate of $4,003,100 provides for salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for the 22 continuing posts and 5 new posts.
The increase relates to the new posts and a change in standard salary costs, offset by the transfer of two posts to the Office of the Under-Secretary-General.
The consultancy requirements for the period are as follows:
The amount of $40,000 is requested for the development of a guide to assess the capacity of local police institutions in the area of peacekeeping operations for a period of five months.
As the role of civilian police becomes more complex and dynamic, with mandates involving local police reform, restructuring and capacity enhancement, the need of the Division to systematically assess post-conflict policing institutions through predetermined benchmarks to identify the strengths and weaknesses of a post-conflict police institution has been recognized.
The identification of strengths and weaknesses will need to be incorporated into the initial planning process to ensure that immediate steps are undertaken to ensure that the sustainable institutional development and capacity enhancement go hand-in-hand with activities that focus on individual officers, such as training and mentoring.
The measuring of local institutional capacity is not a static process but rather an ongoing process in the field missions that is linked to mandate implementation and ultimately to any transitional or downsizing plan or exit strategy.
To date, the assessment of local police institutions has been ad hoc and dependent on the assessor's knowledge, since there is no standardized benchmarking tool.
At present, there is no existing guide and the Civilian Police Division lacks the capacity to develop such a guide.
It therefore requests a consultancy with experience in police reform and development in a post-conflict society.
The guide will ensure that plans are properly developed, implemented and revised in accordance with the needs of the local police institution and ultimately ensure that a sustainable local police institution is developed in parallel to the training and mentoring activities of civilian police.
The variance resulted from the fact that the requirements for the 2005/06 period are distinct and less costly than those approved for the current period.
The travel requirements are as follows:
The estimate of $21,000 is requested for one combined trip to Africa aiming at strengthening cooperation with Member States and regional and subregional organizations to enhance and support African peacekeeping and ultimately enhance the ability of the United Nations to meet the increased policing demands.
A provision of $19,500 is requested for attendance at seminars aiming at assisting the Division in strengthening its relationships with policy centres, think tanks and Member States.
The estimate of $27,000 is requested for one staff member to travel to Africa (Burundi, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia) and to the Middle East for the provision of advice during peace talks.
Mine Action Service
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements
(Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Analysis of resource requirements
The estimate of $706,000 provides for the salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for the five continuing posts.
The increase over the resources approved for the 2004/05 period relate to a change in standard salary costs.
Overall resource requirements of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(a) Human resource requirements
(b) Financial resource requirements
(Thousands of United States dollars)
(c) Executive Office: centrally administered costs
The amount of $491,400 provides for office supplies ($89,500) and rental of office equipment ($119,700) for all support account posts in the Department based on the current level of expenditure, as well as furniture ($282,200) for the new posts.
The increase of $324,100 over the resources approved in the current year is attributable mainly to the cost of furniture for the new posts ($282,000).
A provision of $890,900 is made for commercial communications based on past experience ($588,000), the cost of communications support services to cover charges related to the use of conference facilities and various communications services ($30,000), the acquisition of communications equipment for the new posts based on standard costs ($9,800), the establishment of videoconferencing facilities for the Specialist Support Service ($52,200), the replacement of 14 per cent of the inventory of communications equipment ($97,500) and the replacement of 15 per cent of the inventory of communications spare parts and supplies ($113,400).
The variance is attributable mainly to higher actual commercial communication costs for the Department, for which provision is made at the standard rate of $1,000 per staff member.
The estimate of $5,241,200 provides for the maintenance of information technology equipment ($705,600), the purchase of additional disk storage ($95,000), the replacement of information technology equipment ($899,900), the acquisition of one desktop computer and one printer for the 49 new posts ($107,800), the acquisition of one desktop computer and one printer for the functions funded through temporary assistance in the Recruitment and Placement Section, Office of Mission Support ($4,400), the acquisition of software ($187,000), software licences and fees ($303,000), the purchase of spare parts and supplies ($176,000) and external ongoing information technology maintenance and support tasks in the amount of $2,762,500, as follows:
(a) Help desk support ($900,000): continued round-the-clock global help desk support to Department of Peacekeeping Operations headquarters and field information and communication technology operations, including information exchange for critical systems of the Department;
(b) Network support ($725,000): continued data and voice communications between Headquarters and field missions for the interchange of and access to information.
Network support will be undertaken using a layered approach in order to facilitate round-the-clock availability of the communication links;
(c) Application support ($500,000): support at the tier 2 level for all Lotus Notes applications utilized in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations at Headquarters, including the electronic storage, tracking, archival and retrieval system (E-STARS) and the mail action records system (MARS); support for web-based applications relating to change management procedures and user documentation and training; and the Funds Monitoring Tool;
(d) Peacekeeping Best Practices Section website support, maintenance and enhancements ($100,000).
During the 2005/06 period, several enhancements will be made to the website, including the addition of a search methodology and the network of communities of practice as part of the knowledge management programme of the Section;
(e) The Department of Peacekeeping Operations portal ($225,000).
The Department's portal will be a centralized gateway to departmental information services and applications that will complement the Organization's proposed Enterprise Content Management solution by making available multiple user groups and role-based information access.
The benefits of the portal include:
• Information gateway: bringing information, applications and services under one umbrella as a “one-stop shop” for users
• Accessibility: the portal (Intranet and extranet) will be accessible to all staff at Headquarters and in field missions, as well as peacekeeping partners
• Information-sharing: information will be shared and accessed easily, rapidly, securely and systematically, and will include policies, operational guidance and procedures, reports, maps, mission-specific data, news, etc.
• Systems integration: the portal will facilitate the organization and integration of disparate but associated systems and processes, including databases, core business applications and collaborative services
• Operational efficiency: reduced time spent on information searches and other non-value added activities
(f) Enterprise Content Management ($312,500).
The objective of ECM is to provide an opportunity for all United Nations offices and departments to effectively manage the flow of documents and the entire content life cycle.
ECM will provide a secure repository of information and will complement the Department's portal.
The core modules of ECM are document management, Web content management, document imaging, records management, collaboration and digital assets management.
The modules will help to streamline and automate processes, thus improving their effectiveness, and will reduce by 50 per cent the amount of time required to retrieve electronic documents, strengthen registry and information management in the Department and facilitate the sharing of knowledge.
The provision included in the present budget reflects the initial cost of planning, configuration and setting up of the infrastructure of ECM, which will be undertaken during fiscal year 2005/06.
It is anticipated that those functions will extend beyond 2005/06.
The application is expected to be launched in the peacekeeping missions during the second quarter of 2007.
Executive Office of the Secretary-General
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Justification of new posts
Senior Political Officer (P-5)
The increase in the number and complexity of peacekeeping missions during the past year has had an exponential impact on the volume of documentation to be cleared and processed by the Executive Office of the Secretary-General.
In the last year, the outputs of the Office have doubled, from 44 to 85 reports, from 216 to 420 letters and from 564 to 1,030 notes.
In order to maintain the present level of performance, a second P-5 post is necessary to support this nearly 100 per cent increase in peacekeeping documents, which are reviewed and returned within five working days of receipt.
Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level))
With the increase in work volume, there is a significant increase in administrative tasks.
Owing to the two new peacekeeping missions (UNOCI and ONUB), the expansion of MONUC, revisions of mandates in UNAMSIL and the work in relation to events in the Sudan, the majority of the increase in workload is attributable directly to peacekeeping activities.
The increased workload cannot be managed without an additional General Service staff member.
Therefore, an additional General Service (Other level) post is requested.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The estimate of $729,300 provides for salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for three continuing posts and two new posts.
The increase of $190,800 over the resources approved in 2004/05 is due mainly to the two new posts and a change in standard salary costs.
An estimate of $41,600 provides for general temporary assistance during peak periods of peacekeeping activities, particularly during the start-up of new operations and during times of crisis, which create an abnormally high volume of work.
The amount also provides for the replacement of staff on sick and maternity leave.
In addition to the request for an additional General Service (Other level) post, the continual increase in volume requires additional temporary assistance to ensure that the workload is processed in a timely manner.
A provision in the amount of $13,700 provides for office supplies and the rental of office equipment and furniture, based on standard costs.
The provision of $12,400 provides for commercial communications ($12,000) and the purchase of equipment for the two new posts ($400).
An amount of $10,400 provides for desktop computers and printers for two new posts and for standard maintenance for continuing and new posts.
C. Office of the United Nations Ombudsman
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Justification of new posts
Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level))
The number of cases filed with the Office of the Ombudsman has increased from 120 cases at the end of 2003/04 to 150 cases currently, and the number of cases is projected to increase further.
With a 25 per cent increase in cases and no support staff in the Office of the Ombudsman, it is becoming increasingly difficult to accomplish the tasks necessary to process and resolve cases in a timely manner.
Accordingly, a General Service (Other level) post is requested, which will enable the team in the Office of the Ombudsman to process the workload in a timely manner.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The total of $236,000 provides for salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for one continuing post and one new post.
The increase of $143,700 is due primarily to the new post and a change in standard salary costs.
Travel requirements are itemized below.
An amount of $20,600 provides for the travel of the Ombudsman and one staff member to two missions in Africa twice and to one mission in Asia or the Middle East to guide and advise mission personnel on the prevention of disputes.
A provision of $3,100 provides for two staff members to attend the annual conference of the Ombudsman Association.
The increase of $6,900 reflects the travel of one additional staff member to one mission.
An amount of $7,700 provides for office supplies and the rental of office equipment and furniture, based on standard costs.
An amount of $5,000 provides for commercial communications ($4,800) at standard cost and the purchase of communication equipment for the new post ($200).
The total of $6,400 provides for information technology maintenance ($2,400), one desktop computer and printer for the new post ($2,200) and one laptop ($1,800).
The provision of $12,000 is necessary to cover fees for a specialized training course of the Ombudsman Association held in Washington, D.C. ($2,000), the annual conference of the Ombudsman Association ($4,000) and the production of communication and outreach materials ($6,000).
The increase of $4,800 is due to the production of outreach materials.
Office of Internal Oversight Services
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a Represents a net increase of 10 posts in the pool of resident auditors resulting from the transfer of 12 posts (3 P-5, 3 P-4, 2 P-3, 2 General Service (Other level) and 2 national General Service) from MINUSTAH, ONUB and UNOCI, offset by the discontinuation of 4 national General Service posts and the addition of 2 P-3 posts.
b The new General Service (Other level) posts include 12 national staff for the new resident investigator units of MONUC, UNMIL, MINUSTAH and ONUB.
c In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Justification of posts
(i) New posts
Internal Audit Division
Senior Peacekeeping Resident Audit Coordinator (P-5)
Past experience with the reporting functions in the Internal Audit Division has demonstrated a need for the development and implementation of reporting standards for use by resident auditors in preparing audit reports and throughout the Division, ensuring consistency of content and quality of audit reports.
The General Assembly, in its resolution 59/272 of 23 December 2004, requested that original versions of the reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services not submitted to the Assembly be made available upon request to any Member State.
With this increased accessibility of reports of OIOS (including audit reports issued by the Internal Audit Division) to a broader audience, and given the sensitivity of certain audits, there is a need to ensure that the reports are consistent and meet all reporting standards of the audit profession.
One Senior Peacekeeping Resident Audit Coordinator (P-5) is therefore requested in the Peacekeeping Section of the Internal Audit Division to provide closer monitoring of and to review the audit activities of resident auditors and the audit team working at Headquarters.
The current high turnover of professional resident auditors has substantially affected the quality of their audit reports.
By implementing the new reporting method, the post will ensure consistency in the review and drafting of audit reports.
The incumbent will participate in the annual audit planning process and will monitor the implementation of audit assignments.
The functions of the incumbent will also include preparing coordinated audit reports on horizontal audits, planning and assisting in the conduct of standard risk assessments in all missions, conducting professional standard reviews of audit reports submitted by chief resident auditors, ensuring that financial implications are properly calculated and recorded, following up on procedures and recommending improvements.
The incumbent will also consult and coordinate with other sections of the Internal Audit Division and OIOS on matters relating to resident auditors.
Without this post, OIOS would be unable to establish a capacity for the professional review of all reports, ensuring that they meet the reporting standards of the audit industry.
Given the larger exposure of all reports of OIOS as a result of the General Assembly decision, the credibility of the Office and of the Organization to a larger extent would be affected.
Information Technology Auditor (P-4)
During the period 2003/04, the information technology resources managed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations at Headquarters and in the peacekeeping missions totalled approximately $48 million.
In the current period, that amount grew to approximately $59 million.
With the anticipated establishment of another peacekeeping operation in the Sudan during the first quarter of 2005, it is expected that the funding for information technology will increase accordingly in the 2005/06 period.
Given the significance of the amounts allocated for the maintenance and acquisition of information technology products and for the development of applications using existing resources, it is necessary to strengthen the capacity of OIOS to adequately and extensively audit the products and ensure their alignment with the requirements of the Department and of peacekeeping operations.
An Information Technology Auditor post (P-4) is therefore required to provide audit coverage of the information technology requirements in peacekeeping operations and in the Department and to provide methodological and direct audit support to resident auditors.
The incumbent will work with both Headquarters auditors and resident auditors to ensure that information technology issues are appropriately addressed.
The incumbent will ensure that the existing applications, such as the Mercury procurement system, the Nucleus data warehousing system and the Galileo asset control and inventory management system, as well as any newly proposed systems, are subject to extensive audits or internal controls.
The absence of funding for this post would result in the inability of the Office to provide in-depth audit coverage of the information technology resources managed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which could lead to mismanagement and inadequate review processes in the selection of information technology products and systems, thus affecting the support of peacekeeping missions.
Investigations Division
During the period from July 2003 to June 2004, OIOS received 149 matters to be investigated (A/59/546, para.
Although this number represents a reduction compared to the 226 matters received during the 2002/03 period, the number of significant cases with a risk assessment profile of 100 points or more increased to 33 per cent from 25 per cent in the previous period.
The time required to complete a case has increased from 250 person-hours to 340 person-hours as a result of the increasing proportion of significant cases received.
Using this updated yardstick and considering the projected number of cases to be 430, one third of which are assumed to be significant, the required number of investigators would be 28.
OIOS, in its report on its investigation into allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (A/59/661), conducted in Bunia between May and September 2004, stated that a total of 72 allegations had been received by the Mission.
Of those allegations, OIOS was able to identify 20 cases.
It is anticipated that approximately 50 allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse will be identified in the other missions following the investigation of MONUC.
The Investigations Division of the Office of Internal Oversight Services is currently staffed with 4 Professional posts at Headquarters (1 P-5, 2 P-4 and 1 P-3), headed by a Director at the D-2 level; 13 Professional posts in the Vienna regional hub (2 P-5, 5 P-4 and 6 P-3) and 6 Professional posts in the Nairobi regional hub (3 P-4 and 3 P-3).
It is proposed to strengthen the investigative capacity of OIOS by establishing a combination of regional and resident investigators.
The new structure will include the following:
(a) Four teams of four investigators (4 P-4 and 12 P-3), each operating as a resident investigator in MONUC, ONUB, MINUSTAH and UNMIL;
(b) Two posts (1 D-1 and 1 General Service (Principal level)) in the Vienna regional investigation hub for the purposes of management and carrying out investigations for the entire peacekeeping operation;
(c) Two Investigator posts (P-3) in the Investigations Division, New York, to provide support to cases at Headquarters and to assist the resident investigators on larger cases in MINUSTAH.
The two posts proposed to strengthen the Investigations Unit in Vienna would not be involved in matters relating to UNMIK, which will continue to be handled by the existing staff as part of the ongoing investigative task force.
Investigations Division, New York
Investigator (2 P-3)
The investigations conducted by OIOS in peacekeeping missions have often required that documentation be obtained from Headquarters and that personnel be interviewed.
Two additional Investigator posts (P-3) are requested in the Investigations Division in New York to provide support to cases being investigated at Headquarters and to assist resident investigators in MINUSTAH.
Investigations Unit, Vienna
The investigative task force currently in place in UNMIK utilizes most of the resources of the Investigations Unit in Vienna and is expected to continue its activities beyond the 2005/06 period.
In addition, regional investigators in Vienna provide support to the Nairobi-based investigators, as travel to West African countries is deemed more cost-effective when undertaken from Europe.
It is proposed that the Unit be strengthened by the addition of a Chief, Peacekeeping Service (D-1) and an Investigation Assistant (General Service (Principal level)).
Chief, Peacekeeping Service (D-1)
The work of the Investigations Division has evolved and significantly increased during the 2004/05 period following an increase in the number of cases deemed significant and therefore requiring an effective response.
On 1 July 2004, OIOS strengthened its regional Investigations Unit in Vienna by transferring one P-5, one P-3 and one General Service (Other level) posts from the Investigations and Internal Audit Divisions in New York (see A/58/715, paras.
98 and 99).
The increased scope of responsibility in the Unit and collaboration with senior management in the peacekeeping missions and counterparts in the Internal Audit Division require substantive management and leadership.
It is proposed that the leadership of the Unit be strengthened by the addition of a Chief, Peacekeeping Service, post (D-1).
The incumbent will be responsible for establishing priorities, assigning staff and coordinating activities with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and peacekeeping missions.
The Chief, Peacekeeping Service, will also work with special representatives of the Secretary-General on priorities and corrective actions, liaise with prosecutors and police officials as necessary, establish investigative teams and prepare reports to be submitted to the General Assembly.
The Chief, Peacekeeping Service, will be supported by two existing Operations Managers (P-5), who are responsible for the daily supervision of the teams in the mission, ensuring that they adhere to investigative protocols, assessing when additional assistance is required and providing training on investigative techniques as needed.
Investigation Assistant (General Service (Principal level))
One additional Investigation Assistant (General Service (Principal level)) is required to provide support to the Operations Manager and the Chief, Peacekeeping Service.
The incumbent will conduct research, prepare exhibits, manage confidential files and databases and coordinate field work documentation and the preparation of report annexes.
The incumbent will also assist in conducting interviews.
Resident Investigation Units
Resident Investigator (4 P-4 and 12 P-3)
The Secretary-General, in his report on the experience with resident investigators (A/57/494), underscored the benefits of having mission-based investigators.
Resident investigators have the ability to handle large and small matters in a more timely fashion and to provide mission management with solutions to recurring or individual problems.
The presence of resident investigators has been welcomed by mission management as a means of solving local problems in a timely manner without the need to consult with Headquarters and compete for scarce investigative resources.
It is proposed that resident investigation teams be established in MONUC, MINUSTAH, ONUB and UNMIL to address immediate concerns of sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as other urgent and significant matters as they arise.
Each of the four teams would comprise one team leader (P-4) and three investigators (P-3).
The teams would have the flexibility to travel from their designated peacekeeping mission to another mission as other investigative requirements are identified.
The establishment of mission-based teams would strengthen the capacity of OIOS to provide an investigative response in a timely manner to allegations reported in peacekeeping operations.
Translator (8 national General Service)
In order to increase the ability of the resident investigators to conduct effective investigations in the missions, it is proposed that each investigative team in MONUC, MINUSTAH, ONUB and UNMIL be provided with two translators (National staff), who would be recruited locally.
Administrative Assistant (4 national General Service)
Four Administrative Assistants (national General Service) are required to provide administrative support to each of the four resident investigation teams.
Executive Office
Recruitment Assistant (General Service (Other level))
Prior to the 2003/04 period, the Resident Auditor posts were included in the peacekeeping budget and, as such, their related recruitment functions and other personnel management functions were handled by the Personnel Management and Support Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
As from 1 July 2003, the Resident Auditor posts were transferred to the support account.
Consequently, the recruitment, administration and other personnel management functions were transferred to the Executive Office of OIOS, which currently has one P-3 and one General Service (Other level) posts funded from the support account.
The transfer of the Resident Auditor posts and the increased capacity of OIOS for oversight of peacekeeping have resulted in the need for more careful management of budgetary resources, in addition to the personnel functions.
The addition of the new posts, the relatively high turnover of staff in the field missions and the workload associated with the renewal of appointments has put additional strain on the resources of the Executive Office.
One Recruitment Assistant (General Service (Other level)) post is requested to provide support in the issuance of vacancy announcements, the screening of applicants, the evaluation process, the issuance of letters of appointment, the completion of recruitment formalities, the authorization of recruitment travel and the shipment and processing of administrative actions once staff members are recruited.
(ii) Posts vacant for more than 12 months
Posts in the peacekeeping missions are considered vacant if they are not encumbered or if the incumbent has not been selected through the assessment centres operated by the Internal Audit Division.
Consequently, five posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4 and 2 General Service (Other level)) in OIOS are expected to be vacant as at 30 June 2005.
The post of Chief Resident Auditor (P-5) is rejustified in the Internal Audit Division, Peacekeeping Unit, in Nicosia.
The post is an essential part of the functions of the resident audit office, as it provides high-level audit coverage as well as oversight of and guidance with respect to audits of UNFICYP, UNDOF, UNIFIL, UNOMIG and MINURSO.
It is also necessary at the P-5 level to provide expertise, represent OIOS and liaise with senior management of the missions and for making presentations to the legislative bodies.
The functions of the Unit for the remainder of the 2004/05 period and during 2005/06 include the conduct of 10 audits currently identified in the missions concerned, the conduct of horizontal audits and the consolidation of 14 completed audits into 6 reports.
The anticipated workload of the Unit will necessitate a leadership and oversight capacity to ensure appropriate supervision of the scope of the audits and the coverage of the five missions.
The post has remained vacant because of a revision of the evaluation criteria by the OIOS review body.
Since the post has been vacant, its functions have been performed by a resident auditor temporarily assigned from another peacekeeping mission.
The post of Resident Auditor (P-4) is rejustified in the Internal Audit Division, Peacekeeping Unit, in Nicosia.
The post is required for the conduct of risk assessments and audits in the peacekeeping missions covered from the resident audit office.
Since the post has been vacant, its functions have been performed by an auditor temporarily assigned from the Peacekeeping Section of the Internal Audit Division New York.
The post has not been advertised.
In the Monitoring, Evaluation and Consulting Division, the post of Management Consulting Officer (P-4) is rejustified.
The post is required to provide management consulting services for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and peacekeeping missions in order to improve efficiency and effectiveness in conducting, managing and supporting peacekeeping operations, to enhance the organizational structure, business processes and management of the Department, and to provide targeted management support for the implementation of reform objectives.
The incumbent will support the implementation of critical mission audit recommendations by providing self-evaluation and other consulting services.
The incumbent will also prepare reports to be presented to the legislative bodies and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on issues such as the impact of restructuring and other reform activities, including recruitment policies and procedures.
While the post has been vacant, its functions have been performed through the use of temporary resources.
The functions of the post are still required to complete the workplan and fulfil the Division's mandate.
A recommended list of suitable candidates who meet the evaluation criteria have been identified for this post.
The post of Computer Information Systems Assistant (General Service (Other level)) in the Investigations Unit, Vienna, is rejustified.
The post is requested to provide administrative and information technology support to the investigation teams in the Investigations Unit of Vienna.
Originally approved in the Investigations Division, New York, this post was transferred to Vienna as from 1 July 2004.
The former incumbent of the post declined the offer to transfer from New York to Vienna.
Consequently, the functions of the post were revised and a new vacancy announcement was issued.
While the post was vacant, the functions were performed remotely using the resources in New York.
One Auditing Assistant (General Service (Other level)) post in the Peacekeeping Unit of UNMIK is no longer justified.
The post was required to provide auditing support to the resident auditors of the Unit.
The vacancy of the post is due to the retirement of the former incumbent, after which the functions were performed by the professional resident auditors.
This post is proposed for abolition effective 1 July 2005.
(iii) Posts to be redeployed
It is requested that one P-4 post currently approved in the immediate office of the Under-Secretary-General be transferred to the Internal Audit Division to strengthen the audit capacity of the Division for peacekeeping activities at Headquarters.
(iv) Pool of resident auditors
During the 2004/05 period, three new peacekeeping missions were established in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Burundi (ONUB) and Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI).
The resident audit offices in the new missions included one P-5, one P-4, one P-3 and one General Service (Other level) in UNOCI, one P-5, one P-4, one P-3 and one General Service (Other level) in ONUB and one P-5, one P-4 and two General Service (Other level) in MINUSTAH, all of which are requested to be transferred to the support account budget for the 2005/06 period.
The General Assembly, in paragraph 17 of its resolution 57/318 of 18 June 2003, requested the Office of Internal Oversight Services to deploy Resident Auditor posts as necessary, bearing in mind that whenever a mission's mandate is adjusted or terminated, the number of audit posts should be adjusted or terminated accordingly.
Two posts (1 P-4 and 1 GS (Other level)) currently approved in UNMISET are affected by this decision.
The P-4 post is requested to be abolished and the General Service (Other level) post to be redeployed to MONUC following the liquidation of UNMISET on 20 May 2005.
The Office of Internal Oversight Services has reviewed the distribution and requirements of Resident Auditor posts and reallocated them based on the budgetary size and complexity of the peacekeeping missions and in accordance with the formula used for the determination of the number and salary level of Resident Auditor posts, as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General on the experiences gained from the use of resident auditors in peacekeeping missions (A/55/735).
The pool of resident auditors will continue to be reviewed regularly and adjusted to reflect the changes in the missions' mandate and budgetary level.
The number and level of Resident Auditor and Auditing Assistant posts in the peacekeeping missions are set out in the following table:
a Thousands of United States dollars.
b General Service (Other level).
c Coverage from Middle East regional audit office.
The proposed requirement of 42 resident auditors and auditing assistants reflects the net increase of 10 posts over the numbers approved in the current 2004/05 period and is the result of the following:
(a) The transfer of four posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 General Service (Other level) and 1 national General Service) from the MINUSTAH budget to the support account;
(b) The addition of one new P-3 Resident Auditor post in MINUSTAH to strengthen the audit capacity in the Mission;
(c) The discontinuation of one Auditing Assistant post (national General Service) in MINUSTAH;
(d) The discontinuation of one Auditing Assistant post (national General Service) in MONUC, offset by the redeployment of one Auditing Assistant (General Service (Other level)) post from UNMISET;
(e) The transfer of four posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 1 General Service (Other level)) from the ONUB budget to the support account;
(f) The discontinuation of two Auditing Assistant posts in UNAMSIL: one General Service (Other level) post to be redeployed to UNOCI and one Auditing Assistant post (national General Service) to be abolished;
(g) The discontinuation of one Auditing Assistant post (national General Service) in UNMEE;
(h) The discontinuation of one General Service (Other level) Auditing Assistant post in UNMIK;
(i) The addition of three new posts (1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 1 national General Service) to strengthen the audit capacity in UNMIL;
(j) The discontinuation of one P-4 Resident Auditor post in UNMISET;
(k) The transfer of four posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 1 national General Service) from the UNOCI budget to the support account;
(l) The discontinuation of one Auditing Assistant post (national General Service) in UNOCI;
(m) The addition of one Auditing Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) in the Middle East office.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The estimate of $19,714,200 provides for salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for the continuing 61 posts and the net increase of 45 posts.
The variance of $10,319,400 relates to the net transfer 10 Resident Auditor posts from MINUSTAH, ONUB and UNOCI to the support account and to the 35 new posts in the Internal Audit Division, the Investigations Division and the Executive Office.
It also reflects an increase in standard salary costs.
The provision of $58,800 is requested for temporary assistance for two person-months (General Service (Other level)) in the Internal Audit Division to provide support during the General Assembly sessions, during the annual meeting of the resident auditors, for briefings of the members of the Fifth Committee and for logistical preparations for group training sessions, as well as to replace staff on maternity and sick leave in the Executive Office and the Investigations Units in Vienna and Nairobi.
The increase in resources approved in the current period relate to the new requirements in the Internal Audit Division and in the Investigations Units in Vienna and Nairobi.
The estimate of $180,000 provides for consultancy requirements for the 2005/06 period as follows:
In the Monitoring, Evaluation and Consulting Division, the provision of $37,500 is requested for a consultant to provide support in the areas of operational review, evaluation and assessment of military-related aspects of peacekeeping operations, with a special focus on improving the efficiency and effectiveness of military components in support of peacekeeping operations.
The consultancy will provide support to the work of the military expert currently approved in the Division to conduct multidimensional inspections of peacekeeping missions.
The Internal Audit Division requires expertise in supply chain management and construction engineering, for which a provision of $50,000 is requested for a corporate contractor to take part in an audit of supply chain management in peacekeeping operations and a provision of $15,000 is requested for an individual consultant to assist in conducting a horizontal audit of engineering projects in missions.
The latter consultancy will also include a review of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations Engineering Section.
In the Investigations Division, an amount of $25,000 is requested for expertise in the areas of handwriting and forensic analysis (physical and computer) to provide support to task force investigations in Vienna and Nairobi.
In the Internal Audit Division, an amount of $52,500 is requested for a consultant to provide training on the electronic working papers software to resident auditors from nine peacekeeping missions ($25,000); for a workshop on information technology auditing that identifies specific control mechanisms used when auditing currently installed systems, new systems under development and various activities of the Information Technology Services Division ($15,000); and for a workshop on governance to enable all auditors to gain an understanding of governance issues and apply them to audits ($12,500).
A provision of $1,223,800 is required for travel, as set out below:
In the Internal Audit Division, the estimate of $328,500 is requested for the travel of the Chief of the peacekeeping audit section to inspect, evaluate and coordinate the work done by the chief resident auditors in each peacekeeping mission and to conduct assessment exercises for interviewing candidates for peacekeeping positions in Geneva; for the travel of resident auditors to Rome to participate in the annual work-planning meetings; for the travel of chief resident auditors to New York for presentations to and briefings of the Fifth Committee; for the travel of resident auditors in the Middle East office to undertake assignments in peacekeeping missions in the region that do not have resident audit offices; and for the travel of two auditors from New York to conduct horizontal audits and audits of liquidation activities.
In the Investigations Division, the estimate of $531,700 provides for the travel of regional investigators from Vienna and Nairobi to peacekeeping missions ($451,700) and for the travel of resident investigator teams within their assigned missions to investigate matters reported to the Office of Internal Oversight Services ($80,000).
The Monitoring, Evaluation and Consulting Division requests the provision of $70,800 for one staff member to travel to MONUC, UNMIL, UNMEE, ONUB, UNOMIG and UNAMSIL in the context of the operational review and risk assessment of performance effectiveness of military components in the implementation of their mandates.
With regard to training-related travel, the Internal Audit Division requests a total amount of $237,800 for 36 resident auditors and audit assistants, the Chief of the peacekeeping audit section and the Coordinator of Resident Auditors to travel to Nairobi and Brindisi, Italy, for training on the electronic working papers software ($172,200) and for 21 resident auditors and the Coordinator of Resident Auditors to participate in a group training session on the different aspects of United Nations peacekeeping audits ($65,600).
The Investigations Division requires the amount of $44,900 for the travel of 10 regional investigators to attend a training course of the London Metropolitan Police on investigation-related skills in order to improve their ability and skills in investigative techniques as part of the continuing professional educational requirements for investigators.
The Monitoring, Evaluation and Consulting Division requests $10,100 to attend a training course in Nova Scotia, Canada, in order to provide learning resources, extend the reach and improve the quality of the military support function in the evaluation and impact assessment of peacekeeping and peacebuilding projects.
The variance relates to the additional travel requirements relating to the Resident Auditor posts transferred from MINUSTAH, ONUB and UNOCI and to the new posts in the Internal Audit Division in New York and the Investigations Units in Vienna and Nairobi.
The estimate of $261,100 provides for:
(a) Office supplies ($3,600) and the rental of office equipment ($3,600) for all posts in New York, Vienna and Nairobi, based on standard costs;
(b) Furniture for the new posts in New York ($28,800) based on standard costs;
(c) The purchase of cartridges ($3,900) and a digital camera ($600) for the Executive Office;
(d) The rental of premises for continuing posts and accommodation for the new posts ($53,000), the upgrade of security requirements ($2,000) and the acquisition of one video projector ($2,900), a card scanner and a whiteboard ($500) in the Investigations Unit, Nairobi;
(e) The rental of premises for continuing posts and accommodation for the new posts ($148,000), the acquisition of furniture for the new posts ($12,700), the upgrade of security requirements ($1,000) and the acquisition of a card scanner and whiteboard ($500) for the Investigations Unit, Vienna.
The variance is due to the new posts in the Executive Office and in the Investigations Units of Vienna and Nairobi and to the inclusion of the resources required for the rental of premises for the Investigations Units in Vienna and Nairobi in OIOS as opposed to the Executive Office of the Department of Management, which was the practice in the previous support account budgets.
Resources for the rental of premises and accommodation for the offices in Vienna and Nairobi are not managed by the Department of Management but by the United Nations Office at Vienna and the United Nations Office at Nairobi.
Therefore, resources for those requirements are reflected in OIOS.
The estimate of $48,200 provides for commercial communications ($46,800), based on past experience, and the acquisition of communications equipment ($1,400) for the new posts.
A provision of $89,600 is requested for the maintenance of information technology equipment ($35,600), the acquisition of one desktop computer for each of the seven new posts (Executive Office: 1 General Service (Other level); Internal Audit Division: 1 P-5 and 1 P-4; Investigations Unit, New York: 2 P-3; and Investigations Unit, Vienna: 1 D-1 and 1 General Service (Principal level)) ($15,400), the acquisition of six laptops for resident auditors in the three new missions ($10,800), the acquisition of two laptops for the Investigations Unit, Vienna, and one laptop for the Investigations Unit, Nairobi ($5,400), and the purchase of 26 additional electronic working papers licences for the resident audit offices in the peacekeeping missions ($22,400).
The increase over the resources approved in 2004/05 relates mostly to the requirements for the new posts and the purchase of additional electronic working paper licences.
The amount of $45,900 is requested in the Monitoring, Evaluation and Consulting Division for fees relating to training on the evaluation of military functions, to be held in Nova Scotia, and in the Internal Audit Division for the participation of resident auditors in distance-learning courses on oversight report writing.
E. Office of Legal Affairs
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a In accordance with GA resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements
(Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Analysis of resource requirements
The amount of $909,700 provides for salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for the five continuing posts.
The increase over the resources approved in the current period relates to a change in standard salary costs.
The amount of $26,200 is requested in the Office of Legal Affairs for travel to UNOCI and UNMIL to provide coordinated legal support and legal assistance to the missions.
Those visits are conducted in accordance with the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services in its report on the in-depth evaluation of legal affairs (E/AC.51/2002/5) that legal officers should travel to peacekeeping operations in order to understand legal issues in the missions.
During the 2003/04 period, the Office of Legal Affairs planned a trip to MONUC that could not be undertaken because of security concerns in the Mission.
The organization was reimbursed for the cost of the unused tickets and the travel plans were carried forward to the current 2004/05 period.
The increase over the resources approved for 2004/05 relates to the high cost of travel to the missions selected.
The provision of $1,000, at the maintenance level, is made for the rental of office equipment and the purchase of office supplies for the five continuing posts, based on standard costs.
The amount of $3,500 provides for commercial communications for the five continuing posts, based on past experience.
The amount of $8,400 provides for the maintenance of information technology equipment ($4,000) and the replacement of two desktop computers and two printers ($4,400).
The reduction from the resources approved in the current period is due to the lower quantity of equipment due for replacement in 2005/06.
A provision of $3,000 is requested, at the maintenance level, for training courses provided by the Practising Law Institute.
Department of Public Information
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a In accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/298 (para.
(c) Financial resource requirements
(Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Analysis of resource requirements
An estimate of $364,300 provides for salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for two continuing posts.
The variance reflects an increase in standard salary costs.
The requirements for consultants are outlined below:
A provision of $9,500 is requested in order to conduct a specialized training course in the areas of media relations, policy coordination with partners and logistical, operational and strategic planning during the rapid deployment phase of newly established missions.
This training is essential for updating the skills of the staff concerned, given the rapid changes occurring in the media world and the expertise and skills necessary in media technology and planning, which are not available internally.
The travel requirements are detailed below:
A provision of $23,500 is requested for the travel of one staff member to four missions to provide strategic guidance and support in situ.
An amount of $20,700 is requested for the travel of four consultants to conduct a one-week specialized training course in Brindisi, Italy, on broadcasting and multimedia policy.
The estimate of $2,900 provides for commercial communications charges based on past experience.
The amount of $2,400 provides for the maintenance of information technology equipment.
The reduction from the previous period is due to reduced requirements for information technology equipment.
An amount of $6,000 provides for the rental of equipment for the one-week training course in Brindisi ($3,000) and the purchase of supplies for the training course ($3,000).
Department of Management
Office of the Under-Secretary-General
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
(c) Financial resource requirements
(Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Justification of new posts
Secretariat of the Fifth Committee
Secretariat Services Officer (P-3)
The post of Secretariat Services Officer (P-3) is requested for the secretariat of the Administrative and Budgetary (Fifth) Committee and the Committee for Programme and Coordination in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General to strengthen the secretariat's capacity to service the Fifth Committee during its deliberations on budgets for peacekeeping operations, including the drafting of resolutions and reports.
Until the 2003/04 peacekeeping budget cycle, the financing of ongoing peacekeeping missions was considered by the Fifth Committee exclusively during the resumed session of the General Assembly held in May of each year.
However, with 14 ongoing missions (excluding UNTSO and UNMOGIP), the expansion of MONUC and the establishment of a peacekeeping operation in the Sudan, the projected total 2004/05 peacekeeping budget level is expected to increase from its originally approved level, requiring consideration by the Fifth Committee of revisions to budgets submitted previously.
In a departure from the provisions of General Assembly resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, the Fifth Committee has had to consider, since the 2003/04 budget cycle, the financing of a number of peacekeeping operations during the regular and first resumed sessions.
With peacekeeping-related meetings of the Fifth Committee now amounting to about one third of the total number of meetings, recent experience in the fifty-eighth and fifty-ninth sessions of the General Assembly has shown that the resources of the secretariat were significantly constrained owing to the increase in the number of peacekeeping operations and the consideration of peacekeeping items outside the Committee's normal cycle.
Given the increase in the number of peacekeeping operations, the establishment of a peacekeeping operation in the Sudan, the anticipated expansion of MONUC and the potential for continued growth in the complexity and number of missions, the approval of the P-3 post is considered paramount in augmenting the secretariat's capacity to effectively support its increased workload.
Joint Appeals Board
Legal Officer (P-3)
The Joint Appeals Board secretariat currently has a staffing level of six posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 3 General Service (Other level)), with five posts funded from the regular budget and one post funded from extrabudgetary resources.
With a maximum of 40 appeals resolved annually by the current three Professional staff members and 55 to 60 appeals received annually, a backlog inevitably will build up yearly.
OIOS, in its report on the management review of the appeals process, commented that the addition of a fourth Professional post, at the P-3 level, would provide the additional capacity necessary to resolve additional cases and prevent the accumulation of a backlog (A/59/408, para.
Hence, a Legal Officer post at the P-3 level is requested for the secretariat of the Joint Appeals Board.
Recent cases emanating from peacekeeping operations, which were highly complex and time-consuming, have taken up a significant portion of time.
This has caused the accumulation of a backlog of 46 cases, which needs to be cleared promptly in order for current and future cases to be resolved in a timely manner.
In the Joint Appeals Board, there has been a steady increase in the number of cases relating directly to peacekeeping operations, with 16 cases in 2002, 18 cases in 2003 and 39 cases in 2004.
Because of the complexity and time-consuming nature of the appeals process, the current backlog of 46 cases began to form in 2003.
When delays become excessive and chronic, the entire system of internal justice loses credibility; hence the staff feel less inclined to resort to a system that they do not trust and that is too slow and not credible.
The tardiness in resolving cases leads to more disgruntled staff and less responsible managers.
The Organization has paid monetary awards to applicants solely because of the delay in the appeals process.
The members of the Tribunal have made it clear that they will continue to award compensation to applicants for undue delays until the Administration is in greater compliance with its own established time limits for the resolution of cases.
To date, regular budget resources have been utilized to assist in the resolution of peacekeeping cases.
Given the significant increase in peacekeeping cases over the past year and with the current backlog, the Joint Appeals Board needs an additional P-3 Legal Officer post in order to clear and process peacekeeping cases in a timely manner.
Panel of Counsel
Legal Officer (P-4)
A Legal Officer at the P-4 level is needed for the Panel of Counsel in order to strengthen its capacity to adequately advise staff on cases and provide guidance to the members of the Panel as well as providing support to Panels of Counsel at other duty stations.
With the current staffing level comprising one support staff member (General Service (Other level)) funded from the regular budget and one P-2 Coordinator funded from extrabudgetary resources, the Coordinator also relies on the good will of former and serving staff members to volunteer their time in order to assist the ever-increasing volume of staff members requesting assistance from the Panel.
In addition, the current level of limited resources available to the Panel severely limits its ability to adequately represent and advise staff.
During 2003, out of a total of 211 cases submitted, 17.1 per cent were related to peacekeeping whereas in 2004, 11.6 per cent of the cases pertained to peacekeeping.
However, in 2003 and 2004, of the peacekeeping cases, 75 per cent and 54 per cent respectively came from staff members serving in missions.
The statistical information does not clearly indicate the complexity and time-consuming nature of peacekeeping cases.
Communication between the field missions and Headquarters is often difficult and adds to the time needed in individual cases.
Difficulties in communication include time differences and a lack of technical facilities available to staff members, particularly when they are no longer employed or have been suspended.
The complexity of disciplinary cases in particular also adds to the time needed for representation of staff members in the field.
Because of the inadequate resources of the Panel of Counsel, OIOS concluded that there was an imbalance between the resources available to respondents and those available to appellants (A/59/408, para.
OIOS recommended that a Legal Adviser at the P-4 level be added to the Panel of Counsel.
The General Assembly, in its resolution 57/307 of 15 April 2003, had requested the Secretary-General to strengthen the Panel of Counsel consistent with recommendations of the forthcoming report of OIOS.
A more professional and fully supported Panel of Counsel will improve the calibre of submissions brought to all appeals bodies and consequently will contribute to early resolution and improve the overall standard of the resulting reports and judgements.
With adequate resources to properly represent cases, those without legal foundation might be avoided and consideration of remaining cases would be expedited by virtue of their clear presentation on the merits.
With the provision of a P-4 Legal Officer, there will be a higher proportion of cases being settled at early stages and informally.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The provision of $514,700 relates to salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for two continuing posts and the new posts.
The variance is due to the new posts and a change in standard salary costs.
In the Executive Office, $60,000 is required for general temporary assistance to cover maternity and sick leave and peak periods in the Department of Management.
This request remains at the same level as in the 2003/04 and 2004/05 financial periods.
The variance compared with the amount approved in the current period relates to reductions in the proposed resources made by the legislative bodies.
Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
(c) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
(d) Justification of new posts
Peacekeeping Financing Division
Budget/Finance Officer (2 P-3)
The number of active peacekeeping missions, excluding UNTSO and UNMOGIP, which are funded from the regular budget, has risen from 11 in the 2003/04 period to 14 in the 2004/05 period, as three new and multidimensional missions were established by the Security Council in the first quarter of 2004 (UNOCI, MINUSTAH and ONUB), MONUC was expanded and an operation was established in the Sudan.
Consequently, the peacekeeping budget level will increase to around $5.0 billion per annum.
Experience has shown that the large, complex missions require a team of two budget officers in order to meet legislative reporting deadlines for the preparation and submission of budget reports.
Missions such as MONUC and the new mission in the Sudan require two officers to produce budget estimates on a timely basis and for financial backstopping, including monitoring of budget implementation, administration of trust funds and the provision of consistent guidance to colleagues in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the missions.
Until recently, the current budget/finance officers were able to manage two active missions and one closed mission, in addition to other tasks of a more general nature.
As a result of the complexity of and developments in certain large missions (and sometimes surrounding areas), they do not conform to the normal reporting cycle and sometimes revised budgets are required in a given financial period as a result of a Security Council resolution to enlarge the mandate of a mission.
During a 12-month reporting cycle, the production of reports is a continuous process with tight deadlines.
Performance and budget reports are prepared consecutively and cannot be prepared simultaneously, as performance data is a key measure used in the analysis of budget requirements.
Consequently, an internal review of the Division's workload has been undertaken in which it was determined that a total of 193 work-months were required to support 14 missions (excluding UNTSO and UNMOGIP), the support account and UNLB, as well as a potential peacekeeping mission in the Sudan.
The Division currently has the capacity for a total of 168 work-months for P-3 and P-4 posts, resulting in a shortfall of 25 work-months.
To augment the Division's capacity during the 2004/05 period, approved general temporary assistance resources have been utilized to recruit a Budget/Finance Officer to temporarily support ONUB.
Against this background, two additional Budget/Finance Officer posts (P-3) are necessary to strengthen the capacity of the Division.
One post will be required to support ONUB and one post to increase support to MONUC.
In view of the magnitude, complexity and unpredictable nature of the Mission, it is essential that support for MONUC be increased from one to two posts to meet the substantial increase in financial backstopping of the operation and to facilitate the preparation of financial reports within the deadlines for legislative review.
The Division now risks slippage in reviewing budgets and preparing reports for missions on a regular financial cycle to meet the legislative deadlines for all missions.
The additional posts will enable the Division to reallocate assignments in order to ensure that deadlines for the submission of reports to the General Assembly and workload demands for the support of missions are met.
Accounts Division
Peacekeeping Accounts Section
Finance Officer (2 P-3) and Accounting Assistant (1 General Service (Other level))
The Peacekeeping Accounts Section of the Accounts Division is responsible for all financial transactions, including the issuance of annual financial statements, for all ongoing and closed peacekeeping operations.
In addition, the Section monitors field accounts, consults with field missions on accounting issues, provides policy guidance, prepares critical analyses and reconciliations and supports the resolution of weaknesses and audit concerns.
The workload of the Section has increased significantly owing to the establishment of three new missions in the first quarter of 2004, the expansion of MONUC, the initial phase of the operation in the Sudan and the introduction of strategic deployment stocks in UNLB.
Moreover, recent experience has shown that several large missions have become more complex and multidimensional, which requires a greater level of support from Headquarters to ensure that all financial transactions are in compliance with United Nations financial rules and regulations.
The actual number of transactions between 2002 and 2004 increased by 12 per cent, from 266,602 to 297,934.
It is projected that in the period 2005/06 the workload will further increase by approximately 19 per cent when the full year's transactions are included and the impact of the surge in peacekeeping operations is fully realized.
Thus, the overall increase from 2002 to 2006 is projected to be 31 per cent.
During this period, budgeted expenditure is projected to increase by over 50 per cent.
The increase in expenditure affects all areas of the Accounts Division as a result of the anticipated significant increase in the number of accounting transactions to be recorded.
The increase in workload has greatly affected the Section and strained its current level of resources.
Consequently, two Finance Officer posts (P-3) and one Accounting Assistant (General Service (Other level)) post are proposed to strengthen the capacity of the Section to respond to the exceptional growth in workload and to ensure proper oversight, follow-up and attainment of goals specified in the results-based-budgeting framework.
Payroll Section
Accounting Assistant (General Service (Other level))
With the surge in peacekeeping operations, the number of peacekeeping staff on the payroll has also greatly increased, adding to a workload that was already increasing, with mission appointments and separations becoming more frequent.
The number of peacekeeping staff on the payroll increased 21.5 per cent between June 2003 and November 2004, when the actual number of peacekeeping staff on the payroll was 4,098.
The current rate of increase is about 100 new staff per month.
At that rate, by July 2006 there will be 5,298 staff on payroll.
Given that one person can accurately process 500 staff per month and with the current staffing level of eight, there is a shortage in the number of posts required to process the 1,298 additional staff.
Therefore, an additional Accounting Assistant post (General Service (Other level)) is requested to assist with the increased workload.
Insurance and Disbursement Service
Accounting Assistant (General Service (Other level))
Consequent to the increase in overall staffing in the peacekeeping missions, there have been sharp increases in the volume of health insurance applications and benefits processing.
From 2002 to 2004, annual insurance application activity specifically related to peacekeeping staff increased by 77 per cent, from 1,835 transactions to 3,254.
The peacekeeping component of the insurance transactions increased from 23 per cent in 2002 to 31 per cent in 2004, with activity in January 2005 bringing the increase to 35 per cent.
Past experience indicates that one person in the insurance section can process requirements for an average of 1,000 staff members.
Given the number of peacekeeping staff who elect to have insurance, five support account-funded staff will be required to cover peacekeeping-related insurance services.
Funds from sources other than the support account have been and continue to be used to cover insurance services related to peacekeeping activities, however, this situation can no longer be sustained, as those staff need to tend to the populations for which the funds have been provided.
Without the additional staffing resources of the support account, the insurance section would struggle to meet the insurance requirements of the increasing number of peacekeeping staff clients.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The estimate of $9,705,800 provides for salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for 69 continuing posts and 7 new posts.
The increase of $874,500 relates to the seven new posts and to a change in standard salary costs.
An estimate of $409,000 provides for general temporary assistance required in Accounts Division and the Treasury.
Accounts Division
An amount of $300,000 in general temporary assistance is required in the Accounts Division to ensure that there is no backlog in the processing of payments to Member States, staff and vendors or in the services provided to peacekeeping operations.
The increase in the number of missions creates an increase of 12 per cent in the number of transactions processed by the Peacekeeping Accounts Section, a 15 per cent increase in the number of staff on payroll and a 77 per cent increase in annual insurance activity specifically related to peacekeeping staff between June 2002 and June 2004.
Further workload increases are expected by 2005/06 once the impact of the surge in peacekeeping operations is fully realized.
While the proposed new posts will alleviate some of the additional workload, the continual increase in volume requires additional temporary assistance (at the maintenance level) to ensure that the workload is processed in a timely manner and to achieve the goals specified in the results-based-budgeting framework.
It provides coverage for peak periods as well as for the replacement of staff on extended sick leave and maternity leave.
Treasury
The provision of $109,000 for general temporary assistance in the Treasury covers 12 person-months (General Service (Other level)) to assist in the considerable increased workload relating to foreign exchange transactions and the amount of funds invested.
It also provides for four months of maternity leave for one staff member at the same level.
The Treasury is responsible for all investments, banking arrangements and payments made through Headquarters on behalf of peacekeeping missions.
Those payments include salaries for Headquarters and mission-based personnel and payments to Member States and vendors.
Disbursements are made in various currencies, with the result that over 80 per cent of the total foreign exchange transactions are related to peacekeeping payments.
The investment section carries out all investments and foreign exchange transactions.
The workload of the section has increased significantly owing to the expanded peacekeeping operations, particularly in respect of the volume and number of foreign exchange transactions.
With the increase in the number and magnitude of peacekeeping missions in 2004, the total amount of foreign exchange transactions increased by 40 per cent, from $331,679,667 in 2003 to $462,272,868 in 2004.
In addition, the amount of funds invested on behalf of peacekeeping operations increased by 22 per cent, from $1,248,376,372 in 2003 to $1,525,968,662 in 2004, with a further increase projected for 2005/06.
The number of foreign exchange purchases has increased from 280 to 500 and the number of electronic fund transfers from 1,400 to 2,700, representing a nearly 100 per cent increase in the workload over the previous financial period.
Currently there is one Investment Assistant (General Service (Other level)) funded from the support account.
An additional General Service (Other level) post is required to assist in the considerable increase in workload directly related to peacekeeping operations.
The decrease in general temporary assistance requirements for 2005/06 is due to a decreased requirement in Peacekeeping Financing Division, as posts have been requested to strengthen the capacity of the Division.
The consultants required by the Treasury, for a total amount of $64,400, are described below:
The provision of $64,400 allows for the completion and refinement of the SWIFT cash-management system, which will permit the automated matching of cash and investment transactions and the consolidation of all United Nations bank accounts into fewer accounts.
Automation ensures more accurate information regarding the availability of funds and offers flexibility to book adjustments such as finance and service charges.
Bank account pooling will simplify account management and reduce the overall costs of banking associated with peacekeeping operations.
The amount of $201,000 provides for the travel requirements as detailed below.
The amount of $40,000 is required by the Peacekeeping Financing Division for a senior manager and a budget officer to undertake mission visits to UNOCI, MINUSTAH, UNMIL, UNOMIG and MONUC.
The Division plans to train an additional 215 mission staff in the use of the Funds Monitoring Tool ($42,000), as well as delivering a results-based-budgeting workshop for the staff of MINUSTAH ($4,000).
The amount of $38,000 is requested for the Accounts Division for three trips to missions to provide in situ guidance on financial rules and regulations and accounting and insurance policies.
Additionally, the amount of $10,000 is requested for a finance training workshop aimed at updating the financial skills of staff in the missions and in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
In the Treasury, one staff member will travel to all three newly established missions, as well as to UNLB and the Sudan, to assess and address banking needs and procedures ($36,000).
As banking processes advance rapidly on the global level, the Department needs to keep abreast of changes in order to implement money-saving trends in the missions with respect to cash management and ensure multi-currency convertibility for the United Nations system.
To that end, two staff members will attend an international banking conference ($16,000).
Training is required for one staff member on information technology that is used to consolidate and manage accounts (information technology/banking conference for SWIFT, $15,000).
The total of $167,500 provides for requirements in the Peacekeeping Financing Division ($10,200), the Accounts Division ($26,000) and the Treasury ($131,300).
In the Peacekeeping Financing Division, the amount will cover training supplies for the results-based-budgeting workshop in MINUSTAH, training supplies for training on the Funds Monitoring Tool ($5,100) and course fees for the external training of two staff members of the Division ($5,100) for the upgrading of substantive skills in budget management.
In the Accounts Division, funds will be used to cover training fees for five staff members to update their skills in the area of finance ($16,000) and three staff members in the areas of management ($5,000) and information technology ($5,000).
The Treasury requires resources for bank charges ($96,000) and fees for a certification programme in which investment officers are trained in ethics and regulations according to the guidelines of the Certified Financial Analyst Institute ($35,300).
Office of Human Resources Management
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
(c) Financial resource requirements
(Thousands of United States dollars)
a In 2003/04 and 2004/05, resource requirements in the medical category were included under other supplies, services and equipment.
(d) Justification of new posts
Medical Services Division
Medical Doctor (P-4)
One new Medical Doctor post at the P-4 level is requested for the medical services team.
Despite the recent growth in peacekeeping operations, the Medical Services Division has had only two approved physician posts from the support account since 1992/93 to provide medical support for the staff of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations as well as for all personnel in 16 peacekeeping missions (including UNTSO and UNMOGIP), a new mission in the Sudan and UNLB, including the civilian and military components.
During the 2003/04 period, the Medical Services Division completed 585 medical exams of staff going on mission travel or being deployed; reviewed 6,115 overseas medical exams of mission staff, military observers and civilian police; provided 1,265 immunizations to staff going on mission travel or deployment; issued 1,600 medical kits; certified 6,000 cases of sick leave; and provided continuous medical services.
From 2003/04 to the present, there has been a 50 per cent increase in the number of medical exams of staff going on mission travel or being deployed and a 22.5 per cent increase in medical clearances for new staff, military observers and civilian police (from 6,115 to 7,492).
In 2003/04, there were 456 medical evacuations/repatriations of civilian staff, military observers, civilian police and troops and 509 medical examinations.
It should be noted that only the Medical Services Division can authorize medical evacuations.
Given the increase in the number of peacekeeping operations in areas that pose serious medical challenges, the number of medical evacuation cases is projected to increase even further in the 2005/06 period.
The number of medical services provided to new staff, such as medical examinations and medical clearances, is expected to increase as missions reach full staff capacity.
Since 1999, general temporary assistance has been provided for a full-time physician on a temporary basis.
The continuation of the current arrangement is unsatisfactory, as the workload generated by peacekeeping missions continues to grow and the Division must be adequately staffed in order to meet the medical demands created by the increase in services provided.
As the number of missions continues to grow in number and complexity and missions continue to be located in theatres of operation which give rise to serious medical challenges, the Division will need the additional capacity of a Medical Doctor to address the increase in workload and respond effectively to medical emergencies.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The amount of $3,179,300 provides for salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for continuing posts and one new post.
The variance is due mainly to the new post and to a change in standard salary costs.
An amount of $272,100 is requested for general temporary assistance.
The variance reflects an overall increase in the requirement for general temporary assistance.
Medical Services Division
General temporary assistance in the amount of $124,700 is necessary to finance one nurse for six months to meet demand during a peak peacekeeping surge in view of the three newly established missions and the upcoming mission in the Sudan, as well as one X-ray technician for two months to cover sick leave and annual leave.
The provision also covers 10 months of administrative support in order to prevent medical backlogs and process medical clearances and sick leave certifications.
With general temporary assistance during the 2003/04 period, the Medical Service was able to clear the majority of the backlog.
However, in the current period, no general temporary assistance has been provided for this purpose.
Consequently, the number of medical clearances and sick leave certifications has continued to accumulate, creating a backlog which the Medical Service, without the extra staffing capacity needed to absorb the additional workload, was unable to clear.
All the staff were redirected to work on rapid deployment to the newly established missions and the subsequent phases of deployment of contingent and civilian personnel.
Division for Organizational Development
A provision of $95,800 is requested under general temporary assistance for the Administrative Law Unit of the Division for Organizational Development to recruit a Legal Officer at the P-4 level for six months in order to promptly deal with sexual exploitation and abuse cases that are being referred from the peacekeeping missions.
At end of February 2005, 7 cases had been referred to the Administrative Law Unit and at least 30 additional cases were expected in the following weeks.
More cases are likely to be referred from various peacekeeping missions as investigations continue.
Depending on the factual and legal complexity of the cases, it is expected that with the additional capacity, all cases will be able to be reviewed without delay and will proceed through the disciplinary process in a timely manner.
In addition, the Legal Officer will support the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in devising a strategic approach for the prevention of such occurrences with respect to civilian staff, including mission-specific policies and monitoring arrangements.
The existing resources within the Office of Human Resources Management cannot absorb this additional and unforeseen surge in workload.
Given the sensitivity of these cases and to ensure their priority attention and prompt resolution, additional resources are required in the Office.
Operational Services Division
An amount of $51,600 in general temporary assistance is requested for four months of professional-level staff to assist with the finalization of the design and development of the methodology for self-monitoring in the area of human resources management in the Personnel Management and Support Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and in peacekeeping missions.
Monitoring is an essential function in the overall framework of continued delegation of authority of human resources management to missions.
It ensures that the delegated authority is exercised within the established rules and regulations of the Organization and it is one of the tools of oversight of the Office of Human Resources Management.
Such tools are therefore urgently needed and are crucial to the process of empowering the missions to begin self-monitoring.
Given the limited capacity of the Division, additional capacity is sought in the provision for general temporary assistance to assist in this important stage of the process.
The requirements for consultants are set out below:
An amount of $50,000 is requested by the Division for Organizational Development to support the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in building capacity to address issues of conduct in field missions.
Consultants will provide substantive expertise to the staff of the Human Resources Policy Service to advise it on Department of Peacekeeping Operations human resources policies regarding the Organization's policy on harassment and discrimination, including provisions on investigating allegations.
Advice will also include the finalization of human resources policy guidelines on other mission-related human resources matters.
The Division for Organizational Development will hire an expert to advise it on the creation and launching of a prevention and awareness programme in the areas of harassment and diversity ($20,000) to reinforce and implement the new policy.
At this time, instances of harassment and discrimination in peacekeeping operations need to be prevented and addressed.
An amount of $300,000 is requested to support consistency within the overall organizational policy on training and learning, including the integration and mainstreaming of core values and core and managerial competencies (e.g., ethics and integrity) in Secretariat-wide learning programmes, the customization of existing Secretariat-wide programmes to meet the specific needs of peacekeeping missions and the provision of training to trainers to enhance training capacity in the missions, in partnership with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The travel requirements are set out below.
The Medical Services Division requests an amount of $30,000 in order to carry out five on-site assessments of mission medical facilities and five evaluations of regional medical evacuation centres.
The Division for Organizational Development requests an amount of $122,200 in order to review the daily subsistence allowance in eight missions, conduct salary surveys and reviews in five missions and provide advice and guidance to field missions on the overall organizational policy for learning and training.
The Operational Services Division requests an amount of $73,400 to implement the human resources self-monitoring capacity in four missions, thereby allowing the missions to control more of their recruitment processes.
This plan is in line with the overall increased delegation of authority to missions.
The maintenance level provision of $100,000 provides for vaccines for the Medical Services Division.
The estimate of $5,000 provides for one video camera, which will be used in train-the-trainer sessions.
The variance is due to lower requirements under training supplies for the Division for Organizational Development.
Office of Central Support Services
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a One P-3, one P-2 and three Security Service posts previously approved in the Security and Safety Service were transferred to the new Department of Safety and Security as at 1 January 2005 in accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/276.
(c) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
a Resources do not include amounts relating to the posts in the Security and Safety Service that were transferred to the Department of Safety and Security on 1 January 2005 in accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/276.
(d) Justification of new posts
Procurement Service
Chief, Logistics and Transportation Section (P-5)
The Logistics and Transportation Section procures air and sea transportation services, freight-forwarding services and vehicles.
The section has continuously processed over 50 per cent of the procurement value of the entire Procurement Service, primarily supporting the transportation requirements of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The Section currently has six Professional staff members (1 P-4, 3 P-3 and 2 P-2) and nine support staff, seven of whom have been assigned to perform specific procurement functions owing to a significant increase in transportation procurement requirements, which continue to grow.
The Procurement Service currently has three P-5 posts, one funded from the regular budget, one from the support account and one from extrabudgetary resources, which are heading the Headquarters Procurement Section, the Field Procurement Section and the Support Services Section.
As each of the sections requires leadership and oversight at the P-5 level in order to function effectively, the Procurement Service has reviewed its internal organization on numerous occasions over the past few years and has considered and experimented with various alternative organizational structures.
These include the move of a P-5 post from one of the other sections to supervise the Logistics and Transportation Section.
However, effective managerial oversight of the section that was left without a senior manager significantly suffered as a result of this gap.
In addition, the Procurement Service has experimented with merging two of the sections into a more horizontal structure, but the arrangement resulted in a workload that was completely unmanageable for a single manager, and oversight in the teams concerned dropped significantly during that time.
Following those experiences, the current structure of the Service, with the provision of a senior manager post at the P-5 level, can optimally meet the needs of the Service and provide the much-needed managerial capacity and oversight function.
Concomitant with the recent expansion of peacekeeping activities, procurement in the areas of food rations, fuel and power supply and accommodation to support the infrastructural and basic operational requirements of the peacekeeping missions has also grown and increased in complexity.
The Procurement Service has been required to strengthen and improve its rapid deployment capacity and capability in order to be able to respond efficiently to the demands of peacekeeping missions and to replenish the strategic deployment stocks.
The effective delivery of procurement services for transportation and logistical support constitutes an essential part of the success of the rapid deployment process.
The change in workload in the Logistics and Transportation Section can be seen in the dramatic increase in purchase orders and requisition lines over the past year.
In 2003, the Logistics and Transportation Section processed a total of 894 purchase orders and requisition lines while in 2004 the total increased to 2,070, representing an increase of 132 per cent in one financial year.
Currently, the Procurement Service has numerous systems agreements in place for major items such as vehicles, generators and prefabricated buildings, which have decreased lead times and enabled more economical large-scale purchases.
In addition, the Procurement Service has developed an electronic link between Headquarters and the field missions' procurement management system, enabling missions to place orders against Headquarters systems contracts directly to procure needed products expeditiously.
The Procurement Service monitors the use and expenditures of systems contracts so that assistance can be offered in a timely manner if necessary.
However, it is anticipated that the workload will further increase by 10 per cent in the period 2005/06.
Moreover, the total value of procurement in 2003/04 was estimated at $600 million, increasing to $900 million in 2004/05 and projected to increase to $1 billion in 2005/06.
Although the systems contracts that are in place, such as for the procurement of vehicles, will reduce the number of purchase orders, the complexity of developing systems contracts, including the need to undertake market surveys, update technical specifications and arrange for after-sales service will require a higher percentage of a staff member's time to finalize one systems contract.
In order to manage the increase in workload, the Section has streamlined some processes and the staff have reorganized the manner in which they function so as to work more effectively.
To reinforce the benefits realized as a result of the changes, the Section needs direction and leadership from a chief who has the authority and scope of responsibility to provide the required managerial direction and organization, which will enable staff to work more effectively, resulting in shorter lead times, more delivery targets being met, a reduction in procurement errors and faster bidding processes.
The Chief is expected to plan, develop and manage procurement activities, draft position papers and reports for intergovernmental bodies, improve effectiveness in working methods and process reviews, develop training and, most importantly, coordinate, manage, lead and direct the staff of the Section.
In order to meet the essential needs in the area of transportation and logistical operations and to procure high-value and often technically complex services effectively, the Chief of the Logistics and Transportation Section is required to play a strategic role in the efficiency and expediency of services and pursue the continuous improvement of procurement procedures with a scope of responsibility that also includes policy development regarding procurement processes.
Consequently, a post at the P-5 level is proposed for the function of Chief of the Logistics and Transportation Section.
Archives and Records Management Section
Information Management Officer (P-4)
The importance of records cannot be overstated in relation to accountability, policy formation and managerial decision-making, the development of best practices and protection of the interests of the Organization and the rights of staff, clients and Member States.
They are also of enormous research value to Member States when available as archives.
However, the ability of the Organization and the Member States to gain immediate access to documentary evidence and important accountability records from peacekeeping operations for lessons-learned and other purposes is severely limited.
Many documents are in paper format and are susceptible to environmental factors, fire and the normal decomposition that happens with time.
It is crucial that the Organization have the capacity to ensure that as many historical and transactional documents are properly stored, organized and archived as possible.
To that end, the Archives and Records Management Section is working with the Information Technology Services Division to upload records into the Enterprise Content Management programme, a database that stores, organizes and compartmentalizes records for easy research and retrieval.
Historically, however, the transfer of complete, authentic and reliable records (as evidence of mission activity) to Headquarters has been extremely limited.
Since 1990, 33 peacekeeping missions have been liquidated and 8 of them have transferred no records at all to the custody of the Archives and Records Management Section; the records remain in storage in various places.
In the remaining 25 missions, it is estimated that the Section has received fewer than 50 per cent of the records that should have been transferred to its custody.
In addition, currently 60 per cent of archival peacekeeping records are not fully catalogued because additional human resources have not been made available.
In 2005/06, records from UNIKOM (585 cartons received in 2004) and UNMIBH (3,485 cartons currently awaiting processing in a New Jersey warehouse) will be targeted for cataloguing.
An Information Management Officer at the P-4 level is urgently required to improve momentum towards sound records management practices in the field by providing two core services: advisory services and liaison with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and all field missions on records-related matters and effective management of field records when they arrive at Headquarters to expedite their availability for internal and public use.
Records management expertise is particularly crucial during the mission start-up and liquidation phases and is necessary for record-keeping, archives, information security and information management visits to field missions in liaison with field missions.
In order to service Member States' increasing requirements for access to peacekeeping archives, the records manager will oversee the processing of digital and paper-based field records, including selecting and cataloguing archives, and will effect the timely disposal of administrative records.
Currently, 60 per cent of queries on documentation from the public and Member States relate to peacekeeping, and the Archives and Records Management Section currently does not have any resources approved under the support account.
The incumbent will support the provision of on-site and distance advisory services to missions at all stages of their life cycle, with emphasis on the start-up and liquidation phases, which involves conducting needs assessments, developing mission-specific standard operating procedures and guidance and conducting training at two missions per year.
At Headquarters, the incumbent will be the point of contact for all records-related inquiries from the field and will oversee the processing of field records by one Information Officer at the P-2 level (to be requested under general temporary assistance) and one support post.
Should the Division not get the resources for the post, documents would be processed at a much slower rate, possibly increasing the number of documents that cannot be recovered or restored and reducing the amount of historical material to which Member States and the public have access.
(e) Analysis of resource requirements
The estimate of $5,661,000 provides for salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for 44 continuing posts and 2 new posts.
The variance reflects the addition of two posts and a change in standard salary costs.
The estimate of $369,400 relates to requirements in the Procurement Service and the Archives and Records Management Section, as outlined below.
Procurement Service
The shipping of goods procured from vendors estimated to cost less than $30,000 per shipment has been arranged through the United Nations-contracted freight forwarder.
Under the current arrangement, the freight forwarder solicits offers from shipping companies and presents the recommendation for decision and approval by the Procurement Service.
The number of shipping services arranged through the contracted freight forwarders amounted to 327 cases in the fiscal year ended 30 June 2004 and is estimated at 400 cases for the fiscal year ending 30 June 2005.
During the 2003/04 budget year, freight expenditures associated with shipments to the peacekeeping missions arranged by the United Nations freight forwarder amounted to $793,884 and for the 2004/05 budget year, the expenditure was $647,364 as at 30 November 2004.
At that rate, the projected expenditure for the period 2005/06 will be $2.0 million.
The Procurement Service has reviewed the current arrangements for freight forwarding as recommended by OIOS in its audit of the freight-forwarding contracts at Headquarters and, in order to improve effectiveness and efficiency of the freight-forwarding operations, it proposes that this function be performed by three staff members (General Service (Other level)).
The savings achieved by this initiative and process improvements will be reported in the 2007/08 budget reporting cycle.
Archives and Records Management Section
The amount of $120,200 provides for general temporary assistance, at the P-2 level, to identify and archive sensitive records from peacekeeping operations.
Under the guidance and direction of the proposed Information Management Officer (P-4), the individual will begin the time-consuming task of cataloguing and archiving some 4,070 cartons of files, some of which are highly sensitive and confidential records.
It is projected that the number of cartons of files will increase as missions begin to transfer more files to Headquarters for archiving.
The variance of $266,200 reflects the cost of the pilot project in the Procurement Service.
The requirements for consultants are set out below.
The United Nations is rapidly expanding the use of electronic and digital technologies to create, capture, transmit, manage and store records securely in electronic or digital formats.
If the Archives and Records Management Section is to fulfil its significant involvement in the United Nations-wide Enterprise Content Management programme, a consultant with the required combination of information technology and records management skills is necessary.
Currently, this expertise and resource capacity does not exist within the Section.
The change to electronic archiving highlights the emerging need to have staff with sound knowledge of information technology skills and their application in managing electronic records and digital archives effectively.
The Information Technology Services Division is beginning two pilot programmes, ECM and CRM, which are both greatly needed in the Organization to make information and documents accessible and to preserve them.
In order to standardize and facilitate the creation, storage and management of the vast amount of structured and unstructured information within the United Nations, there is a critical need to implement one programme that can compile and synchronize the information from different sources and venues.
ECM will realize improved accessibility and quality for all content types throughout all departments and missions.
The ECM project is a joint venture of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Archives and Records Management Section and will allow numerous missions and departments at Headquarters to readily access information and documents from a web-based portal.
Consultants will provide expert advice on the configuration and implementation of the ECM pilot programme in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the areas of document management, workflow and imaging, web content management, web portal functionality, and records management and collaboration.
The programmes will make information, including that which was originally provided in e-mail form, accessible and will protect it ($401,600).
The CRM programme will support, automate and streamline existing business processes according to industry best practices in the areas of help desk support, service management and workforce tracking.
The key functionality areas include call centre and service management, information technology service management, asset management, business analytics and reporting, relationship management and project management.
Consultants will lend expertise in the areas of business process engineering, information technology quality assurance and information technology documentation for this pilot project ($401,600).
The Information Technology Services Division has developed information and communication technology standards around business case development, project management and business process re-engineering in conjunction with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The Division will use a consultant to train Department of Peacekeeping Operations staff on those standards and provide support ($149,200).
Information technology training for both ECM and CRM will be conducted by the systems experts ($270,000).
The $62,000 requested for the Procurement Service is for experts to deliver training modules on the latest procurement techniques, on ethical and management issues and for special training sessions in rapid intervention for mission start-up to 20 staff members of the Service and the missions.
This will enable the Service to have a standby capacity of 20 staff members who will be trained to initiate procurement operations in the field during the rapid deployment phase.
Given the need to respond to the increasing workload resulting from the newly established missions, the Service does not have the capacity or the expertise to develop the two training modules and to deliver them.
The variance of $1,371,400 is primarily due to the CRM and ECM projects developed by the Information Technology Services Division with the objective of preserving United Nations historical documents, bringing missions up to business industry standards for high-level business cases and compiling data together in one accessible system.
The details of travel requirements are set out below:
The Archives and Records Management Section requires an amount of $28,000 for planned travel to UNIFIL and the Sudan to retrieve valuable records for processing and security.
The Information Technology Services Division requires an amount of $93,000 for travel of consultants to peacekeeping missions to implement information communication technology standards, ECM and CRM and to train mission focal points in the use of all programme software.
The Procurement Service requires an amount of $300,000 for planned travel to missions to conduct management reviews of procurement processes, to provide technical and managerial advice on procurement issues and to conduct training in procurement, including rapid intervention, to start-up missions.
The variance of $185,800 is due mainly to higher travel requirements in the Information Technology Services Division and the Procurement Service.
The estimate of $151,000 is required for the Procurement Service to facilitate the timely payment of freight charges related to shipments of goods for peacekeeping missions ($100,000) and for training supplies for rapid intervention ($6,000) and for the Information Technology Services Division for the purchase of equipment needed for the CRM project ($45,000).
The variance of $148,200 is due mainly to the proposed requirements for freight charges and the pilot programmes being implemented by the Information Technology Services Division.
Overall resource requirements of the Department of Management
(a) Human resource requirements
a Excludes one P-3, one P-2 and three Security Service posts previously approved in the Security and Safety Service that were transferred to the new Department of Safety and Security as at 1 January 2005 in accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/276.
(b) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
a The resource performance for 2003/04, the approved apportionment for 2004/05 and the estimates for 2005/06 exclude the provisions relating to the Security and Safety Service, which was transferred from the Department of Management to the Department of Safety and Security as at 1 January 2005, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/276.
b In 2003/04 and 2004/05, resource requirements in the medical category were included under other supplies, services and equipment.
(c) Executive Office: centrally administered costs
The amount of $9,387,200 provides for the rental of premises for all posts in the support account ($9,248,000), office supplies ($48,400) and rental of office equipment ($15,100) for all posts in the Department of Management and furniture ($75,700) for the new posts in the Department.
Rental of premises does not include a provision for Resident Auditor posts, for which missions will continue to provide accommodation.
The estimate for the rental of premises also excludes provisions relating to posts in the OIOS Investigations Units at Vienna and Nairobi, which are reflected under the respective office.
The variance relates to the requirements for the new posts and to a change in standard costs for rental of premises.
A provision of $229,100 is made for commercial communications ($226,500) and the acquisition of communication equipment for the new posts ($2,600).
The increase of $20,300 over the previous period is due mainly to communication requirements related to the proposed new posts.
A total amount of $1,575,200 is needed for information technology maintenance, equipment and services and includes information technology programme proposals in the Peacekeeping Financing Division and the Information Technology Services Division.
The amount of $985,000 provides for the development, maintenance and support of a budget formulation database system for peacekeeping budgets and the support account, including software licences, implementation and customization, hardware, software upgrades and disaster recovery to ensure 99 per cent tool availability.
The current tool to collect, analyse and formulate peacekeeping budgets comprises approximately 60 spreadsheet files containing 180 forms with corresponding narrative instructions.
Taking into account the increased volume, complexity and number of peacekeeping operations, the current tool is no longer adequate, primarily from a data security point of view.
It is now necessary to shift to a database system to improve data management for automated validation of accuracy and integrity.
The current spreadsheet tool is not an integrated system and does not provide the same level of security in data management, as every entry needs to be repeatedly checked.
The current, more manual, tool has reached the limit of its capacity, as demonstrated by the fact that the United Nations, for preparation of the regular budget, and other United Nations offices, programmes and agencies, such as the United Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations Development Programme, have shifted to database systems despite having less annual data volume than the combined peacekeeping operations.
In addition, the management of the budget formulation process would benefit from the structure provided by a database system.
The formulation process includes a number of steps that, with the current tool, require re-entry of data and ad hoc design of additional reports.
Those steps include the reformatting of peacekeeping budgets as they move between the offices involved during the formulation process, data retrieval and tracking of the stages of budget formulation, aggregation of data from numerous missions to respond to specific requests by legislative bodies and retrieval of historical budget and expenditure data to support budget analyses.
The proposed budget formulation tool would automate these steps and reduce the risk of multiple types of errors accordingly.
With the data security and process automation features outlined above, the proposed budget formulation database system would facilitate the Secretariat's continued commitment to presenting accurate peacekeeping budgets within the expected time frame.
Finally, the proposed database system would incorporate the results-based-budgeting frameworks for peacekeeping budgets and performance reports, as well as a facility to compile a portfolio of evidence to substantiate the actual indicators of achievement and outputs included in the performance reports.
The system would thus support the internal process within the missions of gathering information and ensuring that their performance reports present valid data.
The amount of $261,200 provides for: (a) maintenance of information technology equipment based on standard costs ($181,200); (b) the purchase of 3 desktop computers and 3 printers for the new posts in the Office of the Under-Secretary-General ($6,600); (c) 7 desktop computers and 7 printers for the 7 new posts in the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts ($15,400); (d) 1 desktop computer and 1 desktop printer for the new post in the Medical Services Division ($2,200); (e) 2 desktop computers and 2 printers for the 2 new posts in the Office of Central Support Services ($4,400); (f) 4 desktop computers and 4 desktop printers for the 4 general temporary assistance posts in the Office of Central Support Services ($8,800); (g) 3 laptops in the Division for Organizational Development ($5,400); (h) 6 replacement desktop computers, 16 replacement desktop printers and ancillary equipment in the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts ($24,700); (i) 1 replacement desktop computer, 1 new colour network printer and 1 replacement local-area network printer in the Procurement Service ($10,300); and (j) 1 desktop computer and 1 desktop printer for the Treasury ($2,200).
A total of $329,000 provides for software services needed for the implementation of the information communication technology, ECM and CRM projects in the Information Technology Services Division.
The variance is due mainly to the software required by the Information Technology Services Division in order to implement pilot programmes and to the new automated budget formulation database proposed by the Peacekeeping Financing Division.
H. Department of Safety and Security
(a) Results-based framework
(b) Human resource requirements
a One P-3, one P-2 and three Security Services posts previously approved in the Security and Safety Service and one P-5, four P-4 and two General Service (Other level) previously approved in the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator were transferred to the new Department of Safety and Security as at 1 January 2005 in accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/276.
(c) Financial resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars)
a The resource performance for the period 2003/04, the apportionment for 2004/05 and the estimates for 2005/06 relate to resources for the Security and Safety Service, previously approved in the Department of Management, and the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator, which are now included in the Department of Safety and Security, established on 1 January 2005 in accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/276.
Columns (1) and (2) are presented to facilitate analysis of the resources.
(d) Analysis of resource requirements
The General Assembly, in its resolution 59/276 of 23 December 2004, established the Department of Safety and Security with the aim of providing a strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations.
The new department, with a mandate for the overall security and safety of all United Nations premises and personnel, will have a new organizational structure.
The new structure will include the former Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator, the Security and Safety Service, previously under the Department of Management, and the security components of missions led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations under a unified organizational structure.
The Department of Safety and Security will establish common security policies and standards for the Organization.
The amount of $1,624,600 provides for the salaries, common staff costs and staff assessment for the 12 continuing posts, based on standard costs.
The increase of $77,800 relates to a change in standard salary costs.
The amount of $100,000 is requested in the Department of Safety and Security for the training of Headquarters security trainers on submachine gun and rifle instructor training, personal protection training, security investigative procedures, fire prevention and safety skills, cardiopulmonary resuscitation and first aid, less-than-lethal instructor training and security operational planning, including incident command systems.
The trainers will later conduct training of the security staff in peacekeeping missions on the same subjects.
The travel requirements for the Department of Safety and Security are set out in the table below.
The amount of $101,900 is requested for two security advisers to conduct compliance inspection visits to UNOCI, UNMIL, MONUC, UNMIK and UNOMIG, and for one security coordination officer and one stress counsellor to deploy to missions to provide support during emergencies.
The amount of $224,500 is requested to provide training to security sections of the peacekeeping missions on hostage incident management, for two security advisers to provide training for the mission security management teams in MINUSTAH, ONUB, UNMISET, UNDOF, UNIFIL and UNFICYP and for the training of mission security and safety personnel and first-line supervisors on the suitable use of firearms and other safety skills.
The reduction from the resources approved in the current period relate to lower requirements under non-training-related travel for the former Security and Safety Service resulting from the planned completion of the threat assessment visits in the current period, offset by additional requirements under the former Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator.
The amount of $2,400 provides for the rental of office equipment and office supplies based on standard costs.
The variance relates to security officers in the Security and Safety Service, for whom no provision is made in the current budget.
The amount of $23,200 provides for commercial communications for the 12 posts based on past experience.
The amount of $14,400 provides for the maintenance of information technology equipment based on standard costs.
The reduction of $16,800 relates to the replacement of information technology equipment in the current 2004/05 period for which no provision is made in the 2005/06 period.
Action to be taken by the General Assembly
The action to be taken by the General Assembly is as follows:
(a) Approval of the support account estimate amounting to $150,743,200 for the 12-month period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;
(b) Application of other income of $1,873,000 for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 to the resources required for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;
(c) Application of the amount in excess of the authorized level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund for the period ended 30 June 2004, namely $13,790,000, to the requirements of the support account for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;
(d) Proration of the amount of $135,080,200 among the individual active peacekeeping operation budgets to meet the requirements of the support account for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006.
Annex I
Proposed staffing of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
Abbreviations: USG, Under-Secretary-General; ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; GS, General Service; OL, Other level; PL, Principal level.
a New post.
b Transferred .
Annex IV
Summary of follow-up action taken to implement requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the General Assembly
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/58/760)
General Assembly (resolution 58/298)
Annex V
Information technology applications contained in the proposed budget for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006