# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
United Nations
Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2005
General Assembly
Official Records Sixtieth Session Supplement No. 23 (A/60/23)
General Assembly Official Records Sixtieth Session Supplement No. 23 (A/60/23)
United Nations • New York, 2005
Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2005
Note
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
[19 July 2005]
Contents
Kofi Annan
Secretary-General of the United Nations
New York
Letter of transmittal
[15 July 2005]
Sir,
I have the honour to transmit herewith to the General Assembly the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/129 of 10 December 2004.
The report covers the work of the Special Committee during 2005.
(Signed) Julian Robert Hunte Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Chapter I
Establishment, organization and activities of the Special Committee
Establishment of the Special Committee
The Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was established by the General Assembly pursuant to its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961.
The Special Committee was requested to examine the application of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and to make suggestions and recommendations on the progress and extent of the implementation of the Declaration.
At its seventeenth session, after considering the report of the Special Committee,1 the General Assembly adopted resolution 1810 (XVII) of 17 December 1962, by which it enlarged the Special Committee with the addition of seven new members.
In paragraph 8 (a) of that resolution, the Assembly invited the Special Committee “to continue to seek the most suitable ways and means for the speedy and total application of the Declaration to all territories which have not yet attained independence”.
At the same session, by its resolution 1805 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 on the question of South West Africa, the General Assembly requested the Special Committee to discharge, mutatis mutandis, the tasks assigned to the Special Committee for South West Africa by resolution 1702 (XVI) of 19 December 1961.
By its resolution 1806 (XVII) of 14 December 1962, the Assembly decided to dissolve the Special Committee for South West Africa.
At its eighteenth session, by resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, the General Assembly decided to dissolve the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories and requested the Special Committee to study the information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations.
It also requested the Special Committee to take that information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration in each of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to undertake any special study and prepare any special report it might consider necessary.
At the same session and at each subsequent session, the General Assembly, after considering the report of the Special Committee,2 has adopted a resolution renewing the mandate of the Special Committee.
On the occasion of the tenth, twentieth, twenty-fifth and thirtieth anniversaries of the Declaration, the General Assembly, by approving the related reports of the Special Committee, adopted resolutions 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, 35/118 of 11 December 1980, 40/56 of 2 December 1985 and 45/33 of 20 November 1990, containing a series of recommendations with a view to facilitating the speedy implementation of the Declaration.
At its forty-sixth session, the General Assembly, by adopting resolution 46/181 of 19 December 1991, endorsed as a plan of action for the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism the proposals contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1991 (A/46/634/Rev.1 and Corr.1).
The plan, inter alia, contained the following provisions:
“22.
The Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, with the cooperation of the administering Powers, should:
“(a) Prepare periodic analyses of the progress and extent of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in each Territory;
“(b) Review the impact of the economic and social situation on the constitutional and political advancement of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
“(c) Organize during the Decade seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions alternately, as well as at United Nations Headquarters, to review the progress achieved in the implementation of the plan of action, with the participation of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, their elected representatives, the administering Powers, Member States, regional organizations, specialized agencies, non-governmental organizations and experts.
“23.
The Special Committee should continue to seek, as a matter of priority, the full cooperation of administering Powers with regard to the dispatch of United Nations visiting missions to Non-Self-Governing Territories.
“24.
The Special Committee, with the cooperation of the administering Powers, should make every effort to facilitate and encourage the participation of representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in regional and international organizations, as well as in the specialized agencies of the United Nations system, the Special Committee itself and other United Nations decolonization bodies.”
At its fifty-fifth session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000, declaring the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and called upon Member States to redouble their efforts to implement the plan of action, as contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1991 (A/46/634/Rev.1 and Corr.1), updated where necessary, to serve as the plan of action for the Second Decade.
The updated plan of action is contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism” (A/56/61).
At its fifty-ninth session, after considering the report of the Special Committee,3 the General Assembly adopted resolution 59/136 of 10 December 2004, in which it approved the report of the Special Committee covering its work during 2004 and requested the Special Committee to continue to seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of the Declaration and to carry out those actions approved by the General Assembly regarding the Second International Decade in all Territories that have not yet exercised their right to self-determination, including independence, and in particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals to bring about an end to colonialism and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
(b) To continue to examine the implementation by Member States of resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions on decolonization;
(c) To continue to examine the political, economic and social situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to recommend, as appropriate, to the General Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the populations of those Territories to exercise their right to self-determination, including independence, in accordance with relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(d) To finalize before the end of 2005 a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing Territories to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(e) To continue to dispatch visiting missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories in accordance with relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(f) To conduct seminars, as appropriate, for the purpose of receiving and disseminating information on the work of the Special Committee and to facilitate participation by the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in those seminars;
(g) To take all necessary steps to enlist worldwide support among Governments, as well as national and international organizations, for the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration and the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
(h) To observe annually the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories.4
In addition, the Assembly reaffirmed that the United Nations visiting missions to the Territories were an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the Territories, as well as the wishes and aspirations of their inhabitants, and called upon the administering Powers to continue to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge of its mandate and to facilitate United Nations visiting missions to the Territories, and also called upon the administering Powers that had not participated formally in the work of the Special Committee to do so at its session in 2005.
In addition to resolution 59/136, the General Assembly adopted 11 other resolutions and three decisions relating to specific items considered by the Special Committee in 2004, which are listed below.
Resolutions, consensus and decisions concerning specific Territories
Resolutions
Decisions
Resolutions concerning other items
Other resolutions and decisions relevant to the work of the Special Committee
Other resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session that were relevant to the work of and were taken into consideration by the Special Committee are listed in a note by the Secretary-General on the organization of work of the Special Committee (A/AC.109/2005/L.1).
Membership of the Special Committee
As at 1 January 2005, the Special Committee was composed of the following 27 members: Antigua and Barbuda, Bolivia, Chile, China, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Dominica, Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Mali, Papua New Guinea, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone, Syrian Arab Republic, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, United Republic of Tanzania and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
A list of representatives who attended the meetings of the Special Committee in 2005 appears in document A/AC.109/2005/INF/1 and Add.1.
Opening of the meetings of the Special Committee in 2005 and election of officers
The Deputy Secretary-General addressed the Special Committee at its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005.
The Chairman made a statement at that meeting.
Statements were also made by the representatives of Bolivia, China, the Congo, Cuba, Dominica, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic, Papua New Guinea and Timor-Leste.
The representative of New Zealand, in its capacity as an administering Power, also made a statement (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.1).
At the same meeting, the Special Committee unanimously elected the following officers:
Chairman:
Julian Robert Hunte (Saint Lucia)
Vice-Chairmen:
Orlando Requeijo Gual (Cuba) Luc Joseph Okio (Congo)
Rapporteur:
Fayssal Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic)
C. Organization of work
At its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman, the Special Committee decided to maintain its Bureau as the only subsidiary body of the Committee.
The Special Committee also decided to adopt the suggestions of the Chairman relating to the allocation of items and the procedure for their consideration (see A/AC.109/2005/L.2 and Corr.1).
Also at the 1st meeting, the Chairman made a statement relating to the organization of work (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.1).
At the same meeting, the Chairman also informed the Committee that the delegations of Guatemala, Namibia and Peru had requested to participate, as observers, in the opening meeting of the Committee.
The Committee decided to accede to those requests.
At the 4th meeting, on 7 June 2005, the Chairman informed the Special Committee that the delegation of Spain had expressed the wish to participate in the proceedings of the Special Committee on the question of Gibraltar.
The Special Committee decided to accede to that request.
At the 8th meeting, on 15 June 2005, the Chairman informed the Special Committee that the delegations of Argentina, Brazil (on behalf of the Rio Group), Ecuador, Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay (on behalf of the States members of the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR: Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay), as well as Bolivia and Chile), had requested to participate in the Special Committee's consideration of the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).
The Special Committee decided to accede to those requests.
Meetings of the Special Committee and its subsidiary bodies
In keeping with its resolve to continue taking all possible measures to rationalize the organization of its work, and with the full and close cooperation of its entire membership, the Special Committee and its subsidiary body were again able to keep to a minimum the number of their formal meetings, as indicated below, by holding, whenever possible, informal meetings and extensive consultations through officers of the Special Committee.
Special Committee
The Special Committee held 11 meetings at Headquarters during 2005, as follows:
(a) First part of the session: 1st meeting, 17 February; and 2nd meeting, 11 March;
(b) Second part of the session: 3rd, 4th and 5th meetings, 6, 7 and 8 June; 6th and 7th meetings, 13 June; 8th and 9th meetings, 15 and 16 June; and 10th and 11th meetings, 20 and 24 June.
During the session, the Special Committee considered in plenary meetings the following questions and adopted decisions thereon, as indicated below:
Subsidiary bodies
Bureau
At its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2005/L.2 and Corr.1), the Special Committee decided to maintain its Bureau as the only subsidiary body of the Committee.
During the period covered by the present report, the Bureau held 10 meetings.
At its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, following the statement by the Chairman, the Special Committee adopted a report on pending matters related to its work (A/AC.109/2005/L.14), without a vote.
E. Question of the list of Territories to which the Declaration is applicable
At its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2005/L.2 and Corr.1), the Special Committee decided to take the question of the list of Territories to which the Declaration is applicable as appropriate.
In taking that decision, the Special Committee recalled that, in its report to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session,5 it had stated that, subject to any directives that the Assembly might wish to give in that connection, it would continue, as part of its programme of work for 2005, to review the list of Territories to which the Declaration applied.
The Special Committee also recalled that, in paragraph 5 of its resolution 59/136, the Assembly had approved the report of the Special Committee, including the programme of work envisaged by the Special Committee for 2005.
At its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, the Special Committee decided to continue its consideration of the question of the list of Territories to which the Declaration is applicable at its next session, subject to any directives that the General Assembly might give at its sixtieth session (see A/AC.109/2005/L.14, para.
Special Committee decision of 14 June 2004 concerning Puerto Rico6
At its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2005/L.2 and Corr.1), the Special Committee decided to take up as appropriate the item entitled “Special Committee decision of 14 June 2004 concerning Puerto Rico” and to consider it at plenary meetings.
At the 4th, 5th and 6th meetings, on 7, 8 and 13 June 2005, the Chairman drew attention to a number of communications received from organizations expressing the wish to be heard on Puerto Rico by the Special Committee.
At its 4th, 5th and 6th meetings, the Special Committee agreed to accede to those requests and heard the representatives of the organizations concerned at its 6th and 7th meetings (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.6 and 7), as follows:
(a) 6th meeting: Jorge Farinacci Garcia, Frente Socialista; Julio E. Fontanet Maldonado, Colegio de Abogados de Puerto Rico; Fernando Martín-Garcia, Partido Independentista Puertorriqueño; Hiram Lozada, Esq., on behalf of American Association of Jurists, Luis Barrios, Iglesia San Romero de las Américas; Francisco Velgara, Vieques Support Campaign; Israel Guadalupe Ortíz, !Vieques, Si!
; Rosa Meneses Abizu-Campos, Partido Nacionalista de Puerto Rico; Ivan Torres, The Committee of Rescue and Development of Vieques; Benjamín Ramos, Pro Libertad Freedom Campaign; Wanda Resto, Fellowship of Reconciliation; Martin Koppel, Social Workers Party; Yuliana Pecunia, Juventud de Izquierda Revolucionaria; Betty Brassel, United for Vieques; Eduardo Villanueva Muñoz, Comité de Derechos Humanos de Puerto Rico; Nelson W. Canals, Gran Oriente Nacional de Puerto Rico; Mary Anne Grady Flores, Ithaca Catholic Worker Vieques Support Group; Jose Aponte-Hernandez, Speaker of the House; and Wilma Reverón Collazo, on behalf of Comité Puerto Rico en las Naciones Unidas;
(b) 7th meeting: Nilda Luz Rexach, National Advancement for Puerto Rican Culture; Jose L. Adames, Al Frente; Eduardo Bhatia, on behalf of the Governor of Puerto Rico, Acevedo Vilá; Julio Muriente-Perez, on behalf of the Movimiento Independentista Nacional Hostosiano; Anita Velez-Mitchell, PrimaVida; and Elba Cintron Pabon, Hormiguero Pro-State 51.
At the 7th meeting, on 13 June, the representative of Cuba introduced draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.7 on behalf of his delegation and also on behalf of the delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.7).
At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.7, without a vote.
At the same meeting, the representatives of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Cuba made statements (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.7).
Draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.7, adopted by the Special Committee at its 7th meeting, on 13 June 2005, reads as follows:
Special Committee decision of 14 June 2004 concerning Puerto Rico
The Special Committee,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well as the resolutions and decisions of the Special Committee concerning Puerto Rico,
Considering that the period 1990-2000 was proclaimed by the General Assembly, in its resolution 43/47 of 22 November 1988, as the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and that by resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000, the General Assembly declared the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Bearing in mind the 23 resolutions and decisions adopted by the Special Committee on the question of Puerto Rico, contained in the reports of the Special Committee to the General Assembly, in particular those adopted without a vote in recent years,
Recalling that 25 July 2005 marks the one hundred and seventh anniversary of the intervention in Puerto Rico by the United States of America,
Also recalling the diverse initiatives taken by the political representatives of Puerto Rico and the United States in recent years, which have thus far failed to set in motion the process of decolonization of Puerto Rico,
Stressing the need for the United States to lay the groundwork for the full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the resolutions and decisions of the Special Committee concerning Puerto Rico,
Noting the debate in Puerto Rico on the search for a procedure that would make it possible to launch the process of decolonization of Puerto Rico,
Aware that Vieques Island, Puerto Rico, has been used for over 60 years by the United States Marines to carry out military exercises, with negative consequences for the health of the population, the environment and the economic and social development of that Puerto Rican municipality,
Recalling the decision of the Government of the United States to put an end to the bombings and military exercises on Vieques Island from 1 May 2003, which was the outcome of the prolonged process conducted during years of peaceful protests carried out by the people of Puerto Rico as well as the wide campaign of international solidarity, which has been appropriately reflected in the work and documents of the Special Committee,
Noting the consensus existing among the people and the Government of Puerto Rico on the necessity of ensuring the decontamination, and return to the people of Puerto Rico of all the territory previously used for military exercises and installations, and of using them for the social and economic development of Puerto Rico,
Recalling the release of several Puerto Rican political prisoners during the past few years,
Noting the consensus among the people of Puerto Rico in favour of the release of the Puerto Rican political prisoners who are still serving sentences in United States prisons for cases related to the struggle for Puerto Rico's independence and to the Vieques Island struggle for peace,
Noting also that the final document of the Fourteenth Ministerial Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Durban, South Africa, from 17 to 19 August 2004, reaffirms the right of the people of Puerto Rico to self-determination and independence on the basis of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and also reaffirms that the Puerto Rican people constitute a Latin American and Caribbean nation,
Having heard statements and testimonies representative of various viewpoints among the people of Puerto Rico and their social institutions,
Having considered the report of the Rapporteur of the Special Committee on the implementation of the resolutions concerning Puerto Rico,7
Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Puerto Rico to self-determination and independence in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the applicability of the fundamental principles of that resolution to the question of Puerto Rico;
Reiterates that the Puerto Rican people constitute a Latin American and Caribbean nation that has its own unequivocal national identity;
Calls upon the Government of the United States of America to assume its responsibility to expedite a process that will allow the Puerto Rican people fully to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and independence, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the resolutions and decisions of the Special Committee concerning Puerto Rico;
Notes the debate in Puerto Rico on the implementation of a mechanism that would ensure the full participation of representatives of all viewpoints prevailing in Puerto Rico, based on the principle that any initiative for the solution of the political status of Puerto Rico should originate from the people of Puerto Rico;
Reiterates the hope that the General Assembly will give comprehensive consideration to the question of Puerto Rico in all its aspects;
Urges the Government of the United States, in line with the need to guarantee the Puerto Rican people their legitimate right to self-determination and the protection of their human rights, to return the occupied land and installations on Vieques Island and in Ceiba to the people of Puerto Rico; respect fundamental human rights, such as the right to health and economic development; assume responsibility for and cover the costs of decontaminating the impact areas previously used in military exercises; and address the serious consequences of its military activity for the health of the inhabitants of Vieques Island and the environment;
Requests the President of the United States of America to release all Puerto Rican political prisoners serving sentences in United States prisons for cases relating to the struggle for the independence of Puerto Rico and to the Vieques Island peace struggle;
Takes note with satisfaction of the report prepared by the Rapporteur of the Special Committee,7 in compliance with its resolution of 14 June 2004;
Requests the Rapporteur to report to the Special Committee in 2006 on the implementation of the present resolution;
Decides to keep the question of Puerto Rico under continuous review.
Consideration of other matters
Compliance of Member States with the Declaration and other resolutions on decolonization
At its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2005/L.2 and Corr.1), the Special Committee decided to consider in plenary meetings the question of compliance of Member States with the Declaration and other relevant resolutions on decolonization.
The Special Committee took that decision into account in its consideration of specific items.
Question of holding a series of meetings away from Headquarters
At its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2005/L.2 and Corr.1), the Special Committee decided to take up the question of holding a series of meetings away from Headquarters as appropriate.
Having regard to its programme of work for 2005, the Special Committee, at its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, considered the question of holding meetings away from Headquarters, taking into account the provisions of paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 and paragraph 3 (9) of resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, by which the Assembly authorized the Special Committee to meet elsewhere than at United Nations Headquarters whenever and wherever such meetings might be required for the effective discharge of its functions.
At the same meeting, the Special Committee decided that it would consider accepting such invitations as might be received in 2006 and that, when particulars of such meetings had become known, it would request the Secretary-General to seek the necessary budgetary provision in accordance with established procedure (see A/AC.109/2005/L.14, paras.
2 and 3).
Pattern of conferences
At its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2005/L.2 and Corr.1), the Special Committee decided to take up as appropriate the item entitled “Pattern of conferences”.
In so doing, the Special Committee was conscious of the fact that it had initiated some important measures in rationalizing its work methods, many of which were subsequently incorporated in a number of resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly.
Further recalling the measures it had taken theretofore in that connection, the Special Committee decided to continue to exercise its initiatives in the effective utilization of the limited conference resources and the further reduction of its documentation requirements.
The Special Committee also continued the practice of circulating communications and information material, as far as possible, in the form of informal notes and aides-memoires in the original language of submission, thus curtailing documentation requirements and accruing considerable savings for the Organization.
A list of the documents issued by the Special Committee in 2005 is contained in the annex to the present chapter.
At its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, the Special Committee considered the item and noted that, during the year, it had closely followed the guidelines set forth in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the pattern of conferences, in particular resolution 59/265 of 23 December 2004.
By organizing its programme of work effectively and holding extensive consultations, the Committee had striven to keep the number of its formal meetings to a minimum.
The Special Committee decided, taking into account its probable workload for 2006, to consider holding its meetings in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) Plenary
February/March As required
June/July Up to 30 meetings
(6-8 meetings a week)
(b) Bureau
February/July 10 meetings
It was understood that that programme would not preclude the holding of any ad hoc meetings that might be warranted and that the Special Committee might, in early 2006, review the schedule of meetings on the basis of any new developments.
The Special Committee decided, subject to any directives given by the General Assembly, to strive, while fulfilling its mandate, to keep its meetings to a minimum (see A/AC.109/2005/L.14, paras.
Control and limitation of documentation
At its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, the Special Committee considered the question of the control and limitation of documentation and noted that, during the year, it had taken further measures to control and limit its documentation in compliance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular resolutions 34/50 of 23 November 1979, 39/68 D of 13 December 1984, 51/211 B of 18 December 1996 and 59/265.
The Special Committee noted that, in its resolution 50/206 B of 23 December 1995, the General Assembly had approved the recommendation of the Special Committee to replace its verbatim records with summary records.
Having reviewed the need for such records, the Special Committee decided to maintain its summary records (see A/AC.109/2005/L.14, paras.
Cooperation and participation of the administering Powers in the work of the Special Committee
In compliance with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the delegation of New Zealand, as an administering Power, continued to participate, in accordance with established procedure, in the related work of the Special Committee (see chap.
The delegation of France also participated in the 2005 Caribbean regional seminar (as observer) and the related work of the Committee on the question of New Caledonia.
The delegations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America did not participate in the work of the Special Committee.8 However, during informal consultations with the Special Committee held in May and June 2004, one administering Power expressed its desire to continue informal dialogue with the Special Committee.
The Special Committee expressed satisfaction at the continuing informal cooperation with the United Kingdom and also expressed the hope that that cooperation would eventually lead to its formal participation in the work of the Special Committee.
In a related context, the Special Committee, at its 3rd meeting, on 6 June 2005, adopted a resolution on the question of sending visiting missions to Territories.
By that resolution, the Special Committee noted with appreciation that, at the invitation of the Government of New Zealand, two visiting missions had been dispatched to Tokelau, in July 1994 and August 2002.
It also noted with satisfaction the cooperation of the United Kingdom, as an administering Power, in facilitating Special Mission to Bermuda in March and May 2005.
It called upon the administering Powers to cooperate or continue to cooperate with the United Nations by receiving United Nations visiting missions in the Territories under their administration (see A/AC.109/2005/L.6).
Participation of representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work of the Special Committee
At its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, the Special Committee considered the question of the participation of representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in its work and decided that the participation of representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work of the Special Committee at Headquarters, as recommended in the plan of action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism (A/56/61, annex), should continue to be facilitated through the reimbursement by the United Nations of the expenses relating to their participation under the terms of the guidelines amended by the Committee and approved by the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session (see A/AC.109/L.1791, annex, and A/AC.109/L.1804).
In that regard, the Special Committee decided to consider the guidelines at its plenary meetings with a view to amending them further, where appropriate (see A/AC.109/2005/L.14, para.
Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories
The question of the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories was considered by the Special Committee at its 2nd meeting, on 11 March 2005.
Representation at seminars, meetings and conferences of intergovernmental and other organizations
At its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, the Special Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the Committee continue to be represented at seminars, meetings and conferences organized by United Nations bodies and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations active in the field of decolonization.
In keeping with its decision of 17 February 2005, the Committee would authorize its Chairman to hold consultations, as appropriate, concerning its participation in those meetings, as well as the level of representation, when accepting invitations.
In accordance with established practice and on the basis of the principle of rotation, the Chairman would hold consultations with the Bureau members, who, in turn, would consult with the members of the Committee from their respective regional groups.
The Special Committee also decided that the Chairman would also hold consultations with that member of the Committee whose regional group was not represented in the Bureau.
It also decided to recommend that the General Assembly make appropriate budgetary provisions to cover such activities in 2006 (see A/AC.109/2005/L.14, para.
Report of the Special Committee to the General Assembly
At its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2005/L.2 and Corr.1), and in accordance with paragraph 31 of General Assembly decision 34/401 on the rationalization of the procedures and organization of the Assembly, the Special Committee decided to follow the procedure adopted at its 2004 session9 in connection with the formulation of its recommendations to the Assembly at its sixtieth session.
At its 10th meeting, on 24 June 2005, the Special Committee, on the proposal of the Chairman, authorized the Rapporteur to reformulate the Committee's draft resolutions into the format of the General Assembly and to submit directly to the Assembly the report in accordance with established practice and procedure.
As a transitionary measure, during its 2005 session, the Special Committee started to issue a number of its resolutions in the format of the General Assembly, in line with the established practice of other subsidiary bodies of the Assembly.
Other questions
At its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005, by adopting the suggestions relating to the organization of its work put forward by the Chairman (see A/AC.109/2005/L.2 and Corr.1), the Special Committee decided, in its examination of specific Territories, to take into account the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions and decisions listed in the note by the Secretary-General on the organization of work of the Special Committee (A/AC.109/2005/L.1, para.
That decision was taken into account during the consideration of specific Territories and other items in plenary meetings.
Relations with United Nations bodies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
Economic and Social Council
In connection with the Special Committee's consideration of the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations, and in accordance with paragraph 17 of General Assembly resolution 59/129 of 11 December 2004 relating to the item, consultations were held between the President of the Economic and Social Council and the Chairman of the Special Committee to consider appropriate measures for coordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies in implementing the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly (see E/2005/47).
Commission on Human Rights
In its consideration of the Territories concerned, the Special Committee took into account the relevant resolutions adopted by the Commission on Human Rights at its sixty-first session, in 2005, including resolutions on the Working Group on Indigenous Populations and the International Decade of the World's Indigenous People of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (2005/49), working group of the Commission on Human Rights to elaborate a draft declaration in accordance with paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 49/214 of 23 December 1994 (2005/50), and the work of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (2005/53).
The Special Committee further took into account the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, including resolutions 59/172, 59/174, 59/180 and 59/185 of 20 December 2004.
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
During the year, having regard to the relevant provisions of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Special Committee continued to follow the work of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
Specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations
In accordance with the requests contained in the relevant General Assembly resolutions, the Special Committee continued its consideration of the question of the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations.
An account of the Special Committee's consideration of the question is set out in chapter VI of the present report.
During the year, the Special Committee adopted decisions relating to the extension of assistance to the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Those decisions are reflected in recommendations of the Special Committee to the General Assembly (see chap.
Regional intergovernmental organizations
Bearing in mind its previous decisions to maintain contact with the African Union, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Pacific Islands Forum on a regular basis in order to assist in the effective discharge of its mandate, the Special Committee, as in previous years, closely followed the work of these regional intergovernmental organizations.
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
The Special Committee continued to follow closely the work of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries regarding the issue of decolonization.
Non-governmental organizations
Having regard to the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/135 and 59/136, the Special Committee continued to follow closely the activities of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization.
The participation of non-governmental organizations in the work of the Special Committee during the period under review is covered in detail in the Special Committee documents (see A/AC.109/2005/18) and the present report (see para.
29 above and chap.
II, annex, below).
The related decisions of the Special Committee are listed in chapter XII of the present report.
H. Action relating to international conventions and programmes
The Special Committee continued to monitor related developments in the Territories, having regard to the relevant provisions of article 15 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (General Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX), annex).
It also continued to take into account the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations bodies concerned relating to the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
Review of work
As noted elsewhere in the present report, the reform processes initiated by the Special Committee in 1991, which brought about a number of changes and improvements in its approach, methods and procedures, continued to be actively pursued in 2005.
The measures adopted by the Special Committee included the streamlining and consolidation of a number of its resolutions and eliminating duplication in its documentation (see para.
40 above).
The Special Committee's recommendation to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session on 12 Territories was consolidated into two resolutions (see chap.
XII, sects.
E and F).
The Special Committee also considered and submitted recommendations on information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations, the question of sending visiting missions to Territories, implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations and economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
During 2005, the Special Committee sent a special mission to Bermuda, at the behest of the Bermuda Independence Commission and upon the invitation of the Government of the Territory, with the agreement of the administering Power.
As noted in chapter II of the present report, the Special Committee held a Caribbean regional seminar at Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005, on the mid-term review, follow-up and priorities for action in implementation of the Plan of Action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism referred to in General Assembly resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000.
In accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly, the Special Committee continued to seek suitable means for the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV) in all Territories to which the Declaration is applicable and formulated specific proposals and recommendations in that regard.
On the question of the publicity to be given to the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, the Special Committee adopted a resolution on the dissemination of information on decolonization, which it recommends to the General Assembly for action at its sixtieth session (see chap.
XII, sect.
The Special Committee also continued its review of the list of Territories to which the Declaration is applicable.
With regard to its decision of 14 June 2004 concerning Puerto Rico, the Special Committee heard a number of representatives of organizations concerned and adopted a resolution on the matter, which is set out in paragraph 33 of the present chapter.
During the period under review, the Special Committee continued the critical review of its work and its programme of future work by holding a number of informal meetings.
The Special Committee continued discussion on the case-by-case work programmes for each of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and held informal consultations on the matter with the administering Powers concerned with a view to improving cooperation between the Committee and the administering Powers (see sect.
J below).
In accordance with the guidelines established by the General Assembly, the Special Committee was able during the year to reduce the number of its formal meetings and to minimize the wastage resulting from cancellation of scheduled meetings.
In the light of the fact that 2005 marked the mid-point of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, the work of the Committee focused on carrying out an appraisal and review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Plan of Action for the Decade.
In order to carry out its analysis, the Committee sought the input of the representatives of the Territories, experts and non-governmental organizations as well as Member States and intergovernmental organizations.
J. Future work
In accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly since 1961 and subject to further directives from the Assembly at its sixtieth session, the Special Committee intends to continue during 2006 to pursue its efforts in bringing a speedy end to colonialism, in accordance with Article 73 of the Charter and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
The Special Committee will continue to fulfil the responsibilities that have been entrusted to it in the context of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, declared by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/146, and particularly with regard to the implementation of the plan of action contained in document A/56/61.
In order to discharge its responsibilities, the Special Committee will keep the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories under continuous review, examining the impact of developments concerning each Territory on their political advancement.
It will also review the compliance by Member States, particularly the administering Powers, with the relevant decisions and resolutions of the United Nations.
In order to carry out this analysis, the Special Committee will continue to seek the input of representatives of the Territories, non-governmental organizations from the Territories and experts inviting them to attend its meetings and regional seminars and also by visiting the Territories to gather first-hand information.
In 2006, the Special Committee intends to continue and intensify its dialogue and cooperation with the administering Powers for the purpose of furthering the cause of decolonization through the development of programmes of work for the decolonization of specific Territories.
This will be done in agreement with the administering Powers, and with the participation of representatives of the Territories at every stage of discussion.
The members of the Special Committee are particularly encouraged by the excellent cooperation of New Zealand and Tokelau at every stage of the negotiations in preparation for the exercise of the right of self-determination by the people of Tokelau towards the end of 2005.
The Special Committee has been kept informed of consultations and their outcomes through briefings and visits to Tokelau.
The Chairman of the Special Committee most recently visited Tokelau in October 2004 to attend a workshop on the constitution.
The Special Committee also intends to develop, in consultation with the administering Powers and the people of the Territories concerned, accelerated action plans for the decolonization of certain Territories.
The Special Committee has noted with great satisfaction the growing interest and participation of the people of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the regional seminars it conducts annually and by the wider participation of Member States, specialized agencies and programmes, non-governmental organizations and experts.
In this regard, the Special Committee will continue to conduct these seminars, for the purpose of assessing, receiving and disseminating information on the situation in the Territories, in order to facilitate the implementation of its mandate.
It will also continue to disseminate information on the work of the Special Committee.
In this connection, the Special Committee will hold a seminar in the Pacific region in 2006.
The Special Committee will continue to seek the cooperation of the administering Powers in dispatching United Nations visiting missions to the Territories under their administration.
Having regard to the constructive role played by such missions in the past, the Special Committee continues to attach the utmost importance to visiting missions as a means of collecting adequate and first-hand information on conditions in the Territories and on the wishes and aspirations of the peoples concerning their future status.
Moreover, visiting missions are important in the context of furthering modalities and action plans for decolonization and observing acts of self-determination.
The Special Committee will explore the possibility of combining visiting missions to certain territories with regional seminars in order to optimize its available resources.
The Special Committee has consistently reiterated the importance of disseminating information on decolonization as an instrument for furthering the aims of the Declaration.
Accordingly, the Committee will continue to use opportunities such as the regional seminars and visiting missions to disseminate information on its activities and on the Territories in an effort to mobilize world public opinion to support and assist the people of the Territories in bringing about a speedy end to colonialism.
It also intends to develop, together with the Department of Public Information, programmes aimed at territories that have requested information about self-determination options.
The Special Committee will continue to pay attention to the specific problems of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The Special Committee is aware that, in addition to general problems facing developing countries, those Territories also suffer handicaps arising from the interplay of such factors as size, remoteness, geographical dispersion, vulnerability to natural disasters, fragility of ecosystems, constraints in transport and communications, great distances from market centres, a highly limited internal market, lack of natural resources and vulnerability to drug trafficking, money-laundering and other illegal activities.
The Special Committee will continue to recommend measures to facilitate a sustained and balanced growth of the fragile economies of those Territories and increased assistance in the development of all the sectors of their economies, with particular emphasis on programmes of diversification.
It is the intention of the Special Committee to continue to follow closely the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international and regional institutions associated with the United Nations.
The Special Committee will hold consultations with those organizations, as appropriate, and will continue the practice of holding consultations between its Chairman and the President of the Economic and Social Council.
The objective of those consultations is to facilitate the effective implementation of the decisions of the various United Nations bodies and to foster cooperation between the specialized agencies and the regional organizations in providing assistance for the Non-Self-Governing Territories in a given region.
The Special Committee will also strive to follow up on the General Assembly's request that the participation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work of relevant meetings and conferences of the agencies and organizations be facilitated so that the Territories can benefit from the related activities of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system.
The Special Committee intends to take into account economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to continue its cooperation with interested States to ensure that the interests of the peoples of those Territories are protected.
In the light of the provisions of the General Assembly resolutions concerning the pattern of conferences, and taking into consideration its experience in previous years as well as its probable workload for 2006, the Special Committee has approved a tentative programme of meetings for 2006, which it commends to the Assembly for approval.
The Special Committee suggests that, when the General Assembly, at its sixtieth session, examines the question of the implementation of the Declaration, it may wish to take into account the various recommendations of the Special Committee that are reflected in the relevant chapters of the present report and, in particular, to endorse the proposals outlined in the present section in order to enable the Special Committee to carry out the tasks it envisages for 2006.
The Special Committee recommends that the Assembly renew its appeal to the administering Powers to take all necessary steps for the implementation of the Declaration and the relevant United Nations resolutions, in accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples of the Territories concerned.
In that connection, the Special Committee recommends that the Assembly request all the administering Powers to become involved with the work of the Special Committee in the discharge of its mandate and, in particular, to participate actively in the work relating to the Territories under their respective administrations.
The Special Committee also recommends that the Assembly continue to invite the administering Powers to allow representatives of the Territories concerned to participate in the discussions in the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) and the Special Committee on the items relating to their respective Territories.
Furthermore, the Assembly might also wish to renew its appeal to all States, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to comply with the various requests addressed to them by the Assembly and the Security Council in their relevant resolutions.
The Special Committee recommends that, in approving the programme of work outlined above, the General Assembly make adequate provision to cover the activities that the Special Committee envisages for 2006.
In that regard, the Special Committee notes that the programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 includes resources to provide for the programme of work of the Special Committee for 2006-2007, based on the level of activities approved for 2005, without prejudice to the decisions to be taken by the Assembly at its sixtieth session.
On that basis, the Special Committee understands that, should any additional provisions be required over and above those included in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007, proposals for supplementary requirements would be made to the General Assembly for its approval.
Finally, the Special Committee expresses the hope that the Secretary-General will continue to provide it with all the facilities and personnel necessary for the discharge of its mandate, taking into account the various tasks assigned to it by the Assembly as well as those arising from decisions taken by it during the current year.
Conclusion of the 2005 session
At its 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005, the Chairman made a statement on the occasion of the closing of the 2005 session of the Special Committee (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.11).
Notes
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventeenth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 25, document A/5238.
2 See the reports of the Special Committee submitted to the General Assembly at its eighteenth to fifty-eighth sessions.
For the most recent, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/58/23); and ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/59/23).
3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/58/23).
4 See resolution 2911 (XXVII).
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/58/23), chap.
I, para.
6 Ibid., para.
8 For the explanation of their non-participation, see documents A/47/86, A/42/651, annex, and Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/41/23), chap.
I, paras.
76 and 77.
9 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/58/23), chap.
I, paras.
51 and 52.
Annex
List of documents of the Special Committee, 2005
Chapter II
Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism
On 19 December 1991, at its forty-sixth session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 46/181, entitled “International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism”, and the plan of action contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1991 (A/46/634/Rev.1 and Corr.1).
In paragraph 22 (c) of the plan of action, aimed at ushering in, in the twenty-first century, a world free from colonialism, the Assembly, inter alia, requested the Special Committee to:
“organize during the Decade seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions alternately, as well as at United Nations Headquarters, to review the progress achieved in the implementation of the plan of action, with the participation of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, their elected representatives, the administering Powers, Member States, regional organizations, specialized agencies, non-governmental organizations and experts.”
At its fifty-fifth session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000, declaring the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and called upon Member States to redouble their efforts to implement the plan of action contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1991, updated where necessary, to serve as the plan of action for the Second Decade.
The updated plan of action is contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the Second Decade (A/56/61).
At its 1st meeting, on 17 February 2005, the Special Committee, mindful of the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly in the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and by approving the recommendations of its Chairman on the organization of work of the Special Committee for the year (see A/AC.109/2005/L.2 and Corr.1), decided to allocate to plenary meetings of the Special Committee, as appropriate, the question of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
The Special Committee considered the questions of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism and the Caribbean regional seminar on midterm review, follow-up and priorities for action of the Decade, held at Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005, at its 1st, 2nd and 10th meetings, on 17 February, 11 March and 20 June 2005.
The Special Committee had before it the guidelines and rules of procedure for the Caribbean regional seminar (A/AC.109/2005/1).
At its 2nd meeting, on 11 March, following a statement by the Chairman, the Special Committee approved the composition of the official delegation of the Special Committee to the Caribbean regional seminar (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.2).
The Special Committee also decided to invite United Nations organs, agencies and institutions to apprise the Secretary-General of actions they had taken in implementation of General Assembly resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000 and to submit a report to the Assembly at its sixty-first session, subject to any directives that the Assembly might give at its sixtieth session in that regard (see A/AC.109/2005/L.14, para.
At the 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, the Chairman of the Special Committee drew attention to the draft report of the Caribbean regional seminar, which had been circulated to members of the Special Committee as a conference room paper A/AC.109/2005/CRP.1 (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.10).
At the same meeting, following a statement by the Chairman, the Committee adopted the draft report of the Caribbean regional seminar and decided to annex it to its report to the General Assembly.
The full text of the report of the Caribbean regional seminar is contained in the annex to the present chapter.
At its 11th meeting, on 24 June, the Special Committee adopted without a vote draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.12, entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”, submitted by the Chairman.
At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted without a vote draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.16 entitled “Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism”, submitted by the Chairman.
The text of draft resolutions A/AC.109/2005/L.12 and A/AC.109/2005/L.16, adopted by the Special Committee at its 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005, appears in the form of recommendations of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, sections H and I, accordingly, of the present report.
Annex
Caribbean regional seminar on the implementation of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism: “Midterm review, follow-up and priorities for action”, held in Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005
Contents
Introduction
At its fifty-fifth session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000, declaring the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and called upon Member States to redouble their efforts to implement the plan of action contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General dated 13 December 1991 (A/46/634/Rev.1 and Corr.1), updated where necessary, to serve as the plan of action for the Second Decade.
The report of the Secretary-General on the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism (A/56/61) contains an updated plan of action.
In its resolution 59/136 of 10 December 2004, the General Assembly approved the report of the Special Committee, which, inter alia, called for the holding of a seminar in the Caribbean region in 2005, to be organized by the Special Committee.
As stated in the guidelines and rules of procedure for the seminar (A/AC.109/2005/1), the purpose of the seminar is to carry out a midterm review of the progress achieved in the implementation of the plan of action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, in order to define priorities for follow-up and intensified action in the remaining years of the Decade.
The seminar will also assess the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories,b in particular their constitutional evolution towards self-government and self-determination, with a view to developing, in cooperation with the administering Powers and the representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the decolonization of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The seminar will also identify areas in which the United Nations system and the international community at large could enhance programmes of assistance to the Territories within an integral framework ensuring the political and sustainable socio-economic development of the Territories concerned.
The topics considered by the seminar will assist the Special Committee in making a realistic evaluation of the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The seminar gave pre-eminence to a broad range of views of the peoples of those Territories.
It also sought to secure the participation of organizations and institutions that are actively involved in the political, economic and social development of those Territories.
The contributions of the participants served as a basis for the conclusions and recommendations of the seminar, which will be carefully studied by the Special Committee with a view to submitting proposals to the General Assembly concerning the fulfilment of the objectives of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
Organization of the seminar
The seminar was held in Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005.
The seminar held six meetings, in which representatives of States Members of the United Nations, Non-Self-Governing Territories, administering Powers, non-governmental, regional and other organizations and experts took part.
The list of participants is given in appendix I.
The seminar was organized to encourage an open and frank exchange of views.
The seminar was conducted by Julian Robert Hunte, Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia to the United Nations and Chairman of the Special Committee, with the participation of the following members of the Special Committee: China, the Congo, Cuba, Dominica, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, the Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (host country) and Tunisia.
France, an administering Power, participated in the seminar as observer.
Algeria, Argentina, Morocco and Spain also participated.
At the 1st meeting, on 17 May 2005, the following members of the Special Committee were appointed Vice-Chairmen of the seminar: Crispin Gregoire (Dominica), Birhanemeskel Abebe (Ethiopia), and Albert Sitnikov (Russian Federation).
Orlando Requeijo Gual (Cuba) was appointed Rapporteur of the seminar and Chairman of the Drafting Group which was composed of the representatives of all members of the Special Committee attending the seminar: China, Congo, Cuba, Dominica, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Tunisia.
The agenda of the seminar was as follows:
Strategies for the successful completion of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism:
(a) Midterm assessment of the level of implementation of the plan of action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism;
(b) Assessment of progress in individual Non-Self-Governing Territories in the process of achieving sustainable political and economic development:
(i) By the representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
(ii) By the administering Powers;
(c) Decolonization and the political status options, including independence, integration or free association, in relation to the Caribbean Non-Self-Governing Territories and Bermuda:
(i) General overview and implications of each option;
(ii) Perspective of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
(iii) Perspective of the administering Powers;
(d) Participation of Non-Self-Governing Territories in organizations, assistance programmes and activities of the United Nations system.
Priority action to speed up the implementation of the decolonization mandate in the remaining years of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism:
(a) Action by the administering Powers and the representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories:
(i) Developing on a case-by-case basis work plans for the completion of decolonization in the remaining Territories, in cooperation with the Special Committee;
(ii) Ensuring, in cooperation with the Special Committee and the wider United Nations system, that the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration are prepared to make an educated choice regarding constitutional status in order to finalize the decolonization process;
(iii) Adopting measures needed to promote political, economic, cultural and educational advancement in the Territories;
(iv) Facilitating participation of the Territories in organizations, assistance programmes and activities of the United Nations system;
(v) Ensuring ownership by the Territories of their natural resources pursuant to General Assembly resolutions, and protection of the environment in Non-Self-Governing Territories;
(b) Action by the Special Committee:
(i) Strengthening dialogue with the administering Powers and the Non-Self-Governing Territories, with a view to developing on a case-by-case basis work plans for the completion of the decolonization process in individual Territories;
(ii) Developing a programme of coordination with the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, and international and regional organizations, to examine and review conditions in each Territory so as to take appropriate measures to accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of the Territories;
(c) Action by the United Nations system:
(i) Promoting participation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in organizations, projects and programmes of the United Nations system within the scope of the respective charters;
(ii) Intensifying dissemination of information on the situation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and decolonization issues through the United Nations web site, radio, publications, photo exhibits and coverage of Special Committee activities;
(iii) Measures to promote the implementation of General Assembly resolutions on decolonization;
(iv) Developing political education programmes, in consultation with the Territories and the administering Powers, to foster an awareness among the people of the legitimate political status options available to them in the exercise of their right to self-determination, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960.
Conduct of the seminar
Proceedings of the seminar
On 17 May, Julian Robert Hunte (Saint Lucia) opened the seminar in his capacity as its Chairman.
The Honourable Michael Browne, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Commerce and Trade of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, addressed the seminar.
His statement is reproduced in appendix II.
At the same meeting, the Chairman of the Special Committee made an opening statement (see appendix III).
At the same meeting, Maria Maldonado, Chief of Decolonization Unit, Department of Political Affairs, United Nations Secretariat, read out a message from the Secretary-General (see appendix IV).
At the same meeting, on the proposal of the Chairman, the members of the Special Committee attending the seminar decided to annex the statement of the Rapporteur of the Committee to the present report (see appendix V).
On 20 May, at the sixth meeting, the Chairman made a concluding statement.
At the same meeting, the participants adopted by acclamation a resolution expressing appreciation to the Government and the people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (see appendix VI).
Summary of statements and discussions
Member States
The representative of Algeria stated that since 1965, the General Assembly had repeatedly called for the decolonization of Western Sahara, while confirming the inalienable right of the Saharawi people to self-determination.
The people of Western Sahara had shown their confidence in the United Nations by accepting a referendum and settlement plan.
Morocco had also accepted the plan but it had prevented the holding of a referendum for self-determination.
The Security Council invited the two parties — Morocco and the Frente Polisario — to continue to overcome the problems facing the implementation of the Settlement Plan and to explore other solutions with a view to resolving their differences.
In 2003, responding to a Security Council request for finding a solution, the Secretary-General's Personal Envoy, Mr. Baker, presented a Peace Plan for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara which envisaged that after 4 years of Saharawi administration under Moroccan sovereignty the people of the Territory, including Moroccan inhabitants, would choose among the options of independence, integration or continuation of autonomy under Morocco.
The plan was supported by the Security Council and the General Assembly.
The Frente Polisario accepted the plan, despite concerns about the fate of the Settlement Plan, but Morocco rejected it in April 2004.
Since then, the Security Council, while making reference to the Baker plan, has continued to call for a mutually acceptable solution that would provide self-determination for the people of Western Sahara.
The representative of Argentina stated that decolonization and self-determination were not synonyms.
Self-determination should not be applicable in the case of any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial integrity of a country.
Quoting General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), he pointed out that on the question of the Malvinas (Falkland Islands), self-determination had been ruled out due to the fact that the inhabitants of the Territory could not be distinguished from the occupying power, as they were descendants of the population illegally transplanted there by the United Kingdom.
This was understood by the Special Committee and the General Assembly through resolution 2065 (XX), in which it recognized a dispute between the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom over sovereignty of the Malvinas (Falkland Islands) and invited both Governments to negotiate a peaceful solution, taking into consideration the objectives of the Charter, resolution 1514 (XV) and the interests of the inhabitants of the Islands.
The representative of Argentina said that the Special Committee should continue to encourage the resumption of the negotiations between the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom in order to find a solution to the question in accordance with the recent resolutions and decisions of the United Nations.
The representative of the Congo stated that the dissemination of information among the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories regarding their rights to self-determination was a crucial part of the decolonization process.
Only the people who were well-informed could make the right choice and avoid being “abused”.
The special Committee should continue to bring attention to the responsibilities of the administering Powers, engaging them in a constructive dialogue with a view to implementing the mandate of the General Assembly.
The active participation and engagement of the administering Powers was crucial in this process.
The Special Committee should systematically review on an annual basis the implementation of the specific recommendations on decolonization and take into account the accurate needs expressed during this seminar by the representatives of the Non-Self Governing Territories.
The representative of Morocco underlined the unique position held by Morocco in the history of colonization as well as in the decolonization process, having been subject to three-fold colonization.
Morocco, participated in good faith in the implementation of the Settlement Plan proposed in 1991.
However, implementation of the plan was thwarted by obstacles leading to the conclusion by the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy of the inapplicability of the settlement plan and their recommendation for the search of an agreed political solution.
This political solution was put forward by the Personal Envoy, Mr. Baker, in his first plan entitled “Draft Framework Agreement” in June 2001.
Morocco accepted to engage in negotiations on the basis of this Draft Framework Agreement with the necessary flexibility, in order to settle definitively this regional dispute while the other parties rejected the proposal.
Since the Security Council found it impossible to choose between the various options presented to it at that time, Mr. Baker, in January 2003 and without prior consultations, presented to the parties his proposed peace plan in which he tried to combined two irreconcilable approaches, that is, the Settlement Plan of which the failure and inapplicability were duly noted and the Draft Framework Agreement.
Morocco's conception of a political solution is to bring the parties, through dialogue and negotiations, to agree on a negotiated and mutually acceptable political solution on the basis of a proposal of autonomy with respect for sovereignty and keeping with the recognition of self-determination as the preferred means of exercising individual and collective rights, and therefore overcome the current impasse and achieve progress towards a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, particularly in the light of the recent promising developments in the region of Maghreb.
Representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
The representative of American Samoa said that the position of the people of American Samoa had been consistent, with their desire to retain their political status with the United States.
They were independent within a federalized system of self-governing States and Territories.
American Samoa had made progress on the issue of self-governance and was in the process of now calling for a constitutional review in 2005.
Two issues needed to be clarified before conducting this constitutional convention.
A clear definition by the Special Committee of what self determination was, different from what American Samoa was doing, and second, a detailed process of what the Special Committee believed American Samoa needed to do to achieve self-governance different from what they were currently doing.
The representative of the British Virgin Islands noted that the islands had a mixed system in its Legislative Council.
There were 13 members, 4 of whom were elected at large or territorial-wide and 9 District or Constituent Representatives.
The Territory balanced its budget with a surplus and had done so over the last number of years.
It received no aid from the United Kingdom in this respect.
The 1999 White Paper, “Partnership for Progress”, indicated that the United Kingdom wanted freedom for the Territories to run their own affairs to the greatest degree possible.
Real progress was being realized, he said through the establishment of the Constitutional Review Commission in February 2004.
It consisted of 9 members of varied backgrounds and had 7 specific terms of reference and a general reference to review the overall constitution.
The report of the Commission had been submitted in April 2005 and would shortly be debated in their Legislative Council.
The representative of Saint Helena asked that the Special Committee, on behalf of the people of Saint Helena take up the following points of concern, with the British Government: the required infrastructure to support the airport project should not be funded from Saint Helena's annual aid programme.
If air access was to deliver sustainable economic development, then it was prudent that it continued with its long-awaited programme of refurbishment and update of its present essential services to allow it to survive, cost-effectively.
The policy of the Department for International Development of full cost recovery and increase of tariff before project approval was given, had to be addressed so as to encourage people to remain on the island and others to return, he said.
The representative of the Territory also noted that the right to nationality should in principle be included in their new constitution, as set forth in Article 15 in the Universal Declaration of Human Right.
Saint Helenians had been without a nationality when they were deprived of British citizenship, which was only restored in 2002, and they did not want a recurrence of this.
He further noted that the Saint Helena status should not be included in their new constitution as it was not a human right and, therefore, not applicable.
Saint Helenians did not need to be protected in this way.
Provision for the acquisition of Saint Helena status was contained in the local legislation.
Inclusion of the Saint Helena status in the constitution would undermine that law and could create an unsatisfactory situation in the future for Saint Helena.
The representative of Turks and Caicos Islands stated that the Turks and Caicos Islands was a British Overseas Territory.
As a Government, they were not content with the relationship or constitutional arrangement.
They had come into office on a mandate for economic as well as political change.
The Constitutional Commission submitted its report over two years ago, and while they had had two meetings with United Kingdom officials on the matter, the talks now seemed stalled.
Further, in the talks that had taken place, it did not appear to this government that there was a sincere willingness or effort to negotiate in good faith a new constitutional arrangement that reflected the aspiration of the Turks and Caicos people, as it had been reflected in their vote in the 2002 election and the Constitutional Commission recommendations.
The Chief Minister therefore called upon the Special Committee to use its influence to encourage the Government of the United Kingdom to meet its responsibilities to their territories, which aspired to be decolonized and to assist them in doing so and not tell them, as they had done in the past, to accept the status quo or jump to independence, without offering a parachute.
This was a direct violation of human rights and dignity of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands.
A reasonable period of full-internal self-governance was the parachute they were seeking, a period to put in place the necessary institutions to ensure the protection of human rights, democratic principles, independence of the judiciary, and good governance, among others, in a new State.
The representative of the United States Virgin Islands indicated that the participation of his territory in international organisations was important to capacity building in preparation for the assumption of more autonomy.
He outlined the programme of government participation in the United Nations proceedings on decolonization dating back to 1975, and the annual presentation of official statements to the Special Committee and Fourth Committee since the 1980s.
He chronicled the role of the United States Virgin Islands as an associate member in the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, and in its subsidiary Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee, the latter of which the territory served as chairman in 1988-1989, and again in 2004-2005.
He presented information on the historical participation of the United States Virgin Islands, and a number of other Non-Self Governing Territories, in the capacity of observers, in United Nations world conferences in the economic and social sphere, beginning with the 1992 Earth Summit and most recently in the 2005 International Meeting on the Sustainable Development of Small Island States, as well as in selected special sessions of the General Assembly.
He expressed concern that there had been no action on the request contained in the relevant General Assembly resolution calling for the participation of the United States Virgin Islands in the UNESCO Archival Programme, and called for implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and ECOSOC on assistance to the Non-Self Governing Territories.
The representative of the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO) stated that the decolonization of Western Sahara has not been achieved, despite the efforts carried out by the international community during the last 15 years.
Morocco, which invaded the Territory in 1975 in the framework of the illegal agreements she signed with the former colonial power, Spain, had refused to continue the implementation of the Settlement Plan approved by the Security Council in 1990-1991 and had rejected the latest peace plan elaborated by the former Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, James Baker, which had received strong support of the Council as stated in its resolution 1495 (2003).
Morocco's obstruction to the efforts undertaken by the international community constituted a serious challenge to the United Nations credibility and particularly to that of the Special Committee, which, he said in the frame work of its mandate, should reaffirm its interest and responsibilities on the matter.
As a question of decolonization, the conflict had to be resolved on the basis of the right of the people of Western Sahara to self-determination, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Security Council.
The current stalemate represented a denial of this essential right and put regional stability and security at risk.
Frente Polisario believed that the Committee should send a mission to the Territory.
A fresh assessment of the situation could bring both new momentum to the decolonization process and new hope to the Saharawi people.
United Nations Development Programme
The representative of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) stated that UNDP corporately and through its field offices has been consistent in its support of the United Nations decolonization mandate and resolutions with the provision of technical assistance inputs and expertise.
In the case of the Caribbean, the Caribbean Non-Self Governing Territories received support for the implementation of in-country policy and public awareness processes.
Earlier this year, UNDP Offices in the Caribbean had proposed providing support for a Regional Governance Programme which was seeking to build on and strengthen the robust governance traditions of the Caribbean.
UNDP Barbados office would support programming strategies to strengthen participatory democracy and promote greater participation by civil society and all population groups with the introduction of a democratic dialogue programme — using multi-stakeholder dialogue to support governance reforms in Barbados and the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States.
Representatives of the regional organizations
The representative of the African Union (AU) stated that the AU fully supported the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the exercise to the right of self-determination and independence by the populations of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The AU also supported the Plan of Action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism which aims at advancing the decolonization process in the Territories.
He underscored that the AU was seized of the question of Western Sahara and the issue of its self-determination.
The AU emphasized the importance of diplomacy and negotiations in conflict resolution.
In concluding, he remarked that efforts should be made to re-examine the bottlenecks in the implementation of the Peace Plan on Western Sahara.
The representative of the Organization of American States (OAS) thanked the Special Committee for its invitation to participate in the forum.
She observed that the OAS had a long tradition of supporting and promoting democracy and noted that the OAS Charter, signed in 1948, identified the promotion and consolidation of representative democracy as one of the Organization's primary principles.
She drew the Committee's attention to the Inter-American Democratic Charter, which promotes representative democracy as a necessary condition for the full social, economic and political development of the peoples of the Americas and in this regard commended the Charter as required reading for those who sought to promote, strengthen and preserve democracy and democratic institutions.
She noted the proposal of the Chairman of the Special Committee, that the OAS consider the dichotomy between colonization and the principles espoused in the Democratic Charter, and undertook to bring the issue to the attention of her principals.
Experts
Experts presented papers dealing with questions and issues proposed by the Special Committee:
(a) An expert from the United States Virgin Islands stated that in assessing the level of implementation of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, he had examined the recommendations of the regional seminars and the resolutions during the first decade in comparison with those of the Second International Decade at midterm.
He outlined the recurrent themes which emerged from the recommendations and resolutions in areas as political education, autonomy, legitimate political options, the UN role in the self-determination process and the human rights dimension of self-determination.
He also noted the themes of ownership of natural resources by the Territories, participation of the territories in UN programmes, the role of visiting missions, the need for expanded dissemination of information on decolonization, and the lack of implementation of decolonization resolutions including the research requirements contained in the plan of action of the International Decade.
He concluded that the achievement of full self-government should be the goal of the UN, rather than the mere adoption of resolutions to that effect, and that unless implementation of the decolonization mandate becomes the priority, the UN may not be able to withstand the pressure of inertia.
(b) An expert from Bermuda said that Independence remained the primary option for the achievement of self-determination by the people of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Elections and referendums were equally valid means for reflecting the will of the people although a referendum offered more safeguards for the incumbent party.
Integration was not an option embraced by the administering Powers but actions of the European Union through its constitution reflected an ominous move in that direction without any input from the Territories under the administration of the United Kingdom.
(c) An expert from Montserrat said that Political progress was defined as a reduction of the autonomy deficit inherent in the colonial relationship.
To achieve this, the `reserved powers' of Governors had to be negotiable.
The UK Foreign Office, however, was strongly opposed to this while all the Caribbean Chief Ministers were unanimous in their desire for minimal powers for the Governors.
The growing frustration caused by this situation could catalyse and accelerate the movement towards full self-government.
Meanwhile the perceived nexus between the affluence of the Territories and their constitutional status, persisted.
More political education was needed to break the psychology and culture of dependence.
(d) An expert from Anguilla noted that her discussion paper on the dissemination of information on decolonization and the development of political education programmes highlighted the importance of the landmark Anguilla Seminar which created an unprecedented level of awareness and of discussion on options of self-determination (free association, integration and independence).
Her paper called for a “de-shrouding” of the terms used to define the colonial reality, suggesting that the terms “British Overseas Territory” and “Administering Power” instead of “Colonies” and “Colonizing Power” created an illusion of partnership and equality.
The paper pointed out that the education process must ensure the understanding that “self-determination and self-governance” were fundamental right of the peoples and that the fact that they were “non-self-governing” meant that this basic right had been denied and violated.
The paper further called on the Special Committee as well as the political leaders and the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to challenge the Administering Power on its disregard for the options of free association and integration (options approved by the General Assembly) and its failure to prepare the Territories for self-determination.
Non-governmental organizations
A representative of the Anguilla Constitutional and Electoral Reform Committee noted that many of the people of Anguilla believed that the Foreign and Commonwealth Office already had a special constitution prepared for Anguilla, although she hoped that was not the case.
The constitutional process in Anguilla had stalled, but they were hoping to move forward very soon with renewed vigour.
The people of Anguilla called upon the United Nations to assist them and to their view that constitutional provisions should no longer be imposed upon the people of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
A representative of the Bermuda Independence Commission (Bermuda) stated that the Commission (BIC) was formed in December of 2004 by the Premier of Bermuda, the Honourable Alex Scott J.P.M.P.
Commissioners represented a broad cross section of the community.
The Commission was charged with causing a full debate on the subject, educating the people of Bermuda on independence, collecting information and presenting its report to the cabinet by the end of June 2005.
The Commission had visited a wide range of countries, consulted with experts and met with the representatives of the United Kingdom's Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
It has been made clear to the Commission by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office that the only options open to Bermuda, which by definition had a relatively advanced constitution with cabinet and a Premier, are full independence or status quo.
The Premier was likely to submit the BIC report to parliament causing further national debate.
A decision on whether the option of independence should be put to the people is likely to follow that debate.
A representative of the Cayman Islands Chamber Non-Governmental Organizations Constitutional Working Group observed that he spoke on behalf of non-governmental organizations in the Cayman Islands involved in Constitutional Review.
These organizations included: the Cayman Islands Chamber of Commerce, Cayman Ministers Association, People for Referendum, Concerned Citizens Group and the Forum.
Pastor Ebanks, who chairs the NGO group, expressed disappointment that no progress had been achieved by the Special Committee to carry out the action plan to introduce United Nations-funded programmes to educate the people about the self-determination options that had been promised during the historic Caribbean seminar held in Anguilla in 2003.
A representative of the Colegio de Abogados de Puerto Rico emphasized that since 1898 Puerto Rico had been and still was a colony of the United States.
The approval of Puerto Rico's constitution in 1952 did not change the nature of its colonial political relation with the United States of America.
In the past, several initiatives had been tried by the people of Puerto Rico, such as proposals to the United States Congress and the President, regarding plebiscites, referendums and even legal actions, with no results.
It seemed that the United States Government had no interest in dealing with the colonial situation of Puerto Rico.
For the first time in many years there was a general consensus in Puerto Rico that the present political situation was unacceptable.
The only discussion was about what should be the best and more effective process to achieve decolonization.
His organization was proposing the Constitutional Assembly on Status as the only true mechanism of self-determination.
This proposal had been adopted by two of the three political parties.
At the moment there was no serious response from the United States Government.
The representative of the Colegio de Abogados de Puerto Rico proposed that the Committee recommend to the General Assembly that Puerto Rico be re-inscribed on the list of Non-Self Governing Territories.
He expressed the hope that the Special Committee would promote an educational process in Puerto Rico, regarding all aspects of decolonization with emphasis on mechanisms such as the Constitutional Assembly on Status.
He also proposed that as part of the educational process, the Special Committee should send a visiting mission to Puerto Rico.
A representative of Free Montserrat United Movement stated that the administering Power had used its power, influence and finances to keep Montserrat in a state of colonial dependency.
He added that the administering Power had used the volcanic activity on Montserrat, to further its own agenda for holding on to Montserrat and to thwart the hopes and aspirations of the people to see some progressive move forward out of their colonial state.
Montserrat had requested that the Associated Statehood option be revisited.
He pointed out that this development was a clear indication that the people of Montserrat were not in favour of maintaining the status quo and that they wanted to see some indication of a process that would eventually lead to their own national identity and nationhood.
For its part, the administering Power contended that Montserrat had only two options: to remain tied to it in a perpetual state of dependency and control or to achieve independence.
That was the stated position that the administering Power had maintained for many years.
The administering Power appeared to have no problems spending money to keep Montserrat dependent.
However, the administering Power had yet to suggest a modality by which it would assist the Territory to move out of its colonial state, and eventually achieve independence.
A representative of the United Nations Association of the Virgin Islands stated that the Committee's recent experiences of direct contact on the ground in non-self-governing territories had illustrated the need for, and usefulness of, accurate and authoritative information on self-determination being provided to the governments and people of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the United Nations.
Recent events in the United States Virgin Islands revealed a profound lack of information and understanding of the issues of decolonization, self-determination and political status within the political directorate and the population, and a disinclination to accept correct information from local persons.
There was an urgent need for the Committee to facilitate the provision of information and education on political status issues to the Territories.
Conclusions and recommendations
At its 6th meeting, held on 19 May 2005, the Chairman presented to the participants the following conclusions and recommendations:
Eradicating colonialism, role of the Special Committee and plan of action
The United Nations has a valid ongoing role in the process of decolonization.
The mandate of the Special Committee is a major political programme of the United Nations.
After carrying out a midterm review, the seminar recommended that the Special Committee, the administering Powers and the Non-Self-Governing Territories engage in constructive discussions and innovative ways to expedite the implementation of the goals of the Second International Decade and its Plan of Action for the Eradication of Colonialism as contained in General Assembly resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000.
The participants reaffirmed the role of the Special Committee as the primary vehicle for fostering the process of decolonization and for expediting the implementation of the Plan of Action towards achieving the goals of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 55/146.
The seminar recommended that the Special Committee continue to participate actively in monitoring the evolution of the Non-Self-Governing Territories towards achieving self-determination.
The Special Committee should include, as appropriate, the participation of the representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, on a case-by-case basis, at the consultations between the Special Committee and the administering Powers.
Any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The participants noted that, in the development of work programmes for individual Territories, the participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in which there is no dispute over sovereignty should be ensured.
They also pointed out that any work programme should include an information and education campaign for the peoples of these Territories, visiting missions of the Special Committee to ascertain the situation in those Territories first-hand and a consultation process acceptable to the peoples in those Territories leading to the exercise of their right to self-determination in accordance with United Nations resolutions.
The Special Committee should continue to develop a mechanism to systematically review, on an annual basis, the implementation of the specific recommendations on decolonization with a focus on implementing the mandate as contained in General Assembly resolutions and the plan of action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
Right to self-determination
The implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 is not complete as long as there remain Non-Self-Governing Territories that have yet to exercise their right to self-determination, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions, including General Assembly and the Special Committee resolutions on special and particular colonial situations.
As long as the administering Powers exercise unilateral authority to make laws and other regulations affecting the Non-Self-Governing Territories without their consent, pursuant to such methods as legislation, orders in council and other methods, a Territory should not be considered self-governing.
In the process of decolonization, and where there are no disputes over sovereignty, there is no alternative to the principle of self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right.
All available options for self-determination are valid as long as they are in accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned and in conformity with the clearly defined principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations, and as enunciated in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and other relevant resolutions and decisions.
The participants expressed the view that, as long as there are Non-Self-Governing Territories, the inalienable rights of the peoples of those Territories must be guaranteed by the United Nations and the Special Committee in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV).
Public awareness and information campaigns
Continued examination of the spectrum of options for self-determination by all parties concerned and dissemination of relevant information among the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories are important elements in achieving the goals of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the plan of action.
The participants affirmed the need for the Special Committee to actively embark on a public awareness campaign aimed at fostering an understanding among the people of the Territories of the options for self-determination included in the relevant United Nations resolutions on decolonization, especially within the context of developing programmes of work for specific Territories.
The seminar recommended that the Special Committee, in conjunction with the Department of Public Information and other relevant United Nations bodies, develop a programme to disseminate information and raise public awareness in the Territories in order to heighten people's understanding of the legitimate political status options available to them in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions, including the 1960 Declaration, and bearing in mind the successful programmes in this vein undertaken for the former Trust Territories.
United Nations information centres should be directed to disseminate information on decolonization to the Territories and to the administering Powers.
In this regard, the participants stressed that information centres, especially those located in the Caribbean and Pacific regions, could play a significant role in disseminating information, promoting public awareness and mobilizing support for the work of the United Nations with respect to the decolonization process.
The Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations should be asked to provide support and assistance for any consultation process to be held in a Non-Self-Governing Territory regarding any act of self-determination.
The participants encouraged the United Nations to assist those Non-Self-Governing Territories that are granted observer status at United Nations world summits and conferences and special sessions of the General Assembly by facilitating the dissemination of information to them regarding the conferences and sessions.
Visiting missions
The participants confirmed the need to dispatch periodic visiting missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories with the aim of raising public awareness of decolonization issues and possible options available for self-determination, while assessing the situation in those Territories and of ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the peoples thereof regarding their future status, and called on the administering Powers to cooperate in facilitating such visiting missions.
They noted the numerous requests made at the seminar from representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories for visiting missions to be undertaken as soon as possible.
Cooperation with and assistance from agencies of the United Nations system and regional organizations
The participants supported closer cooperation between the Special Committee and the Economic and Social Council in order to promote increased United Nations assistance in the economic and social sphere to the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
All Non-Self-Governing Territories should be given access to relevant United Nations programmes in the economic and social sphere, including those emanating from the plans of action of United Nations major summits and conferences, in furtherance of capacity-building and consistent with the necessary preparation for the attainment of a full measure of internal self-government.
The seminar stressed that the wider United Nations system should continue to explore ways to strengthen existing measures of support and formulate appropriate programmes of assistance to the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories and seek concrete proposals for the full implementation of the relevant resolutions by the specialized agencies, as detailed in General Assembly resolution 56/67 of 10 December 2001.
The participants urged the Special Committee to solicit the assistance of the Economic and Social Council regarding the implementation of Council resolution 2004/53 of 23 July 2004 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations.
The participants recognized the vulnerability of small island Non-Self-Governing Territories, which continues to be of major concern and that this vulnerability will grow unless urgent steps are taken to address and strengthen the Territories' capacities, in accordance with the Mauritius Declaration of January 2005.c
The seminar reiterated its support for the current participation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the relevant regional commissions of the United Nations and in specialized agencies of the United Nations.
It called for the increased involvement of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in programmes and activities of the United Nations system in furtherance of the decolonization process, subject to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions, including General Assembly and Special Committee resolutions and decisions on specific Territories.
Participants commended the activities of the United Nations Development Programme in providing assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories and encouraged it to further develop programmes specifically designed for the Territories.
The participants requested those members of the Special Committee that are members of the Economic and Social Council to support the inclusion of Non-Self-Governing Territories that are associate members of United Nations regional commissions as observers in the Council, pursuant to the relevant resolution of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Council.
The participants recommended that the Special Committee establish closer ties with CARICOM and Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), and encouraged Non-Self-Governing Territories in the Caribbean region to develop closer contacts with the two organizations.
Constitutional and self-determination issues in the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the Caribbean and the other regions
The participants took note of the advances made and challenges faced by some Non-Self-Governing Territories in the Caribbean which may contribute to a decision regarding their exercising the right to self-determination in the near future, while others are still facing difficulties in developing a process leading to their self-determination.
The Participants drew the attention of the administering Powers to the three options listed in resolution 1541 (XV) of 1960, by which the General Assembly declared that a Non-Self-Governing Territory could attain a full measure of self-government, as envisaged in the Charter, by: emergence as a sovereign independent State; free association with an independent State; or integration with an independent State.
The participants took note of the ideas expressed by the representative of the Governor of American Samoa, including the idea that a single standard of decolonization should not be applied to every Territory.
Furthermore, they expressed their willingness to support the choice of the people of American Samoa as determined through United Nations mechanisms.
Participants also took note of the statement by the representative of American Samoa requesting information regarding the steps the Territory should take to complete the process of decolonization.
The participants noted with concern the military installations and activities of the administering Powers in Non-Self-Governing Territories, which run counter to the rights and interests of the people concerned and which create serious health and environmental hazards.
The participants, taking note of the statement made by the representative of Argentina, reiterated that the Special Committee should continue to encourage the resumption of negotiations between the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom with the aim of finding a solution to the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), taking into consideration the interests of the population of the Territory, in accordance with the relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations.
With regard to Western Sahara, the participants urged the two parties to achieve a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, which will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in the context of arrangements consistent with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, noting the role and responsibilities of the parties in this respect, and urged the parties and States of the region to continue to cooperate fully with the United Nations to end the current impasse and to achieve progress towards a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution.
The participants recalled the mandate of the Special Committee towards the self-determination for the people of Western Sahara.
Administering Powers and other Member States of the United Nations, inter-governmental organizations, United Nations programmes and civil society
The participants welcomed the presence of the representative of France as an observer and regretted the lack of representation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, taking into account its participation at previous seminars.
They reiterated their call upon all administering Powers to engage the Special Committee in constructive dialogue in the future.
The Special Committee expressed its appreciation to Argentina, Algeria, Morocco and Spain for their participation in the seminar and encouraged other Member States to continue to cooperate with the Special Committee.
The Special Committee also expressed its appreciation for the participation of representatives of the African Union, the Organization of American States, the United Nations Development Programme as well as non-governmental organizations.
Role of the regional seminars
As activities of the plan of action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, the regional seminars serve as an effective forum for focused discussion on matters of concern to the Non-Self-Governing Territories and afford opportunities for representatives of the peoples of the Territories to present their views and recommendations to the Special Committee.
The regional nature of the seminars, alternating between the Caribbean and the Pacific, remains a crucial element in their success.
The administering Powers should be urged to facilitate the participation of the elected representatives of the Territories in the seminars and in sessions of the Special Committee and the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in conformity with the relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations.
The participants recommended that the Special Committee integrate, to the extent possible, the recommendations of the Canouan seminar into its relevant resolutions on decolonization, as those recommendations are important expressions of the will of the people of the Territories.
The participants reiterated their appreciation of the outcome of the Madang seminar in 2004 and confirmed the need for the Special Committee to review the recommendations of the seminar and to make all possible efforts to include them in its follow-up actions.
The participants took note of the decision of the Special Committee to coordinate its annual seminars with other relevant activities to be conducted in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, including visiting missions, as appropriate, in order to better utilize its resources.
The Special Committee should adopt the report of the Canouan seminar and include it in its report to the General Assembly, as it did with the reports of the previous regional seminars.
The participants reiterated the importance of the conclusions and recommendations at the previous regional seminars, held in Vanuatu (1990), Barbados (1990), Grenada (1992), Papua New Guinea (1993, 1996 and 2004), Trinidad and Tobago (1995), Antigua and Barbuda (1997), Fiji (1998 and 2002), Saint Lucia (1999), the Marshall Islands (2000), Cuba (2001) and Anguilla (2003).
Also at the 6th meeting, the participants adopted a resolution expressing appreciation to the Government and the people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (see appendix VI).
Notes
a Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/59/23).
b At present, the list of Territories with which the Special Committee is concerned and to which the Declaration is applicable includes American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), Gibraltar, Guam, Montserrat, New Caledonia, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, Tokelau, the Turks and Caicos Islands, the United States Virgin Islands and Western Sahara.
c International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10-14 January 2005.
Mauritius Declaration.
Document A/CONF.207/L.6 (consolidated).
Appendix I
List of participants
Members of the Special Committee
Saint Lucia* Julian Robert Hunte Chairman of the Special Committee
Michelle Joseph Member of the Special Committee
China* Xie Yunliang Member of the Special Committee
Congo* Luc Joseph Okio Vice-Chairman of the Special Committee
Cuba* Orlando Requeijo Gual Vice-Chairman of the Special Committee
Dominica* Crispin Gregoire Member of the Special Committee
Ethiopia* Birhanemeskel Abebe Segni Member of the Special Committee
Indonesia* Muhammad Anshor Member of the Special Committee
Papua New Guinea Jimmy Ovia Member of the Special Committee
Russian Federation* Albert Sitnikov Member of the Special Committee
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Michael Browne (host country) Margaret Hughes Ferrari
Suenel Fraser
* Member of official delegation of the Special Committee.
Tunisia* Kais Kabtaani Member of the Special Committee
States Members of the United Nations
Argentina Jose Luis Vignolo
Algeria Larbi Djacta
Morocco Souad El Alaoui
Hassana Malainaine
Ali Salem Chagaf
Spain Roman Oyarzun
Administering Power
France (observer) Genevieve Pouquet-El Chami
Non-Self-Governing Territories
American Samoa Lelei Peau
British Virgin Islands Kedrick Pickering
Saint Helena Eric George
Turks and Caicos Islands Michael Misick
Osvald Skippings
Jeffrey Hall
Norman Hamilton
United States Virgin Islands Carlyle Corbin
Western Sahara Ahmed Boukhari
Non-governmental organizations
Anguilla Constitutional and Electoral Lolita Davis Richardson Reform Committee (Anguilla)
Bermuda Independence Commission Michael Winfield (Bermuda)
Cayman Islands Non-Governmental Al Ebanks Organizations Constitutional Wil Pineau Working Group (Cayman Islands)
Colegio de Abogados de Julio Enrique Fontanet de Puerto Rico (Puerto Rico)
Free Montserrat United Movement Chedmond Browne (Montserrat)
United Nations Association of the Judith Bourne Virgin Islands (United States Virgin Islands)
Experts
Carlyle Corbin (United States Virgin Islands)
Walton Brown (Bermuda)
Sir Howard Fergus (Montserrat)
Phyllis Fleming-Banks (Anguilla)
Programmes, funds, specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system
United Nations Development Programme Paula Mohamed
Regional organization
Africa Union Omotayo Olaniyan
Organization of American States Melene Glynn
Observer
Joseph Bossano (Gibraltar)
Appendix II
Statement by the Honourable Michael Browne, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Commerce and Trade of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
On behalf of the government and people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, I wish to extend a warm welcome to the beautiful island of Canouan, one of the lovely jewels of our multi-island country here in the Windward Islands.
It is a special pleasure for me to address this opening ceremony of the 2005 Caribbean Regional Seminar on the Implementation of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
We are delighted that the Committee on Decolonisation accepted our invitation to host this important forum which we in the Eastern Caribbean regard as a highly significant activity to promote the future development of the remaining small island non-self-governing territories in the Atlantic/Caribbean region and elsewhere.
Caribbean countries take seriously the responsibility of fostering the self-determination and decolonization processes, especially in our neighbouring countries which are part and parcel of our Caribbean civilization, but which have not yet achieved a full measure of self-government.
In the Eastern Caribbean, this is especially critical since we regard the small territories — many of whom are our closest neighbours — as integral to the social and economic fabric of the Caribbean.
To confirm this commitment, all six of the independent States of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) are members of the Special Committee.
Caribbean governments have provided important mechanisms for the integration of many of these territories in our institutions.
In the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), three Caribbean territories are associate members while one is a full member.
In the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), five territories are associate members and one is a full member.
Further, two of the territories under review of the Special Committee share our common Eastern Caribbean currency.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines views the continued and expanded participation of these territories in regional institutions as a natural part of the Caribbean regional integration process.
These regional bodies also have a special and complex dimension in this era of rapidly accelerating globalisation, requiring innovative strategies to meet the target of full decolonization by the end of this decade.
As was concluded at the 2004 seminar in Papua New Guinea, we must begin to think outside of the basket.
Clearly, the dynamic chairman of the Special Committee would have it no other way.
I am confident that these next three days will yield important results which will inform the process as it proceeds through the Special Committee proceedings in June, through to the General Assembly in the Fall, and most importantly, into the implementation phase.
Indeed, without implementation, the recommendations will only gather dust on the shelf.
We must ensure that this does not continue, as has happened so tragically in the past.
I wish you, the participants, all the best in your important deliberations.
I hope you will find time to enjoy the unique attractions of this beautiful Island and also visit some of the neighbouring Islands.
Just to the South are the world famous Tobago Cays.
It would be a shame if you failed to enrich your life experience by seeing these national treasures first hand.
I now formally declare open the 2005 Caribbean Regional Seminar on the implementation of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
Appendix III
Statement by Julian Robert Hunte, Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia to the United Nations, Chairman of the Special Committee
On behalf of the member States of the Special Committee, I wish to reiterate my thanks to the Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for its generous offer to host this midterm review of the implementation of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, as we seek to assess progress made by the international community in carrying out its sacred mandate of advancing the self-determination process for the peoples of the remaining non self-governing territories.
Members of the Special Committee join me in expressing our gratitude for the most gracious hospitality extended to us since our arrival in this most picturesque part of the beautiful Windward Islands.
My own country of Saint Lucia, as a neighbouring Windward Island State, takes special pride in the fact that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has become the most recent of our small island countries to offer itself as the venue for these proceedings.
This region has a special role to play in completing the decolonization process for the remaining territories whose shores are washed by our beloved Caribbean Sea, and whose peoples are integral to the further development of our Caribbean civilization.
It was not so long ago that many of our countries were in a similar position of political and constitutional deficiency.
We faced some of the same uncertainties regarding “the way forward” that are experienced today in many of the remaining territories.
It is hoped that those of us who achieved a full measure of self-government in year's past, through independence, free association or integration, can provide useful insights for those who will follow.
The year 2005 is a significant historical benchmark in the decolonization process, as two important activities converge to shed light on how far we have come in advancing the self-determination process, and how much remains to be done.
The first activity to which I refer is the five-year review of the Millennium Declaration which, among its important pronouncements, is the re-dedication of the international community to support efforts towards the right to self-determination of peoples.
The second event is the midterm review of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism which is designed to assess the state-of-play in decolonization.
This seminar convenes at the convergence of these two events, and a “Canouan Consensus” emerging from our dialogue should offer important insights for implementation of the road map on self-determination.
Preceding the Millennium Declaration, and the first — and now second — Plan of Action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, has been a long legislative authority for the realization of decolonization.
We recall the series of resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, since its creation, through to the present day.
We cite similar resolutions approved by the United Nations Economic and Social Council.
We note the significant mandates contained in various human rights conventions such as:
• The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
• The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
• The Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
Arising from this extensive mandate is the consistent reaffirmation by all United Nations Member States to develop programmes of political education in the territories on the options of political equality, to provide assistance to the territories from United Nations agencies, to conduct visiting missions, to operationalize the human rights dimension of self-determination, and to promote the repatriation of natural resources to the territories, among other directives.
We are aware of the annual re-affirmation by the General Assembly for a transfer of powers to the peoples of the territories, consistent with sustained requests for such devolution of power resonating in many of these territories.
We are also aware of the many forward-thinking recommendations advanced before the Special Committee by the peoples of the territories themselves, including the enhancement of the role of such United Nations bodies as the Electoral Unit, the Committee on Human Rights, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations regional commissions, and the United Nations specialized agencies in providing support to the territories in their process of political and socio-economic advancement.
We are further mindful of the measures called for in the plans of action of the international decades, especially the essential research and analysis on the situation on the ground in the individual territories that is critical to bridging the information deficit on decolonization.
These commitments continue to serve as the extensive and fundamental legislative authority for the way forward.
The fact remains, however, that this issue is very much unresolved precisely because the critical element of implementation of the decolonization mandate has been woefully insufficient.
It is only through implementation that we can bring to fruition this unfinished agenda of the United Nations by the end of this second decade.
In my opening address to the 2005 session of the Special Committee last February, I pointed out that we are going to have to undertake innovative measures to bridge the information gap on the situation in the territories, to urge the wider UN system to fulfil its mandate on assistance to the territories, and to enact a sustainable approach to the attainment of the full measure of self-government.
Indeed, these issues have been with us for much too long, and it must be emphasized that the responsibility of member States and the United Nations machinery does not end with the adoption of resolutions on decolonization.
The second half of this decade must be concentrated on implementation.
Otherwise, we will continue in a never-ending spiral of in-action, to return, year after year, to begin again.
It is not my intention — nor, I am sure, the intention of my colleagues on the Special Committee — to be party to a process of inaction, with the adoption of resolutions as our only goal.
It is our intention, however, to accelerate our efforts, to “think outside the box,” by expanding our engagement with the wider United Nations system, and other relevant bodies.
This is why I am especially heartened that we have with us at this seminar Mrs. Paula Mohammed of the UNDP Office in Barbados who oversees the governance programme for the Eastern Caribbean.
The role of UNDP in providing support for the constitutional reform process in Anguilla several years ago was an important step in advancing the critical role that UNDP can play in modernizing the governance models in the remaining territories.
The present assistance provided by UNDP to the United Nations Special Mission to Bermuda is another indication of that role, and I take this opportunity to express our appreciation to Mr. Tom Gittens, UNDP's programme manager for the Atlantic/Caribbean, for his encouragement and commitment to the advancement of the territories under his purview.
On the Pacific side, discussions on UNDP assistance to the New Zealand-administered territory of Tokelau, as it proceeds towards free association, is another promising development.
Just as decolonization is essentially a function of governance, it is, undeniably, also a function of democracy.
I am therefore especially heartened by the presence of Ms. Merlene Glynn, the representative of the Organization of American States based here in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
The OAS has had an historical role in monitoring the decolonization process, within the framework of its earlier agenda item on “Non-Autonomous Territories in the American Hemisphere.” Whilst this is no longer an active OAS agenda item, the self-determination of the territories in the Americas remains very much a hemispheric issue, and can be viewed within the scope of the OAS Democracy Charter.
Indeed, colonialism as a contemporary practice is inconsistent with the principle of democracy, and the OAS can contribute significantly to the decolonization process by considering this dichotomy within its activities related to the Democracy Charter.
As we continue to move ahead, we are pleased to see the sustained interest among those who have historically supported these efforts.
In this connection, I am delighted to acknowledge the presence of Ms. Susan Gordon, the Director of the Multilateral Relations Division of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who only a few short years ago represented her country on the Special Committee at United Nations Headquarters.
Indeed, my colleague Ambassador Phillip Sealy, the Permanent Representative of Trinidad and Tobago to the United Nations, was a member of the Special Committee visiting missions to several Caribbean territories in the earlier stages of his career.
It is our goal here in Canouan to ascertain at this midpoint of the second decade what steps we need to put in place to advance the decolonization process.
The work of the United Nations in this area is enhanced each year through the convening of these regional seminars which bring together, for an important exchange of views and information, the various stakeholders in the advancement of democratic governance.
I am confident that this regional seminar will serve to heighten the awareness of Member States on the complexities of the situation in the individual territories.
I am optimistic that we will also be able to enhance the knowledge base of the representatives of the territories here with us on the statutory role of the wider United Nations system in facilitating the attainment of absolute political equality.
I am hopeful that we will be able to elaborate on the importance of the minimum standards of absolute political equality set forth in the legitimate political status options of integration, free association, or independence.
Now more than ever, I am of the view that the principles of full and absolute political equality must continue as the guiding standard in addressing the self-determination process of the small island territories, if we are to avoid the spectre of “colonies in perpetuity” where the unilateral authority of the administering powers remains the determining factor in the decision-making process.
I anticipate serious discussion on these issues here in Canouan this week, and I look forward to our dialogue as we seek to further refine our approach to solving the decolonization dilemma held over from the twentieth century.
Appendix IV
Message from the Secretary-General
It gives me pleasure to send my greetings to all the participants in this Caribbean Regional Seminar on Decolonization, which takes place during the week of solidarity with the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The people and Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines merit our gratitude for hosting this event and for their ongoing support of the United Nations.
This gathering of representatives of the Territories, the administering Powers, and civil society provides a valuable opportunity to take stock of the progress that has been made in decolonization, and more importantly to formulate strategies for achieving the objective of eradicating colonialism before the end of this decade.
I urge you to have an open, frank and constructive exchange of views.
The successes of the United Nations in decolonization should inspire and encourage us in our efforts to ensure that the people of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories can exercise their right to self-determination, in accordance with the 1960 Declaration regarding colonial countries and peoples.
Toward that end, it is essential that they understand the options regarding their political status and their right to choose their future freely.
It is also important that they are aware of the United Nations activities and programmes of assistance that are available to them.
As was seen in the case of Tokelau, cooperation on the part of all concerned, especially the administering Powers, is vital.
The Secretariat will continue to support your efforts, and stands ready to help develop decolonization plans on a case-by-case basis with the participation of the representatives of the people of the Territories.
I commend the Special Committee for its hard work, and offer all the participants in this seminar my best wishes for success.
Appendix V
Statement by the Rapporteur of the Special Committee
First of all, this Seminar is about carrying out a review and appraisal of the implementation of the objectives of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
The Plan of Action adopted by the General Assembly is very clear about what the ultimate goal of the Decade is: the full implementation of the 1960 Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, what we call for short, the Declaration on Decolonization, which is contained in resolution 1514 (XV).
The Plan of Action is specific as to the measures that should be taken at various levels, be it at the international level, by Member States, by the United Nations — including the Special Committee and the Secretary-General — by the administering Powers, by the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and by non-governmental organizations.
That is why, we have formulated our agenda to reflect the issues highlighted in the Plan of Action.
In convening this Seminar at the mid-point of the Decade, the Special Committee wished to benefit from the constructive analysis and critique by the participants at this event, in taking stock of what has been achieved thus far and specially, of what remains to be done.
We look forward to your contribution in this important task.
I will refer to only a few points in the Plan of Action.
In Section II of the Plan of Action, the Assembly states that the international community, composed of member States, the United Nations system and governmental and non-governmental organizations should join to assist the Territories.
In this respect, I should like to point out that there are many instances of assistance to Territories from individual Member States as well as from the United Nations system.
However, it is also increasingly apparent that whereas several Territories have benefited from such assistance, there are many other Territories have had scant or no information as to what assistance is available to them.
These Seminars are one way in which the Special Committee disseminates information on decolonization and on the activities of the United Nations in favour of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The presence of representatives of the United Nations Development Programme, the Economic Commissions and specialized agencies at these meetings is particularly helpful and we wish to draw the attention to participants from the Territories that attendance to the Seminars of the Special Committee provides an opportunity for them to have direct access to these representatives.
We invite participants to make suggestions as to how the dissemination of information on assistance available could be enhanced.
In this respect, I should also like to point out that some Territories have become associate members of United Nations Economic Regional Commissions and as such, they participate in the work of these Commissions and in activities of the United Nations — such as international conferences and special sessions of the General Assembly — subject to the relevant rules of procedure and decisions.
The advantages of having access to forums where issues of vital concern are discussed and where policy recommendations are made are self-evident.
The Plan of Action calls for the international community to enable the peoples of the Territories to exercise their right to self-determination and decide on their future political status with complete knowledge and awareness of the full range of political options available to them.
It specially calls on the United Nations in cooperation with the administering Powers to ensure that such information is available to the peoples of the Territories.
This is a key issue.
Resolution 1541 (XV) outlines three options — independence, integration and free association.
Resolution 2625 (XXV) mentions “any other political status freely determined by a people”.
In practice, in some cases popular consultations or referendums have given the people of the Territory a choice between integration or independence (for instance, in East Timor, now Timor Leste).
In others, the choice has been between free association and independence (for instance Palau and the Marshall Islands).
The Special Committee recognizes that each Territory is unique and therefore the decolonization process for the Territories has to be considered on a case-by-case basis.
The Plan of Action also calls on the international community to ensure that all political exercises relating to self-determination are carried out in an atmosphere conducive to the open expression of the interests and aspirations of the peoples of the Territories with the United Nations playing an appropriate role.
The Special Committee has reiterated these necessary conditions in its pronouncements and consultations with the administering Powers and representatives of the Territories.
This brings me to another point emphasized by the Plan of Action in Section III: that the United Nations with the administering Powers ensure that all acts of self-determination be preceded by adequate and unbiased campaigns of political education.
The Special Committee has carried these messages to the Non-Self-Governing Territories, most recently to Bermuda, during the special mission that visited the Territory last March.
As you know, the obligations of the administering Powers in promoting political, economic, social, cultural and economic advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories are established by the Charter of the United Nations as is the responsibility of the administering Powers to transmit information on the Territories.
I should like to recall that the Special Committee presented to the administering Powers in 1999 a proposal to hold informal consultations and develop, with the participation of the representatives of the Territories, a programme of work for the decolonization of the Territories on a case by case basis, taking into account the unique characteristics of each Territory.
We in the Special Committee intend to follow up on this proposal and invite the administering Powers during the 2005 session of the Special Committee, to resume dialogue in this regard.
We are keenly aware of the fact that for the Special Committee to make progress in fulfilling its decolonization mandate, it needs the cooperation of the administering Powers.
The cooperation of New Zealand with respect to Tokelau is exemplary as it is encouraging.
In Section IV, the Plan of Action calls on the administering Powers to continue to cooperate or resume cooperation with the Special Committee and actively involve themselves in its work.
The Special Committee has shown flexibility in agreeing to informal discussions to advance the cause of decolonization.
We hope that in this spirit, we can resume informal consultations with the administering Powers.
The Plan of Action also contains specific requests of the Special Committee.
For instance, it states that the Special Committee should continue to seek, as a matter of priority the full cooperation of administering Powers with regard to the dispatch of visiting missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The Committee has sought such cooperation convinced of the usefulness of such activities.
I mentioned earlier that a special mission visited Bermuda in March.
The Mission's report has not yet been published as a document, but in informal discussions with the members of the Special Mission that visited Bermuda, it becomes evident that a great wealth of information has been gained as a result of the visit, by both the people in the Territory and the members of the Special Committee.
Obviously, it would be desirable that the visiting missions or special missions could take place in the framework of a plan for the decolonization of specific Territories agreed to with the administering Power and the representatives of the Territories on a case-by case basis.
The political impact of such visits is also important in that it reassures the Non Self Governing Territories of the fact that their situation is monitored and followed at the United Nations and that their cause can count on the support of the international community.
The Committee has been asked to prepare periodic analyses of the progress and extent of the implementation of the Declaration.
This matter has been brought up in previous seminars and meetings of the Special Committee.
The reports of the Committee, the statements of its Chairman and the recommendations it submits to the General Assembly on individual Territories and on issues such as international assistance and economic interests are parts of such analysis.
The Committee relies on information received at Seminars, meetings of the Committee, reports of the Secretary-General and of the President of ECOSOC, submissions by experts and non-governmental organizations and at visiting missions, to monitor the implementation of the Declaration.
In this connection, the Seminars continue to be a useful forum to review progress achieved, particularly because of the open and frank nature of the discussions that take place.
The Plan of Action foresaw this important role of the Seminars when it requested the Committee to organize them during the Second Decade.
Another issue on which we seek information from Seminar participants is in the review of the impact of the economic and social situation on the constitutional and political advancement of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
These issues are a permanent concern of the Committee and we encourage and welcome the input of the representatives of the Territories, Member States, experts and NGOs.
The ideas, suggestions and recommendations of participants will be given full consideration by the Special Committee and will assist in formulating its own recommendations for action with particular emphasis on the next five years of the Decade.
Appendix VI
Resolution on expression of appreciation to the Government and the people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
The participants in the Caribbean regional seminar,
Having met from 17 to 19 May 2005 in Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, for the purpose of carrying out a midterm review of the progress achieved in the implementation of the plan of action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Having heard the important statement by The Honourable Michael Browne, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Commerce and Trade of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Taking note of the important statements by the representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Express their profound gratitude to the Government and the people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for providing the Special Committee with the necessary facilities for its seminar, for the outstanding contribution they have made to the success of the seminar and, in particular, for the very generous and kind hospitality and the warm and cordial reception accorded to the participants throughout their stay in Canouan.
Chapter III
Dissemination of information on decolonization
The Special Committee considered the question of dissemination of information on decolonization at its 3rd meeting, on 6 June 2005.
In its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, including, in particular, resolution 59/135 of 10 December 2004 on the dissemination of information on decolonization and resolution 59/136 of the same date on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
The Special Committee held consultations with representatives of the Department of Public Information and of the Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat at its 3rd meeting, on 6 June (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.3).
At the same meeting, the Chairman of the Special Committee drew attention to the report of the Secretary-General on the dissemination of information on decolonization (A/AC.109/2005/18) and a draft resolution on the item submitted by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2005/L.4).
Also at the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of Cuba, Mali, Congo, Venezuela (the Bolivarian Republic of), Bolivia, Papua New Guinea and Dominica.
Representatives of Bolivia and Mali made further statements (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.3).
At the same meeting, in the course of his statement during the introduction of the draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.4, the Chairman proposed the following oral revisions, by which:
(a) In the third preambular paragraph, the words “achieving the goals of” would be replaced by the words “implementing the plan of action of”;
(b) In operative paragraph 2, the words “and expand” would be inserted after the words “Considers it important to continue”;
(c) In operative paragraph 3, the words “take into account the suggestions” would be replaced by the words “implement the recommendations”;
(d) In operative paragraph 3 (a), the word “continue” would be replaced by the words “develop procedures”;
(e) In operative paragraph 3 (c), the word “maintain” would be replaced by the word “develop”;
(f) In operative paragraph 4, the words “continue to extend their cooperation in” would be replaced by the word “accelerate”;
(g) In operative paragraph 5, the words “on the implementation of the present resolution” would be inserted after the words “sixty-first session”.
Also at the same meeting, the Committee decided to defer consideration of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.4 until the conclusion of consultations between the Departments of Public Information, Political Affairs and the Chairman of the Committee (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.3).
At the 5th meeting, on 8 June, the Chairman drew members' attention to the revised draft resolution contained in document A/AC.109/2005/L.4/Rev.1 (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.3).
At the same meeting, the Committee decided to waive the 24-hour rule under rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Assembly and consider the draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.4/Rev.1 (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.3).
Also at the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.4/Rev.1 without a vote.
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2003/L.4/Rev.1, adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 8 June 2005, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in part III of the present report (see chap.
XII, sect.
Chapter IV
Question of sending visiting missions to Territories
The Special Committee considered the question of sending visiting missions to Territories at its 3rd and 5th meetings, on 6 and 8 June 2005.
In its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, including, in particular, the pertinent provisions of resolution 59/136 of 10 December 2004 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and resolutions 59/133 and 59/134 A and B of the same date relating to specific Territories.
In addition, the Special Committee considered the specific Territories referred to it, taking into account the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/135 and 59/136, as well as previous decisions of the Special Committee relating to the question.
At its 3rd meeting, on 6 June 2005, the Chairman drew attention to a draft resolution on the item (A/AC.109/2005/L.6) and proposed the following oral revisions to the draft resolution, by which:
(a) In the fourth preambular paragraph, the word “and” before the words “in other relevant resolutions” would be deleted and the words “and in the plan of action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism”, would be added;
(b) In the sixth preambular paragraph, the words “United Nations” would be inserted before the words “special mission”;
(c) In operative paragraph 1, the words “and the plan of action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,” would be added at the end of the paragraph;
(d) Operative paragraph 3 would be replaced by the following text:
“Requests the administering Powers to consider resuming formal cooperation with the Special Committee in furtherance of the decolonization mandate of the General Assembly”;
(e) In operative paragraph 4, the words “as appropriate” at the end of the paragraph would be replaced by the words “on the results of those consultations”.
At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.6, as orally revised, without a vote.
By adopting at its 10th meeting, on 20 June a consolidated resolution on 11 small Non-Self-Governing Territories (A/AC.109/2004/L.11) and its 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005, a resolution on Tokelau (A/AC.109/2005/L.15) the Special Committee endorsed a number of conclusions and recommendations concerning the sending of visiting missions to Territories, as reflected in its recommendations to the General Assembly in chapters X and XI (see also chap.
XII, sect.
E, relating to Tokelau, and sect.
F, relating to American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands).
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.6, as orally revised, adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 6 June 2005, reads as follows:
Question of sending visiting missions to Territories
The Special Committee,
Having considered the question of sending visiting missions to Territories,
Recalling the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Special Committee requesting the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the United Nations by receiving visiting missions in the Territories under their administration,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide an effective means of assessing the situation in those Territories and of ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the peoples thereof regarding their future status,
Conscious that United Nations visiting missions enhance the capacity of the United Nations to assist the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories in attaining the objectives set forth in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, in other relevant resolutions of the Assembly, and in the plan of action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New Zealand, as an administering Power, in the work of the Special Committee, and that, at the invitation of the Government of New Zealand, two visiting missions were dispatched to Tokelau in July 1994 and in August 2002,
Noting with satisfaction the cooperation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as an administering Power, in facilitating a United Nations special mission to Bermuda in March and May 2005,
Welcoming the continuing informal dialogue between the Special Committee and some administering Powers,
Stresses the need to dispatch periodic visiting missions to Non-Self-Governing Territories in order to facilitate the full, speedy and effective implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples with respect to those Territories, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization and the plan of action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism;
Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate or continue to cooperate with the United Nations by receiving United Nations visiting missions in the Territories under their administration, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
Requests the administering Powers to consider resuming formal cooperation with the Special Committee in furtherance of the decolonization mandate of the General Assembly;
Requests its Chairman to continue consultations with the administering Powers concerned and to report thereon to the Special Committee on the results of those consultations.
Chapter V
Economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
The Special Committee considered the question of economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories at its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005.
In its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, including, in particular, resolution 59/128 of 10 December 2004 on economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The Special Committee also took into account the relevant provisions of resolution 55/146 on the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism and resolution 59/136 on the implementation of the Declaration.
Additionally, the Special Committee took into consideration the relevant documents of other intergovernmental bodies concerned, to which reference is made in the last preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.10, adopted on 20 June 2005.
During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it working papers prepared by the Secretariat containing, inter alia, information on economic conditions, with particular reference to foreign economic activities, in the following Territories: Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat, New Caledonia, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands (A/AC.109/2005/4-6, 8-9, 12-13, and 16).
At the 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, the Chairman drew attention to the various working papers prepared by the Secretariat and containing references to economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to a draft resolution on the item (A/AC.109/2005/L.10).
At the same meeting, the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran proposed an oral amendment by which, in operative paragraph 12, the words “the mass media” would be deleted and the words “and also appeals to the media to disseminate information about the developments in this regard” would be added at the end of the paragraph (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.10).
Also at the same meeting, the representatives of Bolivia and Dominica made statements.
The representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran made further statement (See A/AC.109/2005/SR.10).
At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.10, as orally amended, without a vote.
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.10, adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, section B, of the present report.
Chapter VI
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
The Special Committee considered the question of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations at its 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005.
During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of General Assembly resolution 59/129 of 10 December 2004 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations, in paragraph 20 of which the Assembly requested the Special Committee to continue to examine the question and to report thereon to the Assembly at its sixtieth session.
The Special Committee also took into account all other resolutions adopted by the Assembly on the subject, including resolution 55/146 declaring the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, as well as the report of the Secretary-General on the Second Decade containing the updated plan of action (A/56/61) and his further report on the Second Decade (A/60/71 and Add.1).
The Special Committee also took into account the relevant documents of other intergovernmental bodies concerned, to which reference is made in the fourth preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.13.
At the 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005, the Chairman drew attention to the report of the Secretary-General on the item (A/60/64) and to the information submitted by the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system on their activities with regard to the implementation of the Declaration (see E/2005/47), as well as to the draft resolution on the item (A/AC.109/2005/L.13).
With the Committee's consent, Carlyle Corbin, on behalf of the Government of the United States Virgin Islands, made a statement (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.11).
At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.13 without a vote.
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.13, adopted by the Special Committee at its 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, section C, of the present report.
Chapter VII
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations
The Special Committee considered the question of information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations at its 3rd meeting, on 6 June 2005.
During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the resolutions of the General Assembly concerning information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter and related questions, in particular resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, by which the Assembly decided, inter alia, to dissolve the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories and to transfer certain of its functions to the Special Committee, and resolution 59/127 of 10 December 2004, in paragraph 4 of which the Assembly requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in accordance with established procedures, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its sixtieth session.
Furthermore, the Special Committee took into account the relevant provisions of Assembly resolution 59/136 of 10 December 2004 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000 relating to the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
At the 3rd meeting, on 6 June 2005, the Chairman drew attention to the report of the Secretary-General on the item (A/60/69 and Corr.1), which reflected the dates of transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations by the administering Powers in regard to Territories under their respective administration, as well as to a draft resolution on the item (A/AC.109/2005/L.5).
At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.5 without a vote.
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.5, adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 6 June 2005, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, section A, of the present report.
Chapter VIII
Gibraltar, New Caledonia and Western Sahara
In its consideration of the questions of Gibraltar, New Caledonia and Western Sahara, the Special Committee took into account General Assembly resolutions 59/131 and 59/132 of 10 December 2004 and decision 59/519 of the same date, as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions.
A. Gibraltar
The Special Committee considered the question of Gibraltar at its 4th meeting, on 7 June 2005.
During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it a working paper prepared by the Secretariat containing information on developments concerning the Territory (A/AC.109/2005/17).
At the 4th meeting, the Chairman informed the Special Committee that the delegation of Spain had requested to participate in the Special Committee's consideration of the question.
The Special Committee decided to accede to that request.
At the same meeting, with the consent of the Special Committee, Peter Caruana, Chief Minister of Gibraltar, made a statement (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.4).
Also at the same meeting, in accordance with a decision taken at the 3rd meeting, a statement was made by Joseph Bossano, Leader of the Opposition in Gibraltar (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.4).
At the same meeting, the representative of Spain made a statement (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.4).
Also at the same meeting, the representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines posed the question to the Chairman.
The Chairman and the representative of Spain made statements (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.4).
On the proposal of the Chairman, the Committee decided to continue consideration of the question at its next session, subject to any directives that the General Assembly might give in that connection at its sixtieth session and in order to facilitate consideration of the question by the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), to transmit the relevant documentation to the Assembly.
New Caledonia
The Special Committee considered the question of New Caledonia at its 9th meeting, on 16 June 2005.
During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it a working paper prepared by the Secretariat containing information on developments concerning the Territory (A/AC.109/2005/13).
At the 9th meeting, on 16 June, the Chairman drew the attention of the members of the Committee to the working paper and to the text of a draft resolution contained in document A/AC.109/2005/L.9 (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.9).
At the same meeting, the representative of Fiji introduced draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.9 (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.9).
Also at the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.9 without a vote.
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.9, adopted by the Special Committee at its 9th meeting, on 16 June 2005, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, section D, of the present report.
C. Western Sahara
The Special Committee considered the question of Western Sahara at its 5th meeting, on 8 June 2005.
During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it a working paper prepared by the Secretariat containing information on developments concerning the Territory (A/AC.109/2005/2).
At its 5th meeting, on 8 June 2005, in accordance with a decision taken at the outset of the 3rd meeting, the Special Committee granted a request for hearing to Moulud Said of the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO), who made a statement at the same meeting (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.5).
At the same meeting, on the proposal of the Chairman, the Special Committee decided, subject to any directives that the General Assembly might give in that connection at its sixtieth session and in order to facilitate consideration of the question by the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), to transmit the relevant documentation to the Assembly.
Chapter IX
American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands
The Special Committee considered the question of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands at its 9th and 10th meetings, on 16 and 20 June 2005.
In its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account the provisions of General Assembly resolution 59/136 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
In paragraph 8 (c) of that resolution, the Assembly requested the Special Committee, inter alia, to continue to examine the political, economic and social situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and to recommend, as appropriate, to the General Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the populations of those Territories to exercise their right to self-determination.
The Special Committee also took into account relevant resolutions and decisions on the Territories adopted by the Assembly.
The delegations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, the administering Powers concerned, did not participate in the Special Committee's consideration of the Territories under their administration.
However, as a result of informal consultations with the Special Committee held during its substantive session in 2004, one administering Power reaffirmed its desire to continue an informal dialogue with the Special Committee.
The Special Committee considered the 11 Territories at its 9th and 10th meetings, on 16 and 20 June 2005.
During its consideration of the items, the Special Committee had before it the working papers prepared by the Secretariat on the Territories (A/AC.109/2005/4-10, 12, 14-16).
At its 9th meeting, on 16 June 2005, with the consent of the Special Committee, Carlyle Corbin, representative of the Government of the United States Virgin Islands, made a statement (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.9).
At the same meeting, in accordance with a decision taken at the 5th meeting, Shelley Moorhead made a statement on behalf of the African-Caribbean Reparations and Resettlement Alliance (ACCRA) (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.9).
Also at the same meeting, with the Committee's consent, a statement was made by the representative of the Government of Bermuda, Dianna Kempe.
On the proposal by the Chairman, the students from Bermuda were allowed to address the Committee (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.9).
At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of the Congo, China and Cuba.
Representatives of Cuba and the Congo made further statements (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.9).
On 20 June 2005, the Committee had before it the consolidated draft resolution on the item submitted by the Chairman (A/AC.109/2005/L.11).
At the 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, the Chairman made a statement wherein he introduced the consolidated draft resolution (A/AC.109/2005/L.11) relating to the questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands.
At the same meeting, the representative of the Islamic republic of Iran proposed an oral amendment by which a new operative paragraph following current operative paragraph 4 would be inserted in section XI on the United States Virgin Islands and the following paragraphs would be renumbered accordingly.
The new operative paragraph 4 would read as follows:
“4.
Welcomes the establishment of the Inter Virgin Islands Council between the elected Governments of the United States Virgin Islands and the British Virgin Islands and as a mechanism of functional cooperation between the two neighboring Territories, and the subsequent creation of eleven standing committees on natural resources management, mutual disaster preparedness and assistance, constitutional development, among other areas;”
At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.11, as orally amended, without a vote.
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.11, adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, section F, of the present report.
Chapter X
Tokelau
The Special Committee considered the question of Tokelau at its 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005.
During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it a working paper prepared by the Secretariat containing information on developments concerning the Territory (see A/AC.109/2005/3).
At the 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005, with the consent of the Special Committee, the Ulu o Tokelau and the Administrator of Tokelau made statements (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.11).
At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of Bolivia, Chile, the Congo, Cuba and the Syrian Arab Republic (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.11).
Also at the same meeting, the representative of Fiji introduced draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.15 (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.11).
At the same meeting, the Special Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.15, without a vote.
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.15, adopted by the Special Committee at its 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005, appears in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly in chapter XII, section E, of the present report.
Chapter XI
Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The Special Committee considered the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) at its 8th meeting, on 15 June 2005.
In its consideration of the item, the Special Committee took into account paragraph 4 (b), section D, of the annex to the General Assembly resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004, as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions.
During its consideration of the item, the Special Committee had before it a working paper prepared by the Secretariat containing information on developments concerning the Territory (A/AC.109/2005/17).
At the 8th meeting, the Chairman informed the Special Committee that the delegations of Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay had requested to participate in the Special Committee's consideration of the item.
The Special Committee decided to accede to the requests.
At the same meeting, in accordance with a decision taken at its 5th and 7th meeting, statements were made by The Honourable John Birmingham and The Honourable Stephen C. Luxton of the Legislative Council of the Falkland Islands, James Douglas Lewis and Luis Gustavo Vernet (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.8).
At the same meeting, the representative of Chile introduced, also on behalf of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Bolivia and Cuba, a draft resolution on the item (A/AC.109/2005/L.8).
At the same meeting, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship of Argentina made a statement (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.8).
At the same meeting, statements were made by the representatives of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Bolivia, Brazil (on behalf of the Rio Group), China, Cuba, Grenada, Indonesia, Paraguay (on behalf of the MERCOSUR countries, plus Bolivia, Chile and Peru), Peru, the Russian Federation, Sierra Leone, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uruguay (see A/AC.109/2005/SR.8).
At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.8 without a vote.
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.8, adopted by the Special Committee at its 8th meeting, on 15 June 2005, reads as follows:
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The Special Committee,
Having considered the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
Aware that the maintenance of colonial situations is incompatible with the United Nations ideal of universal peace,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2065 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 3160 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 31/49 of 1 December 1976, 37/9 of 4 November 1982, 38/12 of 16 November 1983, 39/6 of 1 November 1984, 40/21 of 27 November 1985, 41/40 of 25 November 1986, 42/19 of 17 November 1987 and 43/25 of 17 November 1988, Special Committee resolutions A/AC.109/756 of 1 September 1983, A/AC.109/793 of 21 August 1984, A/AC.109/842 of 9 August 1985, A/AC.109/885 of 14 August 1986, A/AC.109/930 of 14 August 1987, A/AC.109/972 of 11 August 1988, A/AC.109/1008 of 15 August 1989, A/AC.109/1050 of 14 August 1990, A/AC.109/1087 of 14 August 1991, A/AC.109/1132 of 29 July 1992, A/AC.109/1169 of 14 July 1993, A/AC.109/2003 of 12 July 1994, A/AC.109/2033 of 13 July 1995, A/AC.109/2062 of 22 July 1996, A/AC.109/2096 of 16 June 1997, A/AC.109/2122 of 6 July 1998, A/AC.109/1999/23 of 1 July 1999, A/AC.109/2000/23 of 11 July 2000, A/AC.109/2001/25 of 29 June 2001, A/AC.109/2002/25 of 19 June 2002 and A/AC.109/2003/24 of 16 June 2003 and the resolution adopted on 18 June 2004 and Security Council resolutions 502 (1982) of 3 April 1982 and 505 (1982) of 26 May 1982,
Distressed that, notwithstanding the time that has elapsed since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX), this prolonged dispute has not yet been settled,
Aware of the interest of the international community in the resumption by the Governments of the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland of their negotiations in order to find as soon as possible a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the sovereignty dispute relating to the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
Expressing its preoccupation over the fact that the good level of relations between Argentina and the United Kingdom has not yet led to negotiations on the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
Considering that this situation should facilitate the resumption of the negotiations in order to find a peaceful solution to the dispute over sovereignty,
Reaffirming the principles of the Charter of the United Nations on the non-use of force or the threat of force in international relations and the peaceful settlement of international disputes,
Calling attention to the importance of the Secretary-General continuing his efforts to give full effect to the mission entrusted to him by the General Assembly in the resolutions on the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
Reaffirming the need for the parties to take due account of the interests of the population of the islands in accordance with the provisions of the General Assembly resolutions on the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
Reiterates that the way to put an end to the special and particular colonial situation in the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) is the peaceful and negotiated settlement of the dispute over sovereignty between the Governments of the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland;
Takes note of the views expressed by the President of the Argentine Republic on the occasion of the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
Regrets that, in spite of the widespread international support for a negotiation between the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom that includes all aspects on the future of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), the implementation of the General Assembly resolutions on this question has not yet started;
Requests the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom to consolidate the current process of dialogue and cooperation through the resumption of negotiations in order to find as soon as possible a peaceful solution to the sovereignty dispute relating to the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly resolutions 2065 (XX), 3160 (XXVIII), 31/49, 37/9, 38/12, 39/6, 40/21, 41/40, 42/19 and 43/25;
Reiterates its firm support for the mission of good offices of the Secretary-General in order to assist the parties in complying with the request made by the General Assembly in its resolutions on the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas);
Decides to keep under review the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) subject to the directives that the General Assembly has issued and may issue in that regard.
Chapter XII
Recommendations
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations
Recommendation of the Special Committee
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.5, adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 6 June 2005, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly.
Draft resolution I
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which the Assembly requested the Special Committee to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 59/127 of 10 December 2004, in which the Assembly requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Stressing the importance of timely transmission by the administering Powers of adequate information under Article 73 e of the Charter, in particular in relation to the preparation by the Secretariat of the working papers on the Territories concerned,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General,1
Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations, the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory;
Requests the administering Powers concerned to transmit or continue to transmit to the Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate information is drawn from all available published sources in connection with the preparation of the working papers relating to the Territories concerned;
Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures.
Economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
Recommendation of the Special Committee
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.10, adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2004, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly.
Draft resolution II
Economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “Economic and other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories”,
2 To be issued as Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/60/23), chap.
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the item,2
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well as all other relevant Assembly resolutions, including, in particular, resolutions 46/181 of 19 December 1991 and 55/146 of 8 December 2000,
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under their administration and to protect the human and natural resources of those Territories against abuses,
Reaffirming also that any economic or other activity that has a negative impact on the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and on the exercise of their right to self-determination in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) is contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Reaffirming further that the natural resources are the heritage of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the indigenous populations,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location, size and economic conditions of each Territory, and bearing in mind the need to promote the economic stability, diversification and strengthening of the economy of each Territory,
Conscious of the particular vulnerability of the small Territories to natural disasters and environmental degradation,
Conscious also that foreign economic investment, when undertaken in collaboration with the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and in accordance with their wishes, could make a valid contribution to the socio-economic development of the Territories and also to the exercise of their right to self-determination,
Concerned about any activities aimed at exploiting the natural and human resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the final documents of the successive Conferences of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community,
Reaffirms the right of peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories to self-determination in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as well as their right to the enjoyment of their natural resources and their right to dispose of those resources in their best interest;
Affirms the value of foreign economic investment undertaken in collaboration with the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and in accordance with their wishes in order to make a valid contribution to the socio-economic development of the Territories;
Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and reaffirms the legitimate rights of their peoples over their natural resources;
Reaffirms its concern about any activities aimed at the exploitation of the natural resources that are the heritage of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the indigenous populations, in the Caribbean, the Pacific and other regions, and of their human resources, to the detriment of their interests, and in such a way as to deprive them of their right to dispose of those resources;
Reaffirms the need to avoid any economic and other activities that adversely affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
Calls once again upon all Governments that have not yet done so to take, in accordance with the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, legislative, administrative or other measures in respect of their nationals and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and operate enterprises in the Non-Self-Governing Territories that are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises;
Reiterates that the damaging exploitation and plundering of the marine and other natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, in violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, are a threat to the integrity and prosperity of those Territories;
Invites all Governments and organizations of the United Nations system to take all possible measures to ensure that the permanent sovereignty of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories over their natural resources is fully respected and safeguarded in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
Urges the administering Powers concerned to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the inalienable right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to their natural resources and to establish and maintain control over the future development of those resources, and requests the administering Powers to take all necessary steps to protect the property rights of the peoples of those Territories in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
Calls upon the administering Powers concerned to ensure that no discriminatory working conditions prevail in the Territories under their administration and to promote in each Territory a fair system of wages applicable to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue, through all means at his disposal, to inform world public opinion of any activity that affects the exercise of the right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to self-determination in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
Appeals to trade unions and non-governmental organizations, as well as individuals, to continue their efforts to promote the economic well-being of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and also appeals to the media to disseminate information about the developments in this regard;
Decides to follow the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories so as to ensure that all economic activities in those Territories are aimed at strengthening and diversifying their economies in the interest of their peoples, including the indigenous populations, and at promoting the economic and financial viability of those Territories;
Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session.
C. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
Recommendation of the Special Committee
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.13, adopted by the Special Committee at its 10th meeting, on 20 June 2005, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly.
Draft resolution III
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations”,
5 To be issued as Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/60/23), chap.
Having also considered the report of the Secretary-General3 and the report of the Economic and Social Council4 on the item,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the item,5
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and the resolutions of the Special Committee, as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions, including in particular Economic and Social Council resolution 2004/53 of 23 July 2004,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the final documents of the successive Conferences of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community,
Conscious of the need to facilitate the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in resolution 1514 (XV),
Noting that the large majority of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories are small island Territories,
Welcoming the assistance extended to Non-Self-Governing Territories by certain specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme,
Also welcoming the current participation in the capacity of observers of those Non-Self-Governing Territories that are associate members of regional commissions in the world conferences in the economic and social sphere, subject to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions, including resolutions and decisions of the Assembly and the Special Committee on specific Territories,
Noting that only some specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system have been involved in providing assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Stressing that, because the development options of the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories are limited, there are special challenges to planning for and implementing sustainable development and that those Territories will be constrained in meeting the challenges without the continuing cooperation and assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system,
Stressing also the importance of securing the necessary resources for funding expanded programmes of assistance for the peoples concerned and the need to enlist the support of all major funding institutions within the United Nations system in that regard,
Reaffirming the mandates of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to take all appropriate measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions,
Expressing its appreciation to the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum, the Caribbean Community and other regional organizations for the continued cooperation and assistance they have extended to the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in this regard,
Expressing its conviction that closer contacts and consultations between and among the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and regional organizations help to facilitate the effective formulation of programmes of assistance to the peoples concerned,
Mindful of the imperative need to keep under continuous review the activities of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in the implementation of the various United Nations resolutions and decisions relating to decolonization,
Bearing in mind the extremely fragile economies of the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories and their vulnerability to natural disasters, such as hurricanes, cyclones and sea-level rise, and recalling the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 59/129 of 10 December 2004 on the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;1
Recommends that all States intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in which they are members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
Reaffirms that the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system should continue to be guided by the relevant resolutions of the United Nations in their efforts to contribute to the implementation of the Declaration and all other relevant General Assembly resolutions;
Reaffirms also that the recognition by the General Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations organs of the legitimacy of the aspirations of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to exercise their right to self-determination entails, as a corollary, the extension of all appropriate assistance to those peoples;
Expresses its appreciation to those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system that have continued to cooperate with the United Nations and the regional and subregional organizations in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and requests all the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to implement the relevant provisions of those resolutions;
Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and international and regional organizations to examine and review conditions in each Territory so as to take appropriate measures to accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of the Territories;
Urges those specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system that have not yet provided assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories to do so as soon as possible;
Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system and regional organizations to strengthen existing measures of support and formulate appropriate programmes of assistance to the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories, within the framework of their respective mandates, in order to accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of those Territories;
Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system concerned to provide information on:
(a) Environmental problems facing the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
(b) The impact of natural disasters, such as hurricanes and volcanic eruptions, and other environmental problems, such as beach and coastal erosion and droughts, on those Territories;
(c) Ways and means to assist the Territories to fight drug trafficking, money-laundering and other illegal and criminal activities;
(d) The illegal exploitation of the marine resources of the Territories and the need to utilize those resources for the benefit of the peoples of the Territories;
Recommends that the executive heads of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system formulate, with the active cooperation of the regional organizations concerned, concrete proposals for the full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and submit the proposals to their governing and legislative organs;
Also recommends that the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system continue to review at the regular meetings of their governing bodies the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
6 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 21 (E/1998/41), chap.
III, sect.
7 See ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 21 (E/2004/41), chap.
III, sect.
Welcomes the adoption by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean of its resolution 574 (XXVII) of 16 May 19986 calling for the necessary mechanisms for its associate members, including small island Non-Self-Governing Territories, to participate in the special sessions of the General Assembly, subject to the rules of procedure of the Assembly, to review and assess the implementation of the plans of action of those United Nations world conferences in which the Territories originally participated in the capacity of observer, and in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies;
Also welcomes the adoption by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean of its resolution 598 (XXX) of 2 July 2004,7 in which the Commission welcomed the participation of associate members in the United Nations world conferences and special sessions and reiterated its request, as contained in its resolution 574 (XXVII), for the establishment of necessary mechanisms for the participation of associate members of regional economic commissions in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies;
Requests the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, in consultation with the President of the Economic and Social Council, to explore the potential modalities for the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean;
Requests the Department of Public Information, in consultation with the United Nations Development Programme, the specialized agencies and the Special Committee, to prepare an information leaflet on assistance programmes available to the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to disseminate it widely among them;
Welcomes the continuing initiative exercised by the United Nations Development Programme in maintaining close liaison among the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, including the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, and in providing assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
Encourages Non-Self-Governing Territories to take steps to establish and/or strengthen disaster preparedness and management institutions and policies;
Requests the administering Powers concerned to facilitate, when appropriate, the participation of appointed and elected representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the relevant meetings and conferences of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions, including resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Special Committee on specific Territories, so that the Territories may benefit from the related activities of those agencies and organizations;
Recommends that all Governments intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system of which they are members to accord priority to the question of providing assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and to prepare for submission to the relevant bodies, with the assistance of those agencies and organizations, a report on the action taken in implementation of the relevant resolutions, including the present resolution, since the circulation of his previous report;
Commends the Economic and Social Council for its debate and resolution on this question, and requests it to continue to consider, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate measures for the coordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
Requests the specialized agencies to report periodically to the Secretary-General on the implementation of the present resolution;
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the governing bodies of the appropriate specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations so that those bodies may take the necessary measures to implement the resolution, and also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution;
Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session.
Question of New Caledonia
Recommendation of the Special Committee
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.9, adopted by the Special Committee at its 9th meeting, on 16 June 2005, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly.
Draft resolution IV
Question of New Caledonia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/60/23), chap.
9 A/AC.109/2114, annex.
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to New Caledonia,8
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960,
Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New Caledonia by the French authorities, in cooperation with all sectors of the population, to promote political, economic and social development in the Territory, including measures in the area of environmental protection and action with respect to drug abuse and trafficking, in order to provide a framework for its peaceful progress to self-determination,
Noting also, in this context, the importance of equitable economic and social development, as well as continued dialogue among the parties involved in New Caledonia in the preparation of the act of self-determination of New Caledonia,
Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New Caledonia and neighbouring countries of the South Pacific region,
Welcomes the significant developments that have taken place in New Caledonia as exemplified by the signing of the Nouméa Accord of 5 May 1998 between the representatives of New Caledonia and the Government of France;9
Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of all the people of New Caledonia, to maintain, in the framework of the Nouméa Accord, their dialogue in a spirit of harmony;
Notes the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord aimed at taking more broadly into account the Kanak identity in the political and social organization of New Caledonia, and also those provisions of the Accord relating to control of immigration and protection of local employment;
Also notes the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord to the effect that New Caledonia may become a member or associate member of certain international organizations, such as international organizations in the Pacific region, the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the International Labour Organization, according to their regulations;
Further notes the agreement between the signatories of the Nouméa Accord that the progress made in the emancipation process shall be brought to the attention of the United Nations;
Welcomes the fact that the administering Power invited to New Caledonia, at the time the new institutions were established, a mission of information which comprised representatives of countries of the Pacific region;
Calls upon the administering Power to continue to transmit to the Secretary-General information as required under Article 73 e of the Charter;
Invites all the parties involved to continue promoting a framework for the peaceful progress of the Territory towards an act of self-determination in which all options are open and which would safeguard the rights of all sectors of the population, according to the letter and the spirit of the Nouméa Accord, which is based on the principle that it is for the populations of New Caledonia to choose how to control their destiny;
Welcomes measures that have been taken to strengthen and diversify the New Caledonian economy in all fields, and encourages further such measures in accordance with the spirit of the Matignon and Nouméa Accords;
Also welcomes the importance attached by the parties to the Matignon and Nouméa Accords to greater progress in housing, employment, training, education and health care in New Caledonia;
Acknowledges the contribution of the Melanesian Cultural Centre to the protection of the indigenous Kanak culture of New Caledonia;
Notes the positive initiatives aimed at protecting the natural environment of New Caledonia, notably the “Zonéco” operation designed to map and evaluate marine resources within the economic zone of New Caledonia;
Acknowledges the close links between New Caledonia and the peoples of the South Pacific and the positive actions being taken by the French and territorial authorities to facilitate the further development of those links, including the development of closer relations with the countries members of the Pacific Islands Forum;
Welcomes, in this regard, the accession by New Caledonia to the status of observer in the Pacific Islands Forum, continuing high-level visits to New Caledonia by delegations from countries of the Pacific region and high-level visits by delegations from New Caledonia to countries members of the Pacific Islands Forum;
Welcomes also the cooperative attitude of other States and Territories in the region towards New Caledonia, its economic and political aspirations and its increasing participation in regional and international affairs and its intention to host the 2005 meeting of the Ministerial Committee of the Pacific Islands Forum;
Decides to keep under continuous review the process unfolding in New Caledonia as a result of the signing of the Nouméa Accord;
Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue the examination of the question of the Non-Self-Governing Territory of New Caledonia and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session.
E. Question of Tokelau
Recommendation of the Special Committee
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.15, adopted by the Special Committee at its 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly.
Draft resolution V
Question of Tokelau
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Tokelau,
10 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/60/23), chap. X.
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Tokelau,10
Recalling General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to Non-Self-Governing Territories, in particular General Assembly resolution 59/133 of 10 December 2004,
Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New Zealand as the administering Power with regard to the work of the Special Committee relating to Tokelau and its readiness to permit access by United Nations visiting missions to the Territory,
Noting also with appreciation the collaborative contribution to the development of Tokelau by New Zealand and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme,
Recalling the inauguration in 1999 of a national legislative body, the General Fono, based on village elections by universal adult suffrage and the assumption by that body in June 2003 of full responsibility for the Tokelau budget,
Recalling also the report of the United Nations mission dispatched in August 2002 to Tokelau at the invitation of the Government of New Zealand and the representatives of Tokelau,11
Noting that, as a small island Territory, Tokelau exemplifies the situation of most remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories and that, as a case study pointing to successful cooperation for decolonization, Tokelau has wider significance for the United Nations as it seeks to complete its work in decolonization,
Recalling that New Zealand and Tokelau signed in November 2003 a document entitled “Joint statement of the principles of partnership”, which sets out in writing, for the first time, the rights and obligations of the two partner countries,
Recalling also the decision of the General Fono at its meeting in November 2003, following extensive consultations undertaken in all three villages, to explore formally with New Zealand the option of self-government in free association,
Notes that Tokelau remains firmly committed to the development of self-government and to an act of self-determination that would result in Tokelau assuming a status in accordance with the options on future status for Non-Self-Governing Territories contained in principle VI of the annex to General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960;
Welcomes the substantial progress made in the past year towards the devolution of power to the three taupulega (village councils), in particular the delegation of the Administrator's powers to the three taupulega with effect from 1 July 2004 and the assumption by each taupulega from that date of full responsibility for the management of all its public services;
Notes in particular the decision of the General Fono in November 2003, following extensive consultations in all three villages and a meeting of the Special Committee on the Constitution of Tokelau, to explore formally with New Zealand the option of self-government in free association, and the discussions now under way between Tokelau and New Zealand pursuant to the General Fono decision;
Notes that the General Fono has endorsed a series of recommendations of the workshop of the Special Committee on the Constitution held in Tokelau in October 2003 with the support of the United Nations Development Programme relating to Tokelau's Constitution, the role and functioning of the General Fono, the judicial system and international human rights conventions;
Acknowledges Tokelau's initiative in devising a strategic economic development plan for the period 2002-2004 to advance its capacity for self-government and notes that a further plan is now being finalized for the period 2005-2007;
Also acknowledges the continuing assistance that New Zealand has committed to promoting Tokelau's welfare, as well as the cooperation of the United Nations Development Programme, including the relief and recovery assistance provided in the aftermath of cyclone Percy earlier this year;
Further acknowledges Tokelau's need for continued reassurance, given the cultural adjustments that are taking place with the strengthening of its capacity for self-government and, since local resources cannot adequately cover the material side of self-determination, the ongoing responsibility of Tokelau's external partners to assist Tokelau in balancing its desire to be self-reliant to the greatest extent possible with its need for external assistance;
Welcomes the establishment of the Tokelau International Trust Fund to support the future development needs of Tokelau and the facilitation of this process through a donor round table to be convened by the United Nations Development Programme following an act of self-determination by Tokelau, and calls upon Member States and international and regional agencies to announce contributions to the Fund and thereby lend practical support to assist this emerging country in overcoming the problems of smallness, isolation and lack of resources;
Also welcomes the assurance of the Government of New Zealand that it will meet its obligations to the United Nations with respect to Tokelau and abide by the freely expressed wishes of the people of Tokelau with regard to their future status;
Further welcomes the cooperative attitude of the other States and territories in the region towards Tokelau, its economic and political aspirations and its increasing participation in regional and international affairs;
Welcomes the associate membership of Tokelau in the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, its recent accession to membership in the Forum Fisheries Agency and its application for observer status at the Pacific Islands Forum and associate membership in the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission;
Calls upon the administering Power and United Nations agencies to continue to provide assistance to Tokelau as it further develops its economy and governance structures in the context of its ongoing constitutional evolution;
Welcomes the actions taken by the administrative Power to transmit information regarding the political, economic and social situation of Tokelau to the Secretary-General;
Notes with satisfaction the successful visit to Tokelau in October 2004 by the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to attend the workshop of the Tokelauan Special Committee on the Constitution;
Also notes the considerable progress made towards the adoption of a Constitution and of national symbols by Tokelau, the steps taken by Tokelau and New Zealand to develop a draft treaty of free association as a basis for an act of self-determination and the strong support expressed by Tokelauan communities in New Zealand for the move by Tokelau towards self-determination;
Welcomes the invitation extended by the representatives of Tokelau and the administering Power to the United Nations to monitor an act of self-determination by Tokelau;
Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the Non-Self-Governing Territory of Tokelau and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session.
Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands
Recommendations of the Special Committee
The text of consolidated draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.11, adopted by the Special Committee at its 9th meeting, on 20 June 2005, appears below in the form of recommendations of the Special Committee to the General Assembly.
Draft resolution VI
Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands
General
The General Assembly,
Having considered the questions of the Non-Self-Governing Territories of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands, hereinafter referred to as “the Territories”,
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/60/23), chap. IX.
13 See A/56/61, annex.
14 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Fourth committee, 3rd meeting (A/C.4/58/SR.3).
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,12
Recalling all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to those Territories, including, in particular, the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session on the individual Territories covered by the present resolution,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territories are valid as long as they are in accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned and in conformity with the clearly defined principles contained in resolutions 1514 (XV), 1541 (XV) and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960, containing the principles that should guide Member States in determining whether or not an obligation exists to transmit the information called for under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations,
Expressing its concern that more than forty-four years after the adoption of the Declaration there still remain a number of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Conscious of the importance of continuing effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2010 and the plan of action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,13
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the sentiments of the peoples of the Territories require flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options of self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial size, geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Taking note of the stated position of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on the Non-Self-Governing Territories under its administration,14
Taking note also of the stated position of the Government of the United States of America on the Non-Self-Governing Territories under its administration,15
Taking note further of the stated positions of the representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories before the Special Committee and in its regional seminars,
Noting the constitutional developments in some Non-Self-Governing Territories about which the Special Committee has received information,
Aware of the importance both to the Territories and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected and appointed representatives of the Territories in the work of the Special Committee,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the peoples of the Territories should continue to guide the development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Convinced also that any negotiations to determine the status of a Territory must take place with the active involvement and participation of the people of that Territory, under the supervision of the United Nations, on a case-by-case basis, and that the views of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in respect of their right to self-determination should be ascertained,
Aware of the importance of the international financial services for the economies of some of the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels, including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the Territories, that some Territories have not received a United Nations visiting mission for a long time and that no visiting missions have been sent to some of the Territories, and considering the possibility of sending further visiting missions to the Territories at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Powers,
Mindful also that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the peoples of the Territories and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the administering Powers and to receive information from other appropriate sources, including the representatives of the Territories, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the peoples of the Territories,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to embark actively on a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the peoples of the Territories in gaining an understanding of the options of self-determination,
15 See ibid., Plenary Meetings, 72nd meeting (A/58/PV.72), and corrigendum.
Mindful, in this connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at Headquarters and other venues, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate, and that the regional nature of the seminars, which alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in their success, while recognizing the need for reviewing the role of those seminars in the context of a United Nations programme for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Mindful also that, by holding a Caribbean regional seminar in Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005, the Special Committee was able to hear the views of the representatives of the Territories and Member States as well as organizations and experts in the region, in order to review the political, economic and social conditions in the Territories,
16 See Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolution adopted by the Conference.
17 See A/CONF.172/9, chap. 1.
18 See Report on the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April-6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap.
19 Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994, (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.95.XIII.18), chap.
I, resolution 1, annex.
20 Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3-14 June 1996 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.97.IV.6), chap.
I, resolution 1, annex II.
21 Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August-4 September 2002, A/CONF.199/20.
22 See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap.
23 See resolution 2200 (XXI), annex.
Conscious of the particular vulnerability of the Territories to natural disasters and environmental degradation and, in this connection, bearing in mind the applicability to the territories of the programmes of action of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development,16 the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction,17 the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,18 the International Conference on Population and Development,19 the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II),20 the World Summit on Sustainable Development,21 the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance22 and other relevant United Nations world conferences and summits,
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Aware that the Human Rights Committee, as part of its mandate under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,23 reviews the status of the self-determination process of small island Territories under examination by the Special Committee,
Recalling the ongoing efforts of the Special Committee in carrying out a critical review of its work with the aim of making appropriate and constructive recommendations and decisions to attain its objectives in accordance with its mandate,
Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of the Territories to self-determination, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization, there is no alternative to the principle of self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human rights conventions;
Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the peoples of the Territories themselves to determine freely their future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and in that connection reiterates its long-standing call for the administering Powers, in cooperation with the territorial Governments, to promote political education in the Territories in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV);
Requests the administering Powers to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General information called for under Article 73 e of the Charter;
Stresses the importance of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples being apprised of the views and wishes of the peoples of the Territories and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope of the existing political and constitutional arrangements between the Non-Self-Governing Territories and their respective administering Powers;
Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Powers under the Charter to promote the economic and social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territories, and recommends that priority continue to be given, in consultation with the territorial Governments concerned, to the strengthening and diversification of their respective economies;
Requests the Special Committee to continue to follow closely the developments in legislation in the area of international financial services and their impact on the economy in some of the Territories;
Requests the Territories and the administering Powers to take all necessary measures to protect and conserve the environment of the Territories under their administration against any environmental degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned to continue to monitor environmental conditions in those Territories;
Welcomes the participation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in regional activities, including the work of regional organizations;
Stresses the importance of implementing the plan of action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,24 in particular by expediting the application of the work programme for the decolonization of each Non-Self-Governing Territory, on a case-by-case basis and by completing the periodic analyses of the progress and extent of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in each Territory;
Invites the administering Powers to participate fully in the work of the Special Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to advise the Special Committee on the implementation of provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote self-government in the Territories;
Urges Member States to contribute to the efforts of the United Nations to usher in a world free of colonialism within the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and calls upon them to continue to give their full support to the Special Committee in its endeavours towards that noble goal;
Notes that some Non-Self-Governing Territories have expressed concern at the procedure followed by one administering Power, contrary to the wishes of the Territories themselves, namely, of amending or enacting legislation for the Territories through Orders in Council, in order to apply to the Territories the international treaty obligations of the administering Power;
Takes note of the constitutional reviews in the Territories administered by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and led by the territorial Governments designed to address the internal constitutional structure within the present territorial arrangement;
Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the midterm review of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,25 and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session on the implementation of decolonization resolutions adopted since the declaration of the Second International Decade;
Requests the Special Committee to collaborate with the Human Rights Committee within the framework of its mandate on the right to self-determination as contained in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights23 with the aim of exchanging information, given that the Committee reviews political and constitutional developments in many of the Non-Self-Governing Territories that are under review by the Special Committee;
Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session.
Individual territories
The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
American Samoa
Taking note of the position of the administering Power and the statements of representatives of American Samoa made in the regional seminars expressing satisfaction with the Territory's present relationship with the United States of America,
Noting that the Government of the Territory continues to take steps to increase revenues and decrease Government expenditures,
Noting also that the Territory, similar to isolated communities with limited funds, continues to experience a lack of adequate medical and other infrastructural facilities,
26 Pursuant to Secretary's Order 2657, Department of the Interior, United States of America.
Notes that the Department of the Interior of the United States of America provides that the Secretary of the Interior has administrative jurisdiction over American Samoa;26
Calls upon the administering Power to continue to assist the territorial Government in the economic and social development of the Territory, including measures to rebuild financial management capabilities and strengthen other governmental functions of the Government of the Territory, and welcomes the assistance from the administering Power to the Territory in its recovery efforts following the recent floods;
Welcomes the invitation extended to the Special Committee by the Governor of American Samoa and reiterated, most recently at the Caribbean regional seminar held in Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005, to send a visiting mission to the Territory, calls upon the administering Power to facilitate such a mission, and requests the Chairman of the Committee to take all the necessary steps to that end;
Takes note of the statement of the representative of the Governor of the Territory at the Caribbean regional seminar requesting the Special Committee to provide information on the process of self-governance;
Anguilla
Taking note of the constitutional review process led by the territorial Government,
Recalling the holding of the 2003 Caribbean regional seminar in Anguilla, the first time that the seminar has been held in a Non-Self-Governing Territory,
Noting the desire of the territorial Government and the people of Anguilla for a visiting mission by the Special Committee,
Aware of the efforts of the Government of Anguilla to continue to develop the Territory as a viable offshore centre and well-regulated financial centre for investors by enacting modern company and trust laws, as well as partnership and insurance legislation, and computerizing the company registry system,
Welcomes the constitutional review process led by the Government of Anguilla in cooperation with the administering Power;
Recalls the cooperation of the territorial Government of Anguilla and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in holding the 2003 Caribbean regional seminar in Anguilla, and notes that the staging of the seminar in a Non-Self-Governing Territory for the first time, as well as a town hall meeting between the people of Anguilla and the Special Committee during the seminar, contributed to its success;
Bermuda
Noting the results of the independence referendum held on 16 August 1995, conscious of the different viewpoints of the political parties of the Territory on the future status of the Territory, and aware of the active boycott of the referendum by the then-opposition party,
Also noting the statement of the Premier of Bermuda in his Founder's Day address that there could never be a true democracy as long as the country remains a colony or an overseas dependent Territory, and that only with independence can national unity be forged and pride in being Bermudian fully developed;
Welcomes the agreement reached in June 2002 between the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Territory formally transferring the former military base lands to the territorial Government, and the provision of financial resources to address some of the environmental problems;
Welcomes the dispatch of the United Nations special mission to Bermuda at the request of the territorial Government and with the concurrence of the administering Power, which provided information to the people of the Territory on the role of the United Nations in the process of self-determination, on the legitimate political status options as clearly defined in General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and on the experiences of other small States that have achieved a full measure of self-government;
Decides to follow closely the public consultations on the future political status of Bermuda under way in the Territory, and requests the relevant United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested, in the context of its public education programme;
British Virgin Islands
Taking note of the constitutional review process led by the territorial Government,
Noting that the Territory continues to emerge as one of the world's leading offshore financial centres,
Welcomes the constitutional review process led by the Government of the British Virgin Islands in cooperation with the administering Power;
Takes note of the statement made by the representative of the Legislative Council of the Territory at the Caribbean regional seminar held in Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005, who presented an analysis of the internal constitutional review process;
Welcomes the establishment of the Inter-Virgin Islands Council between the elected Governments of the British Virgin Islands and the United States Virgin Islands as a mechanism for functional cooperation between the two neighbouring Territories and the subsequent creation of eleven standing committees on natural resources management, mutual disaster preparedness and assistance and constitutional development, among other areas;
Cayman Islands
Taking note of the constitutional review process led by the territorial Government,
Noting the approval by the Cayman Islands Legislative Assembly of the Territory's Vision 2008 Development Plan, which aims to promote development that is consistent with the aims and values of Caymanian society,
Welcomes the continuing constitutional review process led by the Government of the Cayman Islands in cooperation with the administering Power;
Takes note of the statement made by the representative of the Non-Governmental Organizations Constitutional Working Group of the Cayman Islands Chamber of Commerce at the Caribbean regional seminar held in Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005, which called for a comprehensive educational programme, to be defined by the Special Committee, on the issue of self-determination, as well as a visiting mission to the Territory;
Guam
Recalling that, in a referendum held in 1987, the registered and eligible voters of Guam endorsed a draft Guam Commonwealth Act that would establish a new framework for relations between the Territory and the administering Power, providing for a greater measure of internal self-government for Guam and recognition of the right of the Chamorro people of Guam to self-determination for the Territory,
Recalling also the requests by the elected representatives and non-governmental organizations of the Territory that Guam not be removed from the list of the Non-Self-Governing Territories with which the Special Committee is concerned, pending the self-determination of the Chamorro people and taking into account their legitimate rights and interests,
Aware that negotiations between the administering Power and the territorial Government on the draft Guam Commonwealth Act are no longer continuing and that Guam has established the process for a self-determination vote by the eligible Chamorro voters,
Cognizant that the administering Power continues to implement its programme of transferring surplus federal land to the Government of Guam,
Noting that the people of the Territory have called for reform in the programme of the administering Power with respect to the thorough, unconditional and expeditious transfer of land property to the people of Guam,
Conscious that immigration into Guam has resulted in the indigenous Chamorros becoming a minority in their homeland,
Aware of the potential for diversifying and developing the economy of Guam through commercial fishing and agriculture and other viable activities,
27 See A/AC.109/2058, para.
Recalling the dispatch in 1979 of a United Nations visiting mission to the Territory, and noting the recommendation of the 1996 Pacific regional seminar for sending a visiting mission to Guam,27
Calls upon the administering Power to take into consideration the expressed will of the Chamorro people as supported by Guam voters in the plebiscite of 1987 and as provided for in Guam law, encourages the administering Power and the territorial Government of Guam to enter into negotiations on the matter, and requests the administering Power to inform the Secretary-General of progress to that end;
Requests the administering Power to continue to assist the elected territorial Government in achieving its political, economic and social goals;
Also requests the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to continue to transfer land to the original landowners of the Territory;
Further requests the administering Power to continue to recognize and respect the political rights and the cultural and ethnic identity of the Chamorro people of Guam, and to take all necessary measures to respond to the concerns of the territorial Government with regard to the question of immigration;
Requests the administering Power to cooperate in establishing programmes specifically intended to promote the sustainable development of economic activities and enterprises, noting the special role of the Chamorro people in the development of Guam;
Also requests the administering Power to continue to support appropriate measures by the territorial Government aimed at promoting growth in commercial fishing and agricultural and other viable activities;
Montserrat
Taking note with interest of the statements made and the information on the political and economic situation in Montserrat provided by the Chief Minister of the Territory to the Caribbean regional seminar, held at The Valley, Anguilla, from 20 to 22 May 2003,
Noting with concern the dire consequences of a volcanic eruption, which led to the evacuation of three quarters of the Territory's population to safe areas of the island and to areas outside the Territory, in particular Antigua and Barbuda and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and which continues to have enduring consequences for the economy of the island,
Welcoming the continued assistance provided to the Territory by States members of the Caribbean Community, in particular Antigua and Barbuda, which has offered safe refuge and access to educational and health facilities, as well as employment for thousands who have left the Territory,
Noting the continuing efforts of the administering Power to deal with the consequences of the volcanic eruption,
Noting with concern that a number of the inhabitants of the Territory continue to live in shelters because of volcanic activity,
Taking note of the constitutional review process led by the territorial Government,
Calls upon the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, as well as regional and other organizations, to continue to provide assistance to the Territory in alleviating the consequences of the volcanic eruption;
Welcomes the continuing constitutional review process led by the Government of Montserrat in cooperation with the administering Power;
Pitcairn
Taking into account the unique nature of Pitcairn in terms of population and area,
Requests the administering Power to continue its assistance for the improvement of the economic, social, educational and other conditions of the population of the Territory and to continue its discussions with the representatives of Pitcairn on how best to support their economic security;
Saint Helena
Taking into account the unique character of Saint Helena, its population and its natural resources,
Taking note of the constitutional review process led by the territorial Government and the consultative poll with regard to a new Constitution held in Saint Helena on 25 May 2005,
Aware of the efforts of the administering Power and the territorial authorities to improve the socio-economic conditions of the population of Saint Helena, in particular in the sphere of food production, continuing high unemployment and limited transport and communications,
Noting the importance of improving the infrastructure and accessibility of Saint Helena,
Noting also the importance of the right to nationality for Saint Helenians and their request that it, in principle, be included in the new Constitution,
Noting with concern the problem of unemployment on the island and the joint action of the administering Power and the territorial Government to deal with it,
Welcomes the continuing constitutional review process and the recent consultative poll led by the Government of Saint Helena in cooperation with the administering Power;
Also welcomes the decision by the administering Power to provide funding for the construction of an international airport on Saint Helena to become operational in 2010, including all required infrastructure;
Requests the administering Power and relevant international organizations to continue to support the efforts of the territorial Government to address the socio-economic development challenges, including the high unemployment and the limited transport and communications problems, as well as to support the additional infrastructure required for the airport project;
Calls upon the administering Power to take into account the concerns of Saint Helenians with regard to the right to nationality;
Turks and Caicos Islands
Noting the results of the general election held in April 2003,
Noting with concern the vulnerability of the Territory to drug trafficking and related activities, as well as its problems caused by illegal immigration and the need for continued cooperation between the administering Power and the territorial Government in countering drug trafficking and money-laundering,
Taking note of the constitutional review process led by the territorial Government,
Welcomes the continuing constitutional review process led by the Government of the Turks and Caicos Islands in cooperation with the administering Power;
Takes note of the statement made by the Chief Minister of the Territory at the Caribbean regional seminar held in Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005, that his Government was in favour of a reasonable period of full internal self-government before moving to independence;
United States Virgin Islands
Taking note with interest of the statements made and the information provided by the representative of the Governor of the Territory at the Caribbean regional seminar held in Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005,
Noting the continuing interest of the territorial Government in seeking associate membership in the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States and observer status in the Caribbean Community and the pending request by the Territory to the administering Power for the delegation of authority to proceed, as well as the 2003 resolution of the territorial legislature in support of that request,
Noting also the expressed interest of the territorial Government to be included in regional programmes of the United Nations Development Programme,
Noting further the necessity of further diversifying the economy of the Territory and the efforts of the Government of the Territory to promote the Territory as an offshore financial services centre,
Recalling that the Territory has not received a United Nations visiting mission since 1977, and bearing in mind the formal request of the Territory for such a mission in 1993 to assist the Territory in its political education process and to observe the Territory's only referendum on political status options in its history,
Noting the stated position of the elected Government of the Territory in opposition to legislation presently before the Congress of the administering Power to appoint a chief financial officer against the wishes of the elected Government of the Territory, and bearing in mind resolution 1664 of 17 December 2003 adopted by the Legislature of the Territory at its twenty-fifth session, in which it opposed the proposal and indicated that it would retard political and civil progress,
Noting also the ongoing cooperation between the territorial Government and Denmark on the exchange of artefacts and archives,
Requests the administering Power to continue to assist the territorial Government in achieving its political, economic and social goals;
Once again requests the administering Power to facilitate the participation of the Territory, as appropriate, in various organizations, in particular the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community and the Association of Caribbean States;
Calls for the inclusion of the Territory in regional programmes of the United Nations Development Programme, consistent with the participation of other Non-Self-Governing Territories;
Welcomes the establishment of the Inter Virgin Islands Council between the elected Governments of the United States Virgin Islands and the British Vigin Islands and as a mechanism of functional cooperation between the two neighbouring Territories, and the subsequent creation of eleven standing committees on natural resources management, mutual disaster preparedness and assistance, constitutional development, among other areas;
Calls upon the administering Power to refrain from enacting any legislative or other measures that would reduce the authority of the elected Government of the Territory to control its own financial affairs;
Notes the position of the territorial Government, including its articulation in resolution 1609 of 9 April 2001, adopted by the Legislature of the Territory at its twenty-fourth session, of its opposition to the assumption by the administering Power of submerged land in territorial waters, having regard to relevant resolutions of the General Assembly on the ownership and control of natural resources, including marine resources, by the people of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and its calls for the return of those marine resources within its jurisdiction;
Notes with appreciation the cooperation agreements existing between the Territory and Denmark, the former colonial Power of the Territory, on the exchange of artefacts and the repatriation of archival material, consistent with the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001,22 and once again requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, under its records and archives management programme, to assist the Territory in carrying out its artefacts and archival initiative.
Dissemination of information on decolonization
Recommendation of the Special Committee
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.4, adopted by the Special Committee at its 3rd meeting, on 6 June 2005, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly.
Draft resolution VII
Dissemination of information on decolonization
The General Assembly,
28 A/60/23, chap.
29 A/56/61, annex.
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization,28
Recalling General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular General Assembly resolution 59/135 of 10 December 2004,
Recognizing the need for flexible, practical and innovative approaches towards reviewing the options of self-determination for the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories with a view to implementing the plan of action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,29
Reiterating the importance of dissemination of information as an instrument for furthering the aims of the Declaration, and mindful of the role of world public opinion in effectively assisting the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories to achieve self-determination,
Recognizing the role played by the administering Powers in transmitting information to the Secretary-General in accordance with the terms of Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations,
Aware of the role of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on decolonization,
Approves the activities in the field of dissemination of information on decolonization undertaken by the Department of Public Information and the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
Considers it important to continue and expand its efforts to ensure the widest possible dissemination of information on decolonization, with particular emphasis on the options of self-determination available for the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
Requests the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Public Information to implement the recommendations of the Special Committee to continue their efforts to take measures through all the media available, including publications, radio and television, as well as the Internet, to give publicity to the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization and, inter alia:
(a) To develop procedures to collect, prepare and disseminate, particularly to the Territories, basic material on the issue of self-determination of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
(b) To seek the full cooperation of the administering Powers in the discharge of the tasks referred to above;
(c) To develop a working relationship with the appropriate regional and intergovernmental organizations, particularly in the Pacific and Caribbean regions, by holding periodic consultations and exchanging information;
(d) To encourage the involvement of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on decolonization;
(e) To encourage the involvement of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the dissemination of information on decolonization;
(f) To report to the Special Committee on measures taken in the implementation of the present resolution;
Requests all States, including the administering Powers, to accelerate the dissemination of information referred to in paragraph 2 above;
Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this question and to report to the General Assembly on the implementation of the present resolution at its sixty-first session.
H. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Recommendation of the Special Committee
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.12, adopted by the Special Committee at its 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly.
Draft resolution VIII
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
The General Assembly,
30 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/60/23).
31 Ibid., chap.
II, annex.
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,30
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all its subsequent resolutions concerning the implementation of the Declaration, the most recent of which was resolution 59/136 of 10 December 2004, as well as the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Bearing in mind its resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000, by which it declared the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and the need to examine ways to ascertain the wishes of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories on the basis of resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions on decolonization,
Recognizing that the eradication of colonialism has been one of the priorities of the United Nations and continues to be one of its priorities for the decade that began in 2001,
Reconfirming the need to take measures to eliminate colonialism by 2010, as called for in its resolution 55/146,
Reiterating its conviction of the need for the eradication of colonialism, as well as racial discrimination and violations of basic human rights,
Noting with satisfaction the achievements of the Special Committee in contributing to the effective and complete implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization,
Stressing the importance of the formal participation of the administering Powers in the work of the Special Committee,
Noting with interest the cooperation and active participation of some administering Powers in the work of the Special Committee, and encouraging the others also to do so,
Taking note of the fact that the Special Committee held a Caribbean regional seminar on the mid-term review, follow-up and priorities for action of the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism at Canouan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, from 17 to 19 May 2005,31
Reaffirms its resolution 1514 (XV) and all other resolutions and decisions on decolonization, including its resolution 55/146, by which it declared the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and
calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with those resolutions, to take all necessary steps to enable the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories concerned to exercise fully as soon as possible their right to self-determination, including independence;
32 Resolution 217 A (III).
Reaffirms once again that the existence of colonialism in any form or manifestation, including economic exploitation, is incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;32
Reaffirms its determination to continue to take all steps necessary to bring about the complete and speedy eradication of colonialism and the faithful observance by all States of the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
Affirms once again its support for the aspirations of the peoples under colonial rule to exercise their right to self-determination, including independence, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the Special Committee to finalize before the end of 2005 a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing Territories to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
Welcomes the progress made in the ongoing consultations between the Special Committee and New Zealand, as administering Power for Tokelau, with the participation of representatives of the people of Tokelau, as evidenced by the decision of the General Fono of Tokelau in November 2003 to actively explore with New Zealand the option of self-government in free association;
Also welcomes the dispatch of the United Nations special mission to Bermuda, at the request of the territorial Government and with the concurrence of the administering Power, which provided information to the people of the Territory on the role of the United Nations in the process of self-determination, on the legitimate political status options, as clearly defined in resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960, and on the experiences of other small States which have achieved a full measure of self-government;
Requests the Special Committee to continue to seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of the Declaration and to carry out the actions approved by the General Assembly regarding the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism and the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism in all Territories that have not yet exercised their right to self-determination, including independence, and in particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals to bring about an end to colonialism and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
(b) To continue to examine the implementation by Member States of resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions on decolonization;
(c) To continue to examine the political, economic and social situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and to recommend, as appropriate, to the General Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the populations of those Territories to exercise their right to self-determination, including independence, in accordance with relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(d) To finalize before the end of 2006 a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing Territories to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(e) To continue to dispatch visiting missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories in accordance with relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(f) To conduct seminars, as appropriate, for the purpose of receiving and disseminating information on the work of the Special Committee, and to facilitate participation by the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in those seminars;
(g) To take all necessary steps to enlist worldwide support among Governments, as well as national and international organizations, for the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration and the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
33 See resolution 54/91.
(h) To observe annually the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories;33
Calls upon all States, in particular the administering Powers, as well as the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, to give effect within their respective spheres of competence to the recommendations of the Special Committee for the implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
Calls upon the administering Powers to ensure that the economic activities in the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration do not adversely affect the interests of the peoples but instead promote development, and to assist them in the exercise of their right to self-determination;
Urges the administering Powers concerned to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the inalienable rights of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to their natural resources, including land, and to establish and maintain control over the future development of those resources, and requests the administering Powers to take all necessary steps to protect the property rights of the peoples of those Territories;
Urges all States, directly and through their action in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, to provide moral and material assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and requests the administering Powers to take steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the strengthening of the economies of those Territories;
Reaffirms that the United Nations visiting missions to the Territories are an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the Territories, as well as the wishes and aspirations of their inhabitants, and calls upon the administering Powers to continue to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge of its mandate and to facilitate visiting missions to the Territories;
Calls upon the administering Powers that have not participated formally in the work of the Special Committee to do so at its session in 2006;
Requests the Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to provide economic, social and other assistance to the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to continue to do so, as appropriate, after they exercise their right to self-determination, including independence;
Approves the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during 2005,1 including the programme of work envisaged for 2006;
Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the facilities and services required for the implementation of the present resolution, as well as the other resolutions and decisions on decolonization adopted by the General Assembly and the Special Committee.
Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism
Recommendation of the Special Committee
The text of draft resolution A/AC.109/2005/L.16, adopted by the Special Committee at its 11th meeting, on 24 June 2005, appears below in the form of a recommendation of the Special Committee to the General Assembly.
Draft resolution IX
Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/146 of 8 December 2000, by which it declared the period 2001-2010 the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recalling also that 2005 marks the mid-point of the Decade,
Recalling that the Plan of Action for the Decade requested the Secretary-General to submit a report on action taken to implement the Plan of Action,
34 A/60/71 and Add.1.
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the plan of action,34
Taking into account the important contribution of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, in particular through the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;34
Calls upon Member States to redouble their efforts to implement the Plan of Action for the second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism;
Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to develop constructive programmes of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing Territories to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
Requests Member States, specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, and other governmental and non-governmental organizations actively to support and participate in the implementation of the Plan of Action during the Decade;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the necessary resources for the successful implementation of the Plan of Action;
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
See A/AC.109/2009 and A/AC.109/2002/31.
iv
v