# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA
Sixtieth session
Item 50 (b) of the provisional agenda*
Sport for peace and development: International Year of Sport and Physical Education
Report of the Secretary-General
Contents
Introduction and background
In its resolutions 58/5 of 3 November 2003 and 59/10 of 27 October 2004, the General Assembly encouraged Governments, international sports bodies and sport-related organizations to elaborate and implement partnership initiatives and development projects compatible with the education provided at all levels of schooling to help achieve the goals contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration (see resolution 55/2); encouraged the United Nations to develop strategic partnerships with the range of stakeholders involved in sport, including sports organizations, sports associations and the private sector, to assist in the implementation of sport for development programmes; stressed the need for all parties to cooperate closely with international sports bodies to elaborate a “code of good practice”; invited Governments to accelerate the elaboration of an international anti-doping convention in all sports activities; and proclaimed 2005 the International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
Pursuant to the above resolutions, the Secretary-General expressed the hope that Governments, international organizations and community groups everywhere would give serious consideration as to how sport can be included more systematically in plans to improve people's lives.
The overall goal of the International Year is to present undeniable proof that sport and physical education play a key role in the achievement of global development goals.
Through a series of international conferences and events and the publication of research documents by partner organizations, the value of sport and physical education for education, health, development and peace is being underscored.
Sport and physical education play an important role at the national and global levels.
On the national level, sport and physical education contribute to economic and social growth, improve public health and bring different communities together.
On the global level, if used consistently, sport and physical education can have a long-lasting positive impact on development, public health, peace and the environment.
A number of civil society organizations, including such sports organizations as the International Olympic Committee, have supported the commemoration of the International Year.
Institutional arrangements
In April 2004, the United Nations Office for the International Year of Sport and Physical Education was created, with financial support from Switzerland, to assist with the commemoration of the International Year and work in close coordination with the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and Peace in Geneva.
In October 2004, the United Nations New York Office of Sport for Development and Peace was created, with the financial support of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), to assist the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and Peace.
The three offices work together to advocate the power of sport as a means to promote education, health, development and peace in support of the Millennium Development Goals.
The offices also promote commemorative activities for the International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
As the lead agency for sport-related issues in the United Nations common system, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) is playing a key role during the International Year in convening Governments to advance the cause of sport and physical education and to raise awareness about sport as a means to promote education, in particular.
A core objective of the International Year is to build global partnerships that use sports as a tool for development and peace.
In January 2004, the Executive Office of the Secretary-General tasked the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP) with responsibilities in this area.
The role of UNFIP includes providing support to Adolf Ogi, the Secretary-General's Special Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace, particularly with regard to his activities to promote field-level projects using sport as a programme tool, and involving United Nations funds, programmes and agencies with partners from the sports world.
This role encompasses support for the International Year, working closely with the United Nations New York Office of Sport for Development and Peace.
UNFIP advises on United Nations partnerships and encourages foundations, the private sector, civil society, Governments and sports organizations and associations to get involved in the promotion of sport to achieve development and peace.
Its senior management engages in numerous conferences and panel discussions on the role of sport for development and peace.
UNFIP also provides administrative support to the United Nations Office for the International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
Pursuant to the conclusions of the previous report of the Secretary-General, steps have been taken to develop a common framework within the United Nations system to unite agencies, funds and programmes in their common goal to promote sport for education, health, development and peace.
Under the leadership of the United Nations New York Office of Sport for Development and Peace, inter-agency meetings of the United Nations Communications Group's Working Group on Sport for Development and Peace are convened every two weeks to discuss coordination and cooperation so as to maximize the impact of sports activities and programmes throughout the United Nations system and avoid duplication.
The objectives of the Working Group, as detailed in its business plan, are to promote a more systematic and coherent use of sport in development and peace; to generate greater support, both in terms of priority and resources, for such activities among Governments and sport-related organizations; to update the inventory of existing programmes on sport for development; to encourage the United Nations system to incorporate sport into activities aimed at achieving the Millennium Development Goals; to identify sport-related activities to be jointly implemented by United Nations agencies; and to make use of sports partnerships as part of its approach to a common development strategy and related tools.
Activities carried out so far and those in the pipeline involve cooperation with non-governmental organizations, sport federations, the private sector, foundations and others.
The Working Group is also identifying opportunities to link sport for development with the worlds of culture and music to amplify the message of the International Year.
With the support of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and Peace, in January 2005, the Government of Switzerland initiated the Group of Friends of Sport for Development and Peace at the governmental level.
The Group comprises the Permanent Representatives to the United Nations in New York of Austria, Chile, Greece, Mali, Norway, the Russian Federation, Switzerland, Tunisia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and seeks to add additional members.
The Group of Friends aims to encourage other Member States to actively include sport in their international cooperation and development policies and to work together with the various United Nations specialized agencies, programmes and funds and with the Office of the International Year and the United Nations New York Office of Sport for Development and Peace.
The Group holds monthly meetings and is planning an event at United Nations Headquarters in late 2005 that will include a high-level meeting of ministerial representatives.
National activities
National focal points
In accordance with the guidelines of the Economic and Social Council for the observance of international years, special attention was given to the role of Governments in the commemoration activities.
Member States were encouraged by the Secretary-General in a note verbale to establish multi-stakeholder national committees or national focal points to plan, coordinate and implement national observance of the International Year.
Action at the country level has made a significant contribution to the successful commemoration of the International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
Initiatives by Member States include public awareness activities, commemorative stamps and websites to widen dialogue and implementation of projects.
The majority of activities have focused on raising public awareness about the benefits of sport and physical education in social and educational programmes.
In addition, a number of projects have successfully made the direct link to sustainable peace and human development.
In most countries the national focal points provided vital support for activities at the national level, initiated activities themselves in many cases, and also coordinated the national implementation of the objectives of the International Year.
The valuable contribution of the United Nations information centres and the UNDP country offices to the prompt and effective identification of a significant number of national focal points should be recognized.
The participation of Member States has been impressive.
Governments in all regions designated national focal points and committed themselves to actively celebrate the Year through planning and implementing concrete initiatives.
National focal points have been established in 32 countries, namely, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Cuba, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Israel, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Nauru, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Poland, Samoa, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, the United Kingdom and Vanuatu.
Furthermore, 12 countries have provided a list of activities in addition to having established a national committee or designated a national focal point, namely, Australia, Austria, Cameroon, Cuba, Finland, France, Israel, Mauritius, Morocco, Switzerland, Tunisia and the United Kingdom.
Lastly, three countries have provided a list of planned national activities, although not establishing a committee or a focal person, namely, Belize, Egypt and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The establishment of numerous national focal points as of July 2005 is due to the fact that sport is already firmly integrated in many governmental structures and activities.
The next section provides a brief overview of the status of reported activities midway through the Year and should not be construed as a comprehensive representation of all activities.
Africa
National focal points have been designated in Cameroon, Mauritius and South Africa, where the majority of initiatives have focused on public awareness campaigns.
Cameroon has dedicated a National Week of Sport and Physical Education in November in all provinces to commemorate the Year.
Events include open debate conferences on the themes “Sport and physical education for health protection”, “Sport and women” and “Using sport and physical education to combat poverty”.
In addition, events are planned linking sport with the International Day Against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, the International Youth Day and the International Day for the Elderly.
Mauritius is dedicating events for every month of the Year, with close involvement from the Ministry of Youth and Sport and local authorities, in activities such as a symposium on women and sport, a workshop on disability and sport and a seminar on the promotion of physical education and sport.
In South Africa, since the national focal point has just recently been identified, it is too early to report on activities.
Although a national focal point has yet to be identified by Zambia, President Levy Mwanawasa has announced the re-introduction of physical education into the mandatory school curriculum as a universal pillar to foster education, health and personal development after the Next Step II Conference in Livingstone.
C. Asia and the Pacific
National focal points were designated by nine countries: Australia, Fiji, Nauru, New Zealand, Samoa, Thailand, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.
Australia has dedicated numerous public awareness-raising activities to the commemoration of the International Year, such as the Australian Youth Olympic Festival, the 2005 Summer Deaflympics, sport leadership grants for women in rural and remote communities and the indigenous sport and recreation programme.
The national focal points of the other countries have just recently been identified, so there are as yet no activities to report.
In commemoration of the International Year, the Bhutan Table Tennis Federation organized a tournament in Thimphu on the theme “Sports for health and happiness”.
UNDP provided technical and financial support for the two-day event, which hosted children between the ages of 9 and 15.
Europe
The countries in Europe that have established national focal points are Austria, Bulgaria, Finland, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey and the United Kingdom.
In Austria, the activities surrounding the International Year focused on raising public awareness on such themes as “Sports media and stereotypes — women and men in sports and media”, “Fit for Austria” and “Female athletes as role models for girls and women”.
There were also projects linking sport with development and peace, such as “Women swimming into the future — promoting and strengthening women in the South Asian tsunami region”, and “Rwanda — kicking for reconciliation in Kigali”.
In Finland, public awareness campaigns through the project “The vehicle of the millennium: line 2015”, radio and television interviews and poster and postcard campaigns have been launched.
In addition, a seminar for municipal sports leaders is planned for August 2005.
France has engaged in activities to raise awareness on the themes of “Physical activity: a preventive medicine for ageing and sedentary lifestyles”, “Technological innovation serving sport” and “Sport and handicap”.
In Germany, the Interior Ministry launched a public poster campaign about the International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
A number of other events have also been supported, such as the observance of the International Paralympic Day organized by the International Paralympic Committee in Bonn.
In Switzerland, the national committee, with a designated focal point, was responsible for coordinating public awareness activities, such as Schweiz-bewegt (Switzerland moves), at the municipal and national levels with programmes that have a direct link to peace, such as the Play for peace camp, in collaboration with the Pestalozzidorf Foundation.
In addition, the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation will organize the international conference on the theme “Sport and Development — Magglingen II”, which will focus on follow-up to the International Year.
The United Kingdom has linked its commemorative activities to specific development and peace themes.
For instance, UK Sport supported the Next Step II Conference in Zambia, the “Kicking AIDS out” courses in Malawi, the Sport for development: evaluation manual and a social inclusion project with the Council of Wales.
E. Latin America and the Caribbean
National focal points have been established in Brazil, Cuba, Mexico and Paraguay.
Cuba has focused its activities on linking sport with national educational programmes on such themes as the national games for children with behavioural and developmental disorders, in addition to international events, such as the scientific methodological workshop on physical education.
No report on activities is yet available from the other countries.
Activities in Belize focused on public awareness activities and workshops during the month of June.
Middle East and North Africa
National focal points have been established in Israel, Morocco and Tunisia.
Israel organized public relations campaigns, including the distribution to all schools of posters with the official logo of the International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
In addition, youth competitions will be implemented for 2,000 students from Jewish communities all over the world, while national physical education weeks are also on the programme.
Lastly, a special booklet from the Director-General of the Ministry of Education was distributed to school headmasters asking them to prepare special educational programmes for the International Year.
Morocco held the sixty-eighth international sports press association conference and, from 18 to 23 August 2005, will host the second pan-African youth leadership summit to highlight the power of sport in advancing health, education and development while promoting tolerance and peace.
Additional national activities will focus on raising public awareness.
In March 2005, the Government of Tunisia, with the support of UNDP, organized an international conference to highlight the critical role of sport in health promotion in the framework of the International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
Tunisia has also prepared an ambitious plan of activities for the commemoration of the International Year with a sensitization campaign on the benefits of sport and physical education and events such as the Arab conference on sport and education and the Sport and development conference, and various other events in connection with education and youth.
Egypt provided a description of activities involving workshops and national festivals pertinent to the International Year.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is helping to organize the Fourth women's Islamic games in Tehran.
A conference focusing on issues concerning sport and human rights will be held concurrently.
In addition, a brochure entitled “Development of education through physical education in the Islamic Republic of Iran” was published.
North America
In Canada, civil society has been particularly active.
While contacts with the Government have been encouraging, a national focal point has not yet been appointed.
International activities and initiatives
The International Year of Sport and Physical Education was launched at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 5 November 2004 by the Secretary-General, together with his Special Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace, the Under-Secretary-General for Communications and Public Information, the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations, tennis champion Roger Federer and Margaret Okayo, women's champion of the New York City Marathon, 2003.
Both sports figures were designated United Nations spokespersons for the International Year.
The Secretary-General emphasized that sport is a good vehicle for promoting education, health, development and peace as a part of the overall effort to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
Since the proclamation of the International Year, the use of sport as a means to promote intercultural, post-conflict and peacebuilding dialogues was discussed or highlighted at several international conferences and events.
A selection of international events that were initiated to increase awareness of the value of sport to promote education, health, development and peace include the following:
(a) The Fourth International Conference of Ministers and Senior Officials Responsible for Physical Education and Sport was organized by UNESCO in Athens from 6 to 8 December 2004;
(b) The International Olympic Committee is participating actively in developing activities for the International Year.
International Olympic Committee President Jacques Rogge and the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General jointly invited United Nations resident coordinators and representatives of national olympic committees to participate in a workshop in Switzerland on 15 and 16 December 2004 to consolidate existing relationships and encourage the establishment of new partnerships.
The results of the workshop provide a framework for better integration of the work of national olympic committees into United Nations country team activities;
(c) The International Forum on Sport and Development was held from 13 to 15 February 2005 in Bad Boll, Germany.
Representatives of different religions, sports and sports sciences from approximately 20 countries attended the event at the invitation of the Evangelical Academy Bad Boll and the International Council of Sport Science and Physical Education.
The purpose of the conference was to examine ways to optimize cooperation in sport on the basis of different projects in development;
(d) The International Conference on Sport and Health was held in Hammamet, Tunisia, from 21 to 24 March 2005 under the sponsorship of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and the Government of Tunisia.
A total of 370 participants from 40 countries took part in the conference, which adopted a declaration reaffirming the role of sport and physical education for the promotion of health and active lifestyles;
(e) In January 2005, on behalf of the United Nations system, the Special Adviser issued a call to the sports world for coordinated action in response to the Indian Ocean tsunami.
The International Volleyball Federation responded first and offered a $3 million donation to UNDP for the rebuilding of schools and playing fields in the affected region.
Three months later, the Office of the Special Adviser and the French sports daily, L'Equipe, organized a high-level round table on the Indian Ocean tsunami response in Geneva, at which the International Olympic Committee and 12 international sports federations agreed on the need for better communication and cooperation in responding to such natural disasters as the Indian Ocean tsunami;
(f) The 2005 Arafura Games International Sports Conference on the theme “Celebrating sport and culture” was held in Darwin, Australia, from 13 to 15 May 2005, by the Arafura Games 2005 team in partnership with Charles Darwin University and the Australian Sports Commission.
The conference examined how sport operates in different countries and the role sport plays in developing communities to improve quality of life;
(g) The Next Step II Conference on the theme “Taking sport for development home” was held in Livingstone, Zambia, from 10 to 13 June 2005.
The conference was an initiative of the Norwegian Olympic Committee and Confederation of Sports in partnership with the National Sport Council of Zambia, UK Sport, Commonwealth Games Canada, Right To Play and FK Norway (Youth Exchange Programme).
The two main goals of the conference were to demonstrate and exchange knowledge on the use of sport as a vehicle in reaching the Millennium Development Goals, particularly in the fields of health and peace and reconciliation, and to exchange knowledge and experience in strengthening local community sports structures, and translate them into practical, sustainable instruments;
(h) Other important international conferences and events scheduled for the second half of the International Year are: Sport Summit for the Environment, Nagoya and EXPO 2005 Aichi, Japan (July 2005); International Conference of Sport and Peace, Moscow (October 2005); International Conference on Sport and Education, Bangkok (October 2005); Sport and Women's Leadership Summit, Atlanta, Georgia (October 2005); and Sport and Development Conference, Magglingen, Switzerland (December 2005).
Those conferences will assess further the growing relationship between sport and development issues and strengthen the role of sport as a means to promote education, health, development and peace.
The report of the United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on Sport for Development and Peace clearly identifies youth as one of the greatest beneficiaries of the effects of sport, and the United Nations New York Office of Sport for Development and Peace is organizing a series of youth leadership summits to highlight the use of sport as an entry point for mobilizing youth to bolster efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
The Pan-African, Pan-Asian and Latin America and Caribbean Youth Leadership Summits were held in Dakar in June 2004; Hiroshima, Japan, in September 2004; and Belo Horizonte, Brazil, in May 2005, respectively.
The second Pan-African Youth Leadership Summit, hosted by Morocco, will be held at Al Akhawayn University from 18 to 23 August 2005.
The regional summits will culminate in the Global Youth Leadership Summit to be held in New York at the end of August 2006.
The inaugural meeting of the Sport for Development and Peace International Working Group was held at United Nations Headquarters in May 2005.
The event was initiated by the non-governmental organization Right To Play and was co-sponsored by UNFIP and the United Nations New York Office of Sport for Development and Peace.
The meeting highlighted the development potential of sport, and the diverse group of representatives from several countries vouched that the applicability of sport, as a means to promote development and peace is universal.
Panel discussions provided specific understanding of sport as a potential tool for peace, and sport and as a contributor towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
The meeting brought together Government representatives, sports ministers, United Nations officials, prominent athletes, representatives of international sports federations and other members of the sports world to ensure that sport becomes a recognized force in the global partnership for development.
V. United Nations activities
United Nations entities have contributed to the International Year of Sport and Physical Education and the broader implementation of sport for development and peace on one or more of three different levels: policy advice and advocacy; implementation of projects and activities; and programme enhancements.
This allows for a broad base of support that goes beyond short-term activities to foster a longer-term impact.
Activities undertaken by United Nations agencies are summarized below.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
The TeleFood campaign of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) draws on the power of sport to help raise awareness and funds in support of projects to fight hunger.
Donations to TeleFood are used to fund small, self-contained agriculture, livestock and fisheries projects that help poor families produce more food.
To date, over 1,866 projects are being realized in 125 countries.
The projects, which cost between $5,000 and $10,000, pay for necessities, such as seeds and simple farming tools, with not a penny spent on administrative costs.
Since 1998, the annual Partita del Cuore, a charity football game between famous Italian singers and soccer players, has helped raise funds for TeleFood projects, and since his nomination in 2004 as FAO Goodwill Ambassador, Raul Gonzales, the captain of the Real Madrid Football Club, has been an active supporter.
International Labour Organization
The Youth Sport Programme of the International Labour Organization (ILO) is under way in Albania, El Salvador and Mozambique, bringing together participants from national sports organizations, ministries of sport, and the sports industry.
Each participant has the opportunity to shape a curriculum that will be taught to sports trainers to enrich the training of young athletes.
The curricula will focus on social exclusion, youth unemployment, gender inequality, child labour and HIV/AIDS prevention.
Partners include the International Olympic Committee and national Olympic Committees, the United Nations system and Kennesaw State University, Atlanta, Georgia.
A key aim is to develop initiatives within the United Nations common framework linked to national development tools, such as the United Nations Development Assistance Framework and the World Bank's poverty reduction strategy paper.
The programme can be adapted to crisis situations, and ILO has prepared a proposal on tsunami recovery for youth following a mission to Thailand in January 2005.
ILO has contributed a methodology called the common framework for sport and development for youth skills development and socio-economic partnerships through sport.
The common framework has been tested in countries such as Albania, El Salvador, Mozambique and Senegal, with the participation of both the United Nations agencies and sports partners, including the national Olympic Committees and the International Olympic Committee, among others.
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
In a partnership with the International Olympic Committee, 11,000 athletes taking part in the XXVIII Olympic Games in Athens were given HIV- and AIDS- awareness cards and red ribbons in their welcome kits.
Six HIV-positive individuals carried the Olympic torch on its global relay as it passed through Cape Town, South Africa, on 12 June.
A second workshop on the theme “Olympic sport and HIV/AIDS” is now being prepared for national Olympic committees in China, Thailand and other countries as a first step to ensuring that much joint AIDS work takes place in China during the run-up to the Beijing Olympics.
The workshop will discuss how to use sport to break down the stigma associated with HIV or AIDS and educate the public, especially the young, about the disease.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS has also joined forces with the International Cricket Council.
The partnership's primary aim is to use cricket to raise public awareness of HIV and AIDS in the cricket-playing world, which includes some of the countries hardest hit by the epidemic.
United Nations Children's Fund
The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has taken the lead in monitoring and evaluating sport and development programmes and in selecting impact indicators showing the benefits of sport and development programmes in the field.
Experts, sports institutions, United Nations agencies and universities gathered at a UNICEF workshop in January 2005 to cooperate on efforts to demonstrate concrete results produced by sport-related programmes that help progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
UNICEF has partnered with the International Football Federation (FIFA), the Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Football, the Association of Tennis Professionals and the National Basketball Association programme of the United States, Basketball without Borders, to promote the power of sport, raise funds and highlight the important and positive impact that sport can have on children affected by disease, war or conflict.
At the country level, UNICEF is working with various Ministries of Sport and Education in an effort to ensure that sport and sports programmes are included in Government planning and budgets.
UNICEF is currently engaged in sport for development programmes in over 80 countries focusing on three key development areas: education, child protection and HIV/AIDS.
UNICEF is collaborating with various private sector partners on and around sport for development, including IKEA, Yahoo and MasterCard.
Department of Public Information
The Department of Public Information is raising awareness about ways in which the United Nations system is drawing on the power of sport to contribute to development and peace and circulating information to all United Nations agencies through the United Nations Communications Group and to the public through United Nations information centres worldwide.
On 28 February 2005 the United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Communications and Public Information and Chair of the United Nations Communications Group, encouraged members of the Group to participate in the Working Group on Sport for Development and Peace.
The News and Media Division of the Department of Public Information covers sport-related initiatives on the United Nations News Service on the web and other outlets, and the Internet Service has assisted in setting up and maintaining a website for the International Year of Sport and Physical Education (http://www.un.org/sport2005).
The group of United Nations celebrity spokespersons, coordinated by the Partnerships Unit of the Department of Public Information, includes several sports stars who help increase public awareness of key development and humanitarian issues, and the Unit is cooperating with the working group on ways to broaden such activities.
For example, tennis champion Vijay Amritraj, a United Nations Messenger of Peace, travelled to a tsunami-affected area in Thailand in August 2005.
His agenda included United Nations programmes that use sport to promote recovery and a meeting with the Minister of Sport of Thailand that focused on the potential of sport to promote recovery.
The Radio and Television Service of the Department of Public Information has recently made a number of sport-related contacts in the video field, including with TV Global, which is interested in highlighting HIV/AIDS awareness at the upcoming Street Football World Cup.
The service is also assisting in preparing a video public service announcement for the International Year of Sport and Physical Education based on a video done for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
United Nations Development Programme
On 16 May 2005, UNDP and Right To Play entered into an agreement to provide a framework to strengthen and further deepen their overall cooperation in order to increase the effectiveness of their efforts in contributing to poverty reduction, peace and sustained development.
Right To Play is a federal non-profit corporation based in Canada that uses sport and play to improve the lives of the world's most disadvantaged children.
This year, in cooperation with the Ministry of Youth and Sport of Bulgaria, UNDP is sponsoring a project to promote ethnic tolerance through sport and fair play.
Under the motto “I Want to Be”, six junior league football teams and players from different ethnic backgrounds in the districts of Yambol and Liven are participating in a variety of athletic activities aimed at facilitating a culture of social integration and ethnic tolerance.
Ronaldo de Lima, the Brazilian soccer star, in his capacity as a UNDP Goodwill Ambassador, visited the West Bank city of Ramallah on 16 May 2005 for a first-hand look at the UNDP youth and anti-poverty projects in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
During his visit, Mr. de Lima participated in UNDP football workshops and inaugurated a new centre for disadvantaged youth and educational and vocational training established through a partnership between the Palestinian Authority Ministry of Social Affairs and the UNDP programme of assistance to the Palestinian people.
United Nations Environment Programme
The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) played an active role in the Sport and Environment Commission of the International Olympic Committee and supported the Committee in organizing regional seminars on sport and the environment in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, on 19 and 20 April 2005 (for West Asia) and in Lusaka on 22 and 23 July 2005 (for Anglophone African countries).
UNEP also engaged the cities on the short list for the 2012 Olympic Games in an effort to help them reinforce the environmental aspects of their bids.
UNEP and the Japan-based Global Sports Alliance organized a sports summit for the environment at EXPO 2005, Aichi, Japan, on 30 and 31 July 2005.
The summit brought together over 300 representatives of sports organizations and athletes to discuss the role and implications of sport on the environment.
International sports organizations, including the International Olympic Committee, FIFA and the International Association of Athletic Federations signed a declaration of commitment to incorporate environmental dimensions into their events.
UNEP and the FIFA 2006 World Cup Organizing Committee entered into an agreement to promote the incorporation of environmental issues and provide support to the monitoring of environmental programmes in the preparation and staging of the 2006 World Cup.
UNEP continued to reinforce its nature and sport camp for children in slum areas of Nairobi.
It mobilized support from partners, including the International Olympic Committee and Global Sports Alliance, to provide equipment and basic training to over 6,500 children in the Nairobi Camp.
UNEP and the International Olympic Committee will organize the sixth World Conference on Sport and Environment at UNEP headquarters in Nairobi from 9 to 11 November 2005.
The Conference, which will focus on sport, peace and the environment, will bring together 3,400 representatives from national Olympic Committees and international sports federations.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
As the lead specialized agency of the United Nations for the International Year of Sport and Physical Education, UNESCO mainly focused on raising the awareness of the educational and ethical dimensions pertaining to the activities listed above.
In this context, the Director-General encouraged Member States and stakeholders to take action to improve the status, place and role of physical education and sport in educational systems in achieving quality education.
UNESCO mobilized its 192 national commissions, the 3,600 UNESCO clubs around the world, its field offices and affiliated non-governmental organizations.
It supported activities undertaken at various levels of stakeholders led by civil society and the educational community worldwide.
UNESCO activities include partnership projects with the Global Sport Alliance (Japan) on the teacher training platform on sport and the environment with a selection of countries in sub-Saharan Africa; the International Biathlon Union on organizing a joint traineeship programme; the International Medalists Association for the joint organization of the Mali youth games in December 2005; and the organization of a friendship run on the occasion of the Marathon de Paris on 9 April 2005 and of a seminar in Porto Novo, Benin, from 16 to 19 May 2005, on the quality of physical education and sport and the elaboration of a referential framework.
A final draft international convention against doping in sport was prepared by Government experts after the Director-General of UNESCO convened three ad hoc meetings of experts and three sessions of an intergovernmental meeting.
The Fourth International Conference of Ministers and Senior Officials Responsible for Physical Education and Sport also considered the draft convention and helped to resolve a number of outstanding issues.
However, at the third and final session of the intergovernmental meeting of experts, a consensus could not be reached on whether funding for the secretariat of the Conference of Parties should be derived from a voluntary fund or from the regular budget of UNESCO.
In March 2005, the Director-General of UNESCO sent to all member States his final report on the preparation of an international convention against doping in sport, including a final draft of the convention, to be considered at the thirty-third session of the UNESCO General Conference in October 2005.
United Nations Human Settlements Programme
The Habitat Agenda asks Governments to promote sports and recreational and cultural activities for all and to take into account the need for playgrounds, parks, sports and recreation areas in urban land-management practices.
In municipal youth development programmes, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) has been working with sports and recreational organizations in slum areas to identify activities to help reach out to young people with information on HIV/AIDS and reproductive health and to offer alternatives to drugs and crime.
Sports events for young people from slum areas have been organized in connection with World Habitat Day, International Youth Day, World Water Day and World AIDS Day.
During the World Conference on Landmines in 2004, the One-Stop Youth Information Centre in Nairobi organized a marathon to raise awareness about the event.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
As in the past seven years, UNHCR continues to run sport activities in refugee camps, mostly in Africa and Asia.
Various sports federations and organizations, such as the International Volleyball Federation, FIFA, the Badminton Federation, the International Basketball Federation, the International Olympic Committee and Right To Play, provide funds and equipment.
Plans for a joint United Nations system project in Sierra Leone are well under way.
In March 2005, Swiss dev.tv and UNHCR shot a film in the Tham Hin refugee camp in Thailand portraying the value of sport and recreation to youth confined for years in that remote camp.
The film will be made available for free use by United Nations entities.
A major project, Together for Girls, in the Dadaab camp in Kenya, which shelters mostly Somali refugees, has received funding from Nike.
The project's objective has been to use sport as a tool to get girls into school and keep them there.
Data collected demonstrate that significant success has been achieved to date.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
The International Day against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, on 26 June 2005, on the theme “Value yourself make healthy choices”, included involvement in sport.
A year-long campaign was launched on 23 June 2005 focused on sport and health.
Austrian swimmer Markus Rogan, 2004 Olympic silver medallist, is the international spokesman for the anti-drug campaign.
United Nations Office for Project Services
The United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) is looking forward to further work on sport for development and peace and coordinating activities at the field level.
Tsunami recovery activities include the refurbishment of sports equipment.
UNOPS has a $90 million joint project with UNICEF on tsunami relief that will potentially involve sport and youth initiatives.
A United Nations Development Group/Cape Verde project involving UNOPS includes sports activities.
United Nations Programme on Youth of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs
The area of sport for development and peace relates to several of the priority areas in the World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond.
Events in 2005 offer opportunities for highlighting linkages between youth and sport for development and peace.
Two plenary meetings of the General Assembly devoted to the evaluation of the progress made in the implementation of the World Programme of Action for Youth will be held in the first week of October 2005.
Prior to the plenary meetings, there will be an informal, interactive round-table discussion on the theme “Young people: making commitments matter”, open to Member States, observers, United Nations organizations and non-governmental youth organizations.
The United Nations Programme on Youth highlighted the tenth anniversary of World Programme of Action for Youth on International Youth Day, 12 August.
Additionally, the United Nations Programme on Youth is working towards increasing an understanding of the critical role of young people in achieving the Millennium Development Goals and is supporting inter-agency collaboration and other efforts towards this end.
The Programme's website (http://www.un.org/youth) can post information and links to United Nations sport for development and peace activities relevant to youth, and also includes them in Youth Flash, the electronic news service of the Programme on Youth.
United Nations Volunteers
As the United Nations programme that supports sustainable human development through the promotion of volunteerism, the United Nations Volunteers programme (UNV) recognizes the value — and as yet untapped potential — of sport to contribute to peace and development.
UNV has therefore been using sport as a highly favourable means to mobilize and engage populations, especially youth, at the local level.
UNV has recently been developing a regional project, initially involving Ghana, Madagascar, Sierra Leone and South Africa, to demonstrate the value of sport in post-conflict situations and to promote democratic processes.
It will use sports activities as an entry point for promoting socially positive attitudes and health and livelihood initiatives among youth as a contribution towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
UNV has also explored with cities planning to host the Olympic Games the possibility of maximizing volunteer support for the games.
Additionally, and in the context of the International Year of Sport and Physical Education, UNV will invite its programme officers and programme managers in the field to include in the annual celebration of the International Volunteer Day on 5 December a special mobilization of volunteers for sport for development and peace.
World Health Organization
Initiatives promoting physical activity are being undertaken at the global, regional and country levels in the context of health, the implementation of a global strategy on diet, physical activity and health, and the prevention and control of chronic non-communicable diseases for overall development, including the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
The World Health Organization (WHO) aims in particular at promoting sustained physical activity initiatives, policies and programmes at the national and local levels and at increasing the regularity of participation in physical activity of various population groups, both men and women, of all ages and in varying degrees of physical condition, in all domains (leisure time, transport and work) and settings (school, community, home and workplace).
The global annual Move for Health Day initiative, held on or near 10 May, is essentially an advocacy and partnership-based event that was recommended in May 2002 to Member States by the World Health Assembly as a step towards reaching that goal (http://www.who.int/moveforhealth).
World Bank
In total, $100 million to $150 million has been spent across the World Bank's youth portfolio on sports development programmes.
In addition, the World Bank 2007 World Development Report will focus on development for and by youth.
The Government of Indonesia has recently created a new Ministry for Youth and Sport, and the World Bank will assist in creating ways for the Ministry to use sport for development.
Publications
The United Nations New York Office of Sport for Development and Peace worked in conjunction with the members of the United Nations Communications Group and the Working Group on Sport for Development and Peace to draft the business plan, which serves as a tool to guide the Working Group in a systematic approach to achieving the goals within the framework of resolutions 58/5 and 59/10.
On 21 June 2005, the draft business plan was approved by the United Nations Communications Group.
To publicize and promote United Nations sport for development and peace activities and programmes and the commemoration of the International Year of Sport and Physical Education, the United Nations New York Office of Sport for Development and Peace produces a fortnightly electronic sport bulletin on behalf of the United Nations Working Group on Sport for Development and Peace.
The bulletin, available in English, French and Spanish, is posted on the website of the International Year of Sport and Physical Education and circulated to several thousand contacts at United Nations offices worldwide, Governments, sports organizations, civil society, private sector partners and the media.
Communication tools and public awareness activities
A concept document on the International Year of Sport and Physical Education was published in Geneva and widely distributed within the United Nations system and to permanent missions in Geneva and New York, as well as to sports organizations internationally.
The concept document contains a CD-ROM with relevant background material on the various United Nations specialized agencies, programmes and funds.
The public information units of participating United Nations system organizations and the Department of Public Information, in cooperation with various Governments and non-governmental organizations, have been advocating the International Year of Sport and Physical Education by distributing information and using the official logo for the Year for sport-related activities and events.
The official website of the International Year of Sport and Physical Education (http://www.un.org/sport2005), created in close collaboration with the Department of Public Information, was launched to foster cross-sectoral fertilization, promote country-level action and improve national and international networking and reporting.
A significant number of countries have established their own dedicated websites for the International Year.
A brief introductory film has been produced by dev.tv, a Geneva-based non-profit, audio-visual production association founded by media professionals, and a 60-second video has been produced by BBC.
In addition, a 30-second video, created by the International Volleyball Federation and UNHCR, is available to further increase media outreach for the International Year.
UNESCO has produced and distributed a special brochure on the International Year in French and English, with the support of the International Biathlon Unions.
It targets the need to strengthen physical education and sport as part of quality education in achieving education for all in line with the final communiqué of the round table of the Ministers in charge of physical education and sport at UNESCO in January 2003, in which they requested the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session to proclaim 2005 as the International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
Many United Nations organizations work successfully with the world of sport in the area of communications and awareness-raising about key issues through global and local efforts, including a number of spokespersons for the International Year of Sport and Physical Education, who have been appointed to act as role models for the values of the International Year.
Roger Federer, tennis champion, and the national cricket teams of India and Pakistan, are among the first appointed spokespersons.
Resource mobilization
As a result of the partnership among the International Olympic Committee, the World Federation of Sporting Goods and the General Assembly of International Summer Sports Federations, the delivery of sports equipment, which in 2004 approached $1 million, to 120,000 recipients in countries such as Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, among others, has been increased.
In the first half of 2005, the Sporting Goods to Go project, a coalition of non-sports organizations, United Nations agencies and sports institutions, has already targeted $2 million worth of sports equipment to be delivered to developing countries as a major contribution to the International Year of Sport and Physical Education.
A task force on resource mobilization has been created within the United Nations Working Group comprising representatives from UNICEF, UNFIP and UNDP, with the aim of: (a) encouraging non-traditional partners and donors to support policies and activities through field projects and partnership programmes; and (b) facilitating, through common frameworks and other appropriate programmes, partnerships among United Nations agencies in the field.
Conclusions and recommendations
The International Year of Sport and Physical Education is highlighting the significant role that sport can play in accelerating progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 and adding a strong impetus to efforts to better integrate sport into the development agenda.
Sport-related activities of Governments and non-governmental organizations undertaken with the United Nations and other partners within the framework of the International Year of Sport and Physical Education are widespread and gaining momentum.
Efforts are needed to publicize their achievements so as to strengthen advocacy and social mobilization.
Programmes promoting sport for development and peace have received greater attention and resources from Governments, civil society and private sector partners.
Those efforts need to be encouraged and strengthened.
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that sport, in conjunction with humanitarian and development activities, can contribute to a powerful synergy to raise public awareness and mobilize support and resources.
Those efforts should also be strengthened and expanded, with greater coordination among the United Nations system and public and private sector partners.
In order to capitalize on both the accomplishments and the potential for sport that the International Year of Sport and Physical Education is demonstrating, further initiatives are needed to incorporate sport as a useful tool in programmes for development and peace and to include sports-based initiatives in country programmes of the United Nations system, where appropriate and according to local needs.
It is imperative that the programme and institutional and advocacy initiatives that advance sport for development and peace during the International Year of Sport and Physical Education lead to sustained long-term effects within the United Nations and among Government, private sector and civil society partners.
Further steps include continuing to work according to the business plan of the United Nations Communications Group Working Group on Sport for Development and Peace and expanding and strengthening United Nations partnerships with Governments, international sports organizations and the private sector.
Specific actions will include furthering efforts to encourage additional Member States to establish national focal points and national committees that would ideally become an integral part of governmental structures to ensure the sustainable continuation of mainstream sporting activities within society.
Activities of the International Year of Sport and Physical Education framework, within and/or with the support of the United Nations system, aim at achieving the recommendations in the report of the Inter-agency Task Force on Sport for Development and Peace entitled “Sport for Peace and Development: towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals”, published in 2003 and noted by the General Assembly in its resolution 58/5.
It is important that this process be maintained.
Under the leadership of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and Peace, the work of the coordinating offices in Geneva and in New York has shown, through the commemoration of the International Year of Sport and Physical Education, the vital contributions of sport to development and peace — and specifically to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals — this momentum should continue to be accelerated.