# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
First: unilateral criminality should apply in cases of child sex tourism; that means that even if the country in which the offence is committed does not punish sexual abuse, it must nonetheless be possible to prosecute offenders in their country of origin.
Secondly: account must be taken of the principle of extraterritorial jurisdiction.
We need standard national legislation throughout Europe which punishes Union citizens who engage in child sex tourism, irrespective of where the offence was committed.
Europe must take responsibility for its citizens, even beyond its borders.
These demands can be succinctly summarised: children are no less deserving of protection because their home country denies them the necessary protection, and there is all the more reason not to turn a blind eye to incidents within the European Union.
Each of us knows of cases of child abuse in our own country.
The Council and Commission have indeed supported the principle of extraterritorial jurisdiction, but these drafts still allow for the criterion of dual criminality in exceptional cases.
In other words, in exceptional cases, it would still be possible for sex tourists who have abused children to escape punishment if the country in which the offence was committed does not punish child abuse.
The European Parliament flatly rejects this regulation on possible exceptions.
The Member States must be proactive in opposing anything which encourages or plays down child sex tourism.
Respect for the rights of the child must be anchored in the European Treaties if we are to guarantee protection for children in principle.
Measures taken so far must be examined to see how effective and efficient they really are and EU funds must also be made available in the future to fight child sex tourism.
The role of NGOs is particularly important in this context.
The Commission is called upon to draw up a survey of national laws in this sphere and, if necessary, to submit suitable proposals setting out the constituent elements of offences.
All the points which it has now been decided should be regulated and taken into account in the future within the European Union must be given the same consideration in accession negotiations, in relations with third countries and, most importantly, when deciding how development cooperation funds should be deployed.
The freedoms and rights of citizens include freedom from physical and mental harm.
This applies not only to our children but to all children.
It is our duty to implement this with all the means at our disposal.
Everyone involved agreed on this consensus.
In my view, this resolution sets an example for constructive and fruitful cooperation which goes beyond the party political divide.
I should therefore like to thank all my fellow Members, especially those from the other committees involved, whose positions have been worked into my report.
This is also an explanation of the fact that numerous proposed amendments were rejected by my group.
They are already contained in the report, even if some are formulated differently.
I am convinced that this is a good, sensible resolution which will allow us to protect children.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first, I should like to thank Mrs Klamt for this comprehensive and thorough report.
I am glad, too, that the opinion of the Committee on Women' s Rights has been incorporated into the report.
Child sex tourism does not take place only in Europe, but throughout the world.
Child sex tourism is a tragic and distressing fact of life and this problem has become worse and more serious in certain regions of the world over recent years.
Parliament' s approach to the fight against this evil must therefore go beyond the borders of Europe.
In addition to the situation in the Far East, there is also that on the German-Czech border, which is why this problem needs to be clarified in no uncertain terms during accession negotiations.
It is important to clarify the legal situation and to dispense with the notion of dual criminality.
The law of the offenders' country of origin must be binding for the purposes of criminal prosecution.
Offenders should not imagine themselves to be safe in some law-free zone.
It must be possible to punish offenders, even if abuse is not a punishable offence in the country in which it is committed.
This problem cannot be solved through national measures.
We need a common approach in the European Union and in the Member States, in cooperation with the third countries in question.
Children as persons with their own, inviolable rights deserve our special protection, irrespective of the country in which they live.
This protection must be guaranteed in both theory and practice.
Sufficient funds must be provided to support an effective, victim-orientated fight against this evil.
In all the Member States of the European Union, the necessary legislative measures must be taken and the laws harmonised in order to guarantee the protection of children.
Last but not least, protection of children as separate personalities with the right to freedom from physical and mental harm must be included in the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Mr President, I wish to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Klamt, on a splendid and successful piece of work.
Swedish travel agents are to be the first in the world to actively combat the child sex trade, which is rife in many so-called tourist paradises.
All the major players in the Swedish tourist industry have already promised to comply with a special code of conduct.
Once they have shown that they are fulfilling the requirements of the code, they will be duly approved or certified.
As early as the beginning of April of this year, a campaign was begun to make travellers aware of what is happening.
There are TV and cinema advertisements, posters at the airports and large placards.
Behind the code of conduct lies the Swedish branch of ECPAT, an organisation which works to end the sexual exploitation of children.
Among the requirements made of travel companies are that they should train their staff, both at home and at the resorts, as well as inform travellers.
They are also to see to it that, for example, hotel owners and staff are aware of, and contribute to, the work being done to combat the child sex trade.
It is about touching people' s consciences.
Allow me to conclude my speech by talking about children - our greatest gift, the most precious thing we have.
They are innocent and defenceless and they seek security.
We must awaken citizens' consciences where our children are concerned.
I also want to talk about the sexual dimension to life.
Adult society cannot escape from its failure to adequately foster an appreciation of both the wonder and the responsibility entailed in sexual experience.
It is about showing love and tenderness, about the gift of life, about carrying life forward and about faithfulness.
We must awaken citizens' consciences regarding the place of love in our lives.
Mr President, I should first, of course, like to congratulate Mrs Klamt on her report.
It is not only excellent in quality but also extremely useful.
Everyone agrees on the idea that children are the future of the world but, at the same time, they represent one of the most vulnerable groups in the population of this planet.
Indeed, the United Nations Convention of 20 November 1989 granted them specific rights and all our actions should take their inspiration from recognition of these rights.
We must tackle a dreadful scourge, the sexual exploitation of children.
There are 'clients' , if one can use the word in such a horrifying situation, who buy children in order to indulge their sexual fantasies.
These clients, from Europe, the United States or Japan are the hard core of child abusers.
This horrendous phenomenon occurs principally in third countries where there is great poverty.
The chief causes are poverty and social inequality, the collapse of family and community protection, discrimination against girls and ignorance.
All these causes combine to form a melting pot where lives are shattered by the greed of some parties and the deviance of others.
We might remember the old Japanese proverb which says, 'The traveller knows no shame' .
Some people have no qualms about doing in another country what they would not do at home.
It is a compound of anonymity and impunity coupled with a scorn one might describe as racist, which permits some individuals to treat a child as an object to be used, defiled and rejected.
Most child prostitutes are part of the general prostitution market run by Mafias of procurers.
It is very hard to locate these children and to extract them from a life of prostitution.
Unfortunately, some individuals use the Internet to provide details of their base acts and addresses where children can be procured.
We cannot remain indifferent to this scourge which represents an appalling infringement of children' s rights and human rights, and we must protect these children by attacking the origins of the problem and by pursuing the paedophiles.
The origins of the problem can be attacked by tackling poverty and ignorance.
There must be criminal penalties for child abusers.
The first chapter of the European Charter on the Rights of the Child states that 'child' refers to any person under the age of 18.
I suggest that we adopt this age limit and say that all minors must absolutely be protected.
It is our duty to this generation which represents our future, a generation which expects us to protect and respect it.
This report and the Commission communication to which it responds makes two major contributions to progress in seeking to reduce sexual exploitation of children through so-called sex tourism.
The first is in contributing to the construction of an international human rights community: in all kinds of ways there has been increasing recognition that Europe must promote international standards of respect for human rights, for instance in the international criminal tribunals on Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the agreement on the statute of the international criminal court, the Pinochet case, the intervention in Kosovo to stop ethnic cleansing - all these things have been developing momentum.
Saying that we will not allow our citizens to sexually exploit children abroad fits into that pattern, and the part of Mrs Klamt' s report that talks of how we must insist that double standards are unacceptable is very well put and particularly valuable.
It is not acceptable that our citizens should behave abroad in a way that they would not behave at home.
Secondly, this report makes a contribution to police and judicial cooperation in the European Union.
This is a strong example where those Euro-sceptics who resist cooperation in this field are wrong.
It is only by joint across-the-board action that we can tackle this issue, not least by agreeing to extra-territorial application of criminal laws.
Approximation and mutual recognition of national criminal provisions, which is not the same as harmonisation, will be of the utmost utility, as will cooperation through police forces and Europol, insisting all the time, as the Parliament does, on adequate parliamentary and judicial scrutiny.
So I congratulate Mrs Klamt for a very valuable report and I hope it will continue to be built on in future.
Mr President, confronted with the worrying development of sex tourism and, more generally, the sexual exploitation of children in Europe and throughout the world, Mrs Klamt is quite right to put forward measures in her report which are adequate to deal with the serious problem before us.
I particularly recall measures such as the inclusion of children' s rights in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the setting up of free telephone helplines for children.
There is an urgent need for a coherent policy for the protection of children to be implemented.
I therefore support Amendment No 4 calling for a European centre for missing children and victims of sexual abuse to be set up in order to coordinate the activities of the organisations set up in the Member States.
The Commission must undertake to actually establish this European database.
I wish to point out that Parliament has already adopted resolutions on this subject.
It must be noted that the proposals made have only been implemented in part.
Much more effective measures are required.
Finally, I must alert the House to the latest developments.
It is now not just sex tourists who are travelling to third countries; we now have children being sent here, to Europe, like so many items sent by parcel post.
Considering, then, the transnational nature of the problem, I think that we should demand that Europol supports national and transnational inquiries and gives an annual report of its work.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to offer my sincere congratulations to Mrs Klamt.
I feel that she has produced a report which proposes practical solutions, as many of us wished, and I thank her for that.
I also think that she has avoided the pitfalls of sexophobia, which was not lacking in some contributions.
It is an extremely serious problem.
The report is a good one, but I would not like to see it sabotaged or even drastically cut by one section of this House tomorrow, as I fear it will be.
It is all very well to discuss the problem in the third world, but I believe, as previous speakers have said, that there are also major problems within the European Union, and I have just learnt that the Group of the Party of European Socialists has requested a separate vote on the important sections of this report.
A separate vote means that some parts of the text may be removed.
In particular, the Group of the Party of European Socialists is asking for the suggestion for the establishment of a committee of enquiry to be removed.
I find that cause for extremely serious concern.
We are aware, for we have already discussed this, of the seriousness of the situation in some countries within the Union, particularly in Belgium.
As I speak, the lid is being lifted on the infamous Dutroux case in the form of an excellent investigation on the Belgian national television station, RTBF.
Unfortunately, I was not able to see the whole thing.
It showed that the highest authorities in this country did all they could to hold up this inquiry by indulging in constant obstruction, transfers of police officers and magistrates and the defamation, and worse, of the victims who came forward to testify.
These are extremely serious matters, involving high-ranking personalities, but it is all still perfectly concealed, completely outside the scope of the justice system.
I think that we can and we must look at what is happening in the third world.
We can and we must, and let me once again thank Mrs Klamt, propose solutions.
I agree with Mrs Ludford: we must think in terms of institutions, in terms of an international court, and consider already extending the jurisdiction of international courts, but we must not neglect our own doorstep.
There are some extremely serious situations within the European Union as well.
It is a matter of urgency that, pursuant to Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union, in the event of a 'serious and persistent breach (of the principles of) human rights, fundamental freedoms, and the rule of law' , the Union, and hence Parliament, which has a responsible part to play in this, should, at last, tackle, since the relevant Member State cannot, this very serious matter of the hundreds, nay thousands of missing children, including, as you know if you have seen the posters in railway stations and at bus stops, at least 150 children still missing in Belgium, who have been not only raped but also killed, sacrificed in the name of some dubious pleasure.
Mr President, Mrs Klamt suggests in her report that those who engage in child sex tourism delude themselves that child abuse in a country far from Europe is less reprehensible because there is a different culture and the moral standards we have here do not apply.
I think these tourists deliberately create this fantasy for themselves by way of an excuse for their misconduct.
Why on earth would someone' s own moral standards suddenly change because they were in a different country?
We need to look with a critical eye at how this could happen.
Are the values and standards based on Christian and humanist tradition still alive and well in our decadent society?
I support the Commission' s actions, which aim to instil a sense of moral awareness.
But that is not enough.
This is about serious criminal offences, the perpetrators of which must be convicted.
I urge the Council to apply the extra-territorial principle, with no concessions.
The criterion of dual criminality, which is still applied in a number of Member States, stipulates that any crime committed is only punishable if it is also punishable in the third country.
Ironically, this rule dovetails neatly with the sex tourist' s delusion that the moral standards of their own country do not apply in another culture.
This requirement must be abolished forthwith.
I do not support the demand for a legal basis for a European policy on children.
This discussion does not belong in this report on the world-wide problem of child sex tourism.
Mr President, the matter addressed by Mrs Klamt' s truly excellent report is one of the most burning and ever growing issues of our time, to which a solution must urgently be found.
Of course, the Commission' s initiatives, especially the activities to increase awareness, should not be underestimated but unfortunately they are proving to be inadequate since the sexual exploitation of children and child tourism are continually assuming greater dimensions, not only in 'traditional' underdeveloped countries but within the European Union itself.
We therefore urgently need an integrated and cohesive Community policy on children and it is really sad - as others too have said - that the Treaty of Amsterdam does not provide the necessary legal base.
Yet, the provision for the creation of a new area of freedom, security and justice in the immediate future, which presupposes police and judicial cooperation in combating international organised crime, reinforces our hopes of a more effective approach to those circles which both supply and demand child sex services.
For that reason, it is vital to include the rights of children, exactly as they are laid down by the UN Convention of 20 November 1989, in the European Union' s Charter of Fundamental Rights which is currently being drawn up.
We also need legislation which is binding on an extra-territorial scale, to punish culpable acts perpetrated abroad, with strict provisions for the prosecution of travel agencies and haulage companies which promote the abomination of child sex tourism.
We need more resources for the implementation of specific schemes, and we need closer cooperation between the Commission and the tourism industry to define codes of ethics.
We should look towards the good example set by Sweden.
Finally, we must also act to protect and support children who are victims of sexual exploitation, and young refugees and immigrants who are a particularly vulnerable group.
In summary, I think we need a common front and a common strategy at three levels.
Firstly, at the level of awareness, secondly, at the level of suppression, and thirdly, in the direction of protection and rehabilitation of victims.
Mr President, in November 1996, the European Commission adopted its first communication on combating child sex tourism.
A year later, in November 1997, a European Parliament resolution and a Council statement on 'Tourism' revealed the general consensus among the institutions on the broad lines of the Commission communication.
Since then, this support has been implemented in practical terms by the setting up of a new budget line, with the funds made available intended for campaigns to raise awareness, within the European Union, and to combat the development of child sex tourism.
It has since been expressed in the Council conclusions of 21 December 1999, which display a new firm political commitment to resolving this significant social problem, which we are pledged to do.
If, as it is to be hoped, the European Parliament reiterates its support for this approach, then this will strengthen the determination of all the operators involved in combating this scourge.
At the same time, further progress in this direction will contribute to our response to the concerns expressed by European citizens at the development of this scourge.
Mrs Klamt' s report follows up the Commission communication of May 1999 presenting the operations carried out in the period 1997-1998 and specifying follow-up operations necessary to initiate and/or implement new actions.
You will have noted that Community measures combating child sex tourism is progressing at a sustained rate along the lines of the strategy initially agreed, aiming, on the one hand, to reduce demand, particularly by means of cooperation with the tourist industry and the relevant NGOs, and, on the other hand, to tackle the sources of supply in tourist destination countries by any appropriate means, including Community policies for external relations and development cooperation.
The importance of this second aspect was, moreover, highlighted by the Commission as early as 1998 when the support strategy for the development of sustainable tourism in developing countries was defined, which stipulated that the problem of child sex tourism should be taken into specific consideration as the subject of structured political dialogue with the countries most affected, particularly at regional level.
The development of child sex tourism flies in the face of the very idea of a human community united on the basis of ideals such as respect and dignity, and public welfare and remembrance.
Furthermore, it could be said that, rather than fuelling the 'regulation versus self-regulation' debate, the need for efficiency requires us to concentrate on investigating and maximising the use of the synergies between these two modes of operation which, in the case in point, are broadly complementary.
Especially since, alongside the progress made towards effective self-regulation, i.e. including mechanisms to monitor the execution of commitments made, the development of police and judicial cooperation in Europe cannot fail to have a positive effect on the suppression of child sex tourism.
The Council joint action of 24 February 1997 on combating the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children, stipulating that each Member State should undertake to review its own national legislation on measures relating to types of deliberate behaviour, is exemplary in this regard.
The fact that it is actually possible to be prosecuted by the authorities of two countries, in exceptional circumstances, must not disguise the main contribution of this joint action, to wit, affirming the principle of extra-territorial jurisdiction applicable to one of its nationals or to a person usually resident on its territory.
It is therefore easier to understand the great interest generated by legislative reforms on the subject, as well as their practical interpretation, in terms of the everyday application of the legislation, hence the importance which the European Parliament attaches to assessing the degree to which the Member States actually meet their obligations under this joint action.
This assessment may provide the opportunity to focus on suppressing child sex tourism, and to draw up an initial status report.
In operational terms, the raft of planned operations has been implemented steadily.
Combating child sex tourism offers the Commission an opportunity to enlist its various services to step up internal coordination.
It also affords the Commission the opportunity to step up its cooperation with the national administrations, professional associations and non-governmental organisations involved.
Other Commission initiatives in the context of the increased involvement of the tourist industry have also had practical results, particularly in terms of drawing up and strengthening codes of conduct and other self-regulatory mechanisms in the tourist industry.
As I am sure you are aware, your support will give us further incentive to pursue this avenue with yet more determination.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Liability for defective products
The next item is the report (A5-0061/2000) by Mr MacCormick, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the Commission Green Paper 'Liability for defective products' (COM(1999)396 - C5-0184/1999 - 1999/2158(COS)).
It is an honour and a pleasure to have the opportunity to present this report to Parliament today.
It is on the very important subject of product liability on which the European Community first introduced legislation as long ago as 1985 in the form of a directive.
This was transposed in a somewhat leisurely way, and in some cases we might even say in a shockingly slow way, by Member States.
So it is only fairly recently that there has been across the Union experience of the working of the product liability regime, which of course is not absolutely uniform in any event across the countries, because there are areas where different views may be taken consistent with the directive.
This legislation substitutes distributive justice, in a sense, for corrective justice in this very important area of the law of civil liability.
The idea is that if a defective product is sold and used and injures in any way a consumer, the consumer should be entitled to compensation without proof of fault on the producer' s part, merely proof of causation of the damage by the defective product.
This is a very good idea.
It helps to spread the risks of injury widely and ensure compensation.
Of course, it does not in itself ensure product safety.
That is better done by other regimes regulating various industries, and we have a good regulatory regime in most of our industries in the European Union now.
Moreover, it should not be thought that this is the only basis upon which people who are injured can be helped.
We have other systems of distributive justice on this side of the Atlantic, not paralleled in, for example, the United States of America, which has a different but somewhat tougher product liability law than we have.
There, however, it is a kind of forensic lottery, as academics have called it, because many people who are injured get nothing at all and some people who are injured get enormous damages.
It is generally, and rightly, thought that plaintiffs' lawyers are the people who do best out of the deal.
We should stick to our own view on social security as the main basis for help, but then have this product liability regime as well.
The Green Paper raised the question of whether this scheme should be extended and whether some changes should be made.
This was in response to debates in Parliament last year, which led to the amendment of the directive to include primary agricultural products.
It seems to me that the Green Paper, although it has started the debate well, will not finish it completely.
It gave a useful summary of the way the law has developed and been applied, and then asked a series of questions of interested parties and required replies in by the end of November last year.
That is a good way of finding out if there are alarming and urgent matters needing swift action.
It is a bad way of producing a thorough and scientific study of the impact of a body of law on civil society and on life in our Union.
We need more and deeper study for that purpose.
In the meantime we could take this view, and my report suggests that we take this view: unless the evidence produced shows a strong factually-based need for early change, we should have further and deeper reflection on the matter, and we should have a debate that ranges wider than the debate triggered by the Green Paper itself.
There is a great deal of very interesting work of a scholarly and scientific kind and there could be more if it was known that this was properly under consideration.
I know that this approach has disappointed some colleagues, particularly those who raised the debate last year, and it has been suggested that the Parliament would simply walk away from important issues if we left it at that.
I would not myself like to leave it at that.
I have therefore suggested some compromise amendments which suggest that there must be a further and deeper dialogue about this which pays close attention to the points which have been raised without prejudging what is the right answer to them.
I do not think it should be prejudged.
I would not myself like to be a party to imposing on Europe the "tort tax" under which Americans have made themselves suffer.
So I suggest that we urge the Commission to hold a longer and deeper dialogue about this; not to precipitate action but to measured consideration.
We have a good law and the saying "if a thing ain' t broken, don' t fix it; but do not be complacent about it either" applies here.
Mr President, yesterday, ladies and gentlemen, an American court awarded the nicotine victim Leslie Whiteley compensation of no less than USD 44 million.
A week ago, the European Council in Lisbon spoke out in favour of a Europe of innovation.
Under these circumstances the question which arises is, do we need to review our European liability law?
Do we want to mimic the Americans in our liability law?
How can we formulate a liability law which promotes rather than hinders innovation?
We welcome the fact that the Commission has initially submitted a Green Paper on this issue because we consider it sensible to start by evaluating experience with the present directive before we start laying down new rules.
As the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats, we are in favour, in the interests of legal security, of a clear division between compensation and punitive sanctions, a division not possible under American law.
In the interests of medium-sized enterprises, we want to prevent incalculable liability risks and avoid excessive compensation for parties which have suffered minor damage at the expense of consumers as a whole since, at the end of the day, it is they who must pay for such compensation in the form of higher prices.
We want a liability law which promotes innovation and does not conceal incalculable liability risks for companies launching new products.
In evaluating the opinions submitted on the Green Paper, we should like the Commission to have a free rein when it assesses the need to reform the product liability directive.
We would like you to evaluate the reports which you receive impartially.
We think, at first glance, that the present liability law achieves a fair balance between the interests of consumers on the one hand and the interests of product manufacturers on the other.
Companies must assume liability for damage to consumers without fault.
At the same time, liability is statute barred after ten years and capped at EUR 75 million.
We therefore take the view that a review should only be started if there is clear proof of the need to amend the directive.
Caution and level-headedness are needed.
Millions of cases are affected day after day.
We wish the Commission every success in evaluating the results of the Green Paper.
Mr President, our honourable friend, Mr MacCormick, has made a thorough and critical appraisal of the Green Paper on civil liability for defective products and he deserves our thanks for his work and for his cooperative contribution.
I should just like to make a few more comments on behalf of my group on a number of necessary amendments on which both we and the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party reached extensive agreement in the run-up.
I refer to the checks which your department needs to carry out, Commissioner Bolkestein, and the question of the burden of proof which, according to Article 4, rests solely on the injured party.
My group believes the Commission should check if prima facie evidence and circumstantial evidence can also be taken into account at all levels at which evidence is taken.
This is particularly important because the product world is becoming more and more complex and it is becoming more and more difficult for individual persons who have suffered damage to provide proof in this area.
There is also the question of derogations from general manufacturer' s liability, especially the so-called development risk.
We need to examine if these derogations are expedient and conducive to the balance between manufacturers and consumers.
This applies in particular in the case of foodstuffs and medication.
We do not want to see the consumer alone bear the risks inherent in technical progress.
In my view, applying the directive solely to private use and consumption is a questionable move.
The Commission should consider if the directive should not be extended to commercial goods.
The material damage sustained by a company is, in principle, no different from the material damage sustained by a private individual.
And the smaller the enterprise, the heavier the burden of this unequal treatment.
Harmonisation of laws at Community level would be in keeping with the purpose of the product liability directive, especially as increasing flexibility in the world of work is tending more and more to blur the clear distinction between the private world and the world of work.
We also need to think about the way in which liability is statute-barred.
It is clear from the case of BSE that a standard ten-year limitation on liability may be insufficient under certain circumstances.
We could perhaps consider gearing the limitation period to the type of product.
However, it is not only these individual points which are important; we also need to seize every opportunity to harmonise product liability still further in the form of comprehensive consumer protection in the European Union.
If we supplement the MacCormick report in this direction, the European Parliament will have done a good job in the eyes of the consumer.
Which is why we have been elected.
Mr President, I would like to welcome what is a very well considered report, which invites us to stand back and take stock before embarking on further legislation in this field - a refreshing welcome from the tendency of this House sometimes to rush, or to be pushed to rush, at complex legislation.
I would particularly like to focus my comments on the issues raised by this report on the further harmonisation of private law.
In our enthusiasm we sometimes forget what a sensitive subject the harmonisation of private law is; it touches the national legal traditions in our Member States, legal traditions born of our differing histories and cultures of separate nations and jurisdictions.
Professor MacCormick will be acutely aware of this in Scotland, with its own legal heritage.
I am not in any way opposed to further harmonisation, it can be helpful to the good functioning of the internal market, but imposed legislative harmonisation needs to be carefully and openly considered, or we may find we have left our citizens behind in this project.
The traditional push towards harmonisation has been the internal market to which we can now add the aspirations of Tampere for a single area of European justice.
But harmonisation must respect subsidiarity - we have no need to rush towards uniformity of civil law in this area of product liability.
We should be aware that uniformity can stifle innovation and prevent adaptation to local or national circumstances and problems.
It is a truism that European law has been able to benefit from the ability to draw on rich comparative material of varying legal traditions in our different Member States.
It would be dangerous to stifle this by uniformity.
Let me suggest that the aspirations of Tampere can be better met in the public law area of the intended Charter of Fundamental Rights than by further imposed legislation which harmonises our private law traditions.
Research seems to show that our traditions are tending to converge slowly.
Let us perhaps be prepared to assist and guide that convergence and respect the conditionality of the further harmonisation which is integral to Professor MacCormick' s proposals.
Mr President, I would like to join my colleagues in giving a warm welcome to Professor MacCormick' s very realistic report.
In considering the whole issue of product liability we have to say that the current directive appears to have functioned well.
There is not a great deal of evidence that consumers are at the moment being seriously disadvantaged.
I would argue quite strongly that we have achieved a very fair and reasonable balance of interests.
I want to pick up the point made by my colleague Mr Wuermeling that we must take particular care about development risks in the environment within which we now find ourselves.
It was a crucial issue at the Lisbon Summit and new product innovation is one of the key competitive aspects of European business.
If our regulations on product liability stifle competitiveness and innovation, I suggest that consumers will be at a major disadvantage as well.
Consumers will be the ones to lose out, if a flow of competitive and innovative products is stifled.
So let me echo Mr MacCormick: there is a need for much more clearly-based factual evidence before we make changes to this legislation.
Mr President, I am afraid that my opinions will differ from those of Mr Harbour or Mr Wuermeling, because, although the 1985 directive on civil liability was a milestone in the field of consumer protection and furthermore a chapter in which the Commission played a very important role and adopted a strikingly progressive approach, I think that, at the same time, several years have passed since it was adopted.
I therefore feel that it is notable and praiseworthy that the Commission has decided to review it.
This Green Paper represents a first step towards this review.
We must bear in mind the fact that in 1985 certain principles that are today considered to be fundamental were not incorporated, and at that time could not be incorporated into the text of the directive, because debate on the subject had not reached a sufficiently advanced level.
Amongst these principles, the first we should highlight is the importance of the manufacturer accepting, at least in certain areas, the development risks.
I come from a country, Spain, where consumer legislation dictates that the manufacturer bears responsibility for development risks.
There have been no bankruptcies among insurance companies or manufacturers, nor has technical progress been hampered as a result.
For too long the consumer has had to bear the full cost of this risk in the cause of progress.
The second principle consists of removing the burden of proof from the party that has suffered the damage.
We are talking about an objective responsibility and therefore the burden of proof imposed on the victim must be made as light as possible.
The third principle concerns setting levels of compensation.
The directive does provide for this eventuality, but we must bear in mind the fact that judicial bodies are used to seeing this setting of compensation as interference by legislative authority in its duties and this issue must therefore also be reviewed.
Mr President, thank you very much for allowing me to take the floor.
I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur, Mr MacCormick, for the report he has produced and the work he has done.
May I also thank the other Members of this House for their comments and questions.
Mr President, rapporteur, the subject of product liability came up for discussion by the European Parliament around two years ago.
At the time, the Commission put forward a proposal to the effect that the principle of risk liability for defective products, which is provided for in Directive 85/374, should also be applied to primary agricultural products and products of hunting.
You may recall that during that debate in November 1998, the Commission announced that the report which was being drafted at the time on the functioning of the directive presented the best opportunity to consider revising the 1985 directive, and was the best means of doing so.
The aforesaid report will be presented to Parliament and the Council at the end of this year.
In addition, the Commission undertakes to initiate a wide-ranging discussion with all parties, based on a Green Paper, which is on the table for discussion in this sitting.
On 29 July last year, the Commission gave its blessing to the current Green Paper on liability for defective products.
This Green Paper was, and still is, intended to elicit information from all interested parties, particularly the business community, consumers, insurance companies and government institutions, on two questions.
The first question is how the product liability directive of 1985 actually worked in practice.
The second question is as follows: to what extent will this directive have to be amended?
This document was intended, as I said, to stimulate reflection and debate.
In an important section of the Green Paper, all interested parties are invited to make a firm case for their stance on the need for revision.
This section addresses a wide range of subjects, amongst which are the points raised by the European Parliament in a debate two years ago, to wit, the burden of proof, development risks, compensation for brain injury suffered, franchise, the limitation period and financial ceilings, but also other issues such as the need for more transparency, supplier liability and recovery of damages.
These subjects are also mentioned by Mrs Gebhardt, or at least some of them are.
She also talked about burden of proof, development risks and further harmonisation in this sphere, as well as further industrial usage.
These two sets of subjects overlap.
In any case, it is clear that these subjects will all need to be addressed in a report that the Commission intends to compile towards the end of this year.
The proposals for a potential revision, referred to in the Green Paper, must serve as guiding principles for open discussion.
In fact, Mr MacCormick pointed out in his intervention this evening that the Commission needs to deepen the debate.
I undertake to do so on behalf of the Commission, but this must be in concert with Parliament of course, and with the other interested parties, because as an entity, the Commission is, of course, dependent on the views expressed by society and by this House.
Accordingly, the Commission would not wish to anticipate any future initiatives on the part of the Commission.
However, the Commission would urge all interested parties to base their response on factual evidence.
This point was also emphasised by Mr Harbour, when he said that only convincing reasons of a factual nature could be put forward as arguments for amending the directive.
The Commission agrees wholeheartedly with Mr Harbour.
Of course, we will always be prepared to reconsider our position in the light of arguments of a factual nature, but under no other circumstances.
That also explains why the Commission would call again on the Members of this House not to confine themselves to certain positions purely for reasons of principle.
The Parliamentary committee with competence in this matter takes the same view as that expressed by myself a few moments ago, and by Mr Harbour, but the said committee believes that any revision of the 1985 directive should be based on incontrovertible fact.
Before undertaking revisions, the Community legislator must subject the effects of existing legislation to careful scrutiny.
A number of issues raised in the Green Paper, among others, will need to be addressed in the process.
That is why in certain cases, people do not go along with attempts to galvanise the Commission into action, which is an opinion the Commission shares.
It goes without saying that all the issues mentioned in the Green Paper will be gone through with a fine toothcomb in the report.
So far, approximately one hundred contributions have been received from national and European consumer organisations, various sectors of the business community, government institutions in the Member States and in other European countries, as well as from organisations that specialise in product liability.
This shows how important people think this subject is, and how justified Parliament is in devoting attention to this report this evening.
The analysis of the functioning of the directive, which will be undertaken on the basis of these contributions, is to be included in the report.
The Commission does not intend at this stage to pass judgement on the debate as to whether or not it is necessary to revise the 1985 directive, but it will be guided by the aforementioned analysis in the course of this debate.
If it turns out that it is indeed going to be necessary to undertake a revision, then naturally the Commission' s offices will prepare a draft proposal.
I therefore hope that the European Parliament can subscribe to this approach, and that it will adopt the motion for a resolution prepared by the competent Parliamentary committee, in its unamended form.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Electricity
The next item is the report (A5-0078/2000) by Mr Turmes, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on electricity from renewable sources and the internal electricity market (SEC(1999)0470 - C5-0342/1999 - 2000/2002(COS)).
Mr President, what is the purpose of a directive on renewable forms of energy, or an own-initiative report from Parliament?
I think we must place this report, and also the directive which is in the pipeline, in the context of the European Union' s energy policy with its three objectives of competitive pricing, security of supply and environmental protection.
Since 29 February 2000, we have had a common electricity market but, regrettably, still with considerable distortions of competition which still, unfortunately, work to the disadvantage of both renewable energy cogeneration and energy management and the forms of energy of the future.
The reasons for this are energy prices which do not incorporate the external costs, with the sizeable subsidies which are still available to the nuclear sector as well as the fossil-fuel sector.
The directive which is currently being prepared should, in my opinion, have two objectives.
Firstly, the current imperfect market must be adjusted as necessary in order to protect the still tender shoots of the plant which is renewable energy, and also to lay the foundations for renewable energies so that they head in the direction that they need to before the year 2030 or 2040, when they must be capable of providing the greater part of the European Community energy mix.
We have many reasons to move in this direction.
Firstly, the protection of the environment, but also the creation of jobs.
We have studies, backed up with figures, to show that renewable energies create more jobs than conventional forms of energy.
We know that we must make Europe ready for a world renewable energy market and there are also geostrategic advantages to our reducing our dependence on regions which are often in crisis.
What must the cornerstones of this forthcoming directive be?
It must, in the first place, be based on the Treaty articles relating to both the internal market and the environment.
It must have ambitious, clearly defined objectives at European level in the order of those given in the Commission White Paper, i.e. 12% for energy and 23% for electricity.
After setting these objectives at the European level, there must be 'burden sharing' negotiations between the Commission and the Member States in order for reciprocal agreement to be reached on the specific national objectives which, when added together, will combine to form the European objective.
As regards the instruments to be implemented, my report advocates subsidiarity.
I believe it is too early to pass judgement on the various instruments that can be classified.
On the one hand, there are the fixed-price systems which have launched the renewable energy industry in Europe.
On the other hand, there are the trading systems which have just been created in the Netherlands and Denmark, where there are still many administrative and technical problems to resolve.
We therefore propose that the Commission makes an assessment of the various instruments in 2005, and that, until that date, subsidiarity should be maintained and the Commission should refrain from regulating subsidies to the renewable sector.
I would argue that it is pointless to make cuts in subsidies to the renewable sector when there are much larger subsidies going to the nuclear and fossil-fuel sectors.
There is one last point which I wish to put forward, namely the need for a system for labelling and providing information on all forms of electricity.
In an internal market, the consumer should be informed, and this information should be provided for every form of energy, not just green electricity.
I would like to thank all the people who contributed to this report, which is the result of a real team effort, and I await their comments with interest.
Mr President, I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent piece of work.
We have what are per se excellent basic documents in the field of renewable energy sources, such as the White Paper referred to, which contains a brilliant critical analysis.
But, on balance, everyone is in favour.
Everyone says yes, we need these new sources of energy.
They are a fundamental component of the 21st century, of the 21st century way of thinking.
But everyone has slightly different ideas and, as a result, we often fail to find a standard line which will allow us to achieve these objectives.
The second point is that we tend to polarise, and that causes problems.
On the one hand, we say, there are the advocates of renewable energy sources, ecologically-minded, forward-looking people.
On the other hand, there are the energy suppliers, oil traders and oil producers, who want exactly the opposite.
All we are doing is fanning the flames of enmity.
I think we should put this enmity behind us and acknowledge that these renewable sources of energy only have one enemy.
That enemy is our ignorance of the fantastic opportunities which they offer us.
First, there are ecological advantages and, secondly, there are job opportunities.
Thirdly, I think that whatever we invest in this area is neither subsidy nor promotion but sensible investment from a national economic point of view.
We must recognise that.
Fourthly, we must bear in mind that sources of fossil fuels have been accompanied recently by price fluctuations ranging from 10 to 30 dollars a barrel.
Fifthly, more and more studies are implying that actual sources of fossil fuels are much smaller than we perceive them to be today.
Sixthly, we are conducting discussions throughout the world - and we can see this happening from Chechnya via the Gulf to Africa - about earth' s remaining resources.
If we now recognise that you are also a bringer of peace, then we will probably have made a huge step if we accept this report tomorrow.
Mr President, Madam Vice-President, ladies and gentlemen, Parliament has basically been in agreement on this question since 1996.
It was Parliament, may I remind you, which had to push the previous Commission in the direction of this policy.
It did not start with the White Paper, but with an initiative by Parliament, and I remember because I was the rapporteur at the time.
We need a much higher proportion of primary energy used.
We have already come a long way, but not far enough by a long chalk.
We need it for climatic reasons and for industrial policy reasons, because there is a global market to fill here.
In this respect, I should like to thank the rapporteur on behalf of the committee and note that, consequently, 80% of the resolutions tabled are therefore uncontested.
For the rest, an aside: everyone still here this evening must have not renewable sources of energy but an inexhaustible supply of energy!
We are represented in accordance with the subject matter!
Unfortunately, I note that the report contains a number of statements which are incorrect, which violate the Treaty or which are politically untenable.
For example, elevating the feed-in system to a universal panacea is wrong.
It is true, of course, that the countries with feed-in systems have made a great deal of progress, but that is not on account of the feed-in system but because of the financing which is in place there.
We must make a distinction between these causes.
As a result, we and the Commission are of the opinion that the Member States should now be allowed to experiment.
It is too early to see one system as a universal panacea and dismiss another.
Secondly, the report also contradicts the Treaty at certain points.
This applies in particular to the statements on aid policy.
It is true that renewable energy needs aid now, and probably will for some time to come, in order to get started.
That is quite right and it complies with the Treaty.
But it is certainly not right to give them the same aid as all other forms of energy because they make a totally different contribution to the energy mix, and it is not right to link aid for one to the lifetime of the others.
My third comment also concerns a point at which the resolution does not comply with the Treaty.
We here in the European Union cannot impose mandatory obligations on the Member States.
The European Union has no legal basis and no credentials for doing so and, because of that, it cannot impose sanctions.
Anyway, that is precisely what the Lisbon Council has just agreed to reject in connection with the job markets.
That is why it is right to regard this as a matter of economic policy of common interest; hence the burden sharing negotiations.
More importantly, I cannot agree when there is talk of the curse of the lowest bidder.
Statements like this show disdain for the consumer and disregard the principle of supply and demand.
In addition, as I am sure you will understand, we cannot get excited about new forms of bureaucracy, even if it comes along in the jewel-studded cloak of an EU agency.
That is why, Madam Vice-President, I have three recommendations to make to the Commission.
First: you should use your directive, the draft of which we are waiting for, to promote the use of all renewable sources of energy and, if possible, you could suggest a uniform development framework.
Secondly: as far as financial assistance is concerned, a distinction should be made between everyone and those who need this financial assistance.
The distinction is easy to make.
Thirdly, and I consider this extremely important in the interests of investors: if a new system should replace the systems currently being tried out in Europe, either in the Member States or in the Union, it should not, of course, penalise those who have already made investments.
They need permanent protection.
We want both the competition and energy departments of the Commission to make a clear statement on that to the markets.
Mr President, I too should like to thank Mr Turmes on behalf of my Group for the excellent and detailed work contained in his report.
We certainly have no lack of reports.
We have had the Mombaur report, the Rothe report, the former member, Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz, drafted a report, Mrs Ahern drafted a report and, if I remember correctly, I also drafted a report on this subject once.
So there is no shortage of reports and they have all been translated into every possible language.
What we need now are initiatives to implement our decisions.
We have decided that the share of renewable sources of energy should rise from 6% to 12%.
At present, if I remember the figures correctly, we are not yet even quite at 6%, but at 5.4%.
In any case, I am merely repeating the Commission' s figures.
How can we do this?
Biomass and hydroelectric power account for 95% of renewable energy sources in the European Union.
Wind, solar energy, photovoltaic energy etc. only account for 5%!
In other words, if we decide to double these figures and if we come up against purely physical limits with hydroelectric power, if we cannot build more large power stations as and where we please, and there is a limit to what we can do in the Alps, then we have to think of something else, for example a bridge with agricultural policy.
I should like to ask you, Commissioner, to build a bridge with agricultural policy, to enter into an alliance.
If, for example, the enlargement of the European Union encompasses countries such as Poland, which have large agricultural areas and a high proportion of their population working in agriculture, most of whom will become unemployed over the next 10 or 20 years as these countries engage in intensive farming, then there is room for manoeuvre here.
There is, of course, the question of how we can finance this, but at least we have technical room for manoeuvre.
As far as renewable sources of energy and financing them at national level is concerned, I have just a few brief comments.
The systems are so different that they must, at all costs, be made compatible in the medium term, so that we can create a real European market here.
Secondly, aid must be degressive.
Not radically degressive perhaps, otherwise there is no end result, but it must show a downward trend in order to ensure that the best technologies are used, because there is constant technical progress even with renewable sources of energy.
I can easily imagine, and here I do not share Mr Mombaur' s view, that we may need to consider sanctions, otherwise the whole thing makes no sense.
For example, we undertook at Kyoto to adhere to certain quotas.
No one can be punished for failing to keep to the quotas.
Had we introduced the euro like that, if no sanctions had been imposed for failing to comply with requirements, the euro would not have been a success.
In the case of renewable sources of energy or the CO2 policy, nothing will be achieved in the long run without sanctions.
We cannot enter into commitments willy-nilly and then fail to honour them.
I keep coming back to this: without sanctions, this joint energy policy, because in the final analysis that is what it is, will not function.
It is perhaps an unpleasant thought, but it will not function otherwise.
Mr President, I would like to reiterate the thanks to the rapporteur for the extremely cooperative manner in which he has embarked upon this important report and I am pleased to participate in the intimate gathering of renewable fanatics so late at night.
Three points - firstly, the whole issue of a level playing field.
It seems to us essential that if we are going to give renewable energies the breathing space and the momentum that they merit, it is right to try and aim for a level playing field.
That requires, above and beyond everything else, downward pressure on the unacceptably high and legally dubious levels of subsidies which continue to flow to fossil energy sources in the European Union, notably, but not excusably, the coal industry in a number of large Member States.
As long as those market distorting subsidies to fossil fuels continue we cannot realistically talk about a fair or level playing field in the European Union.
In that context we join with the rapporteur in feeling that some kind of special provisions concerning subsidies are merited as long as those market distorting subsidies continue elsewhere.
On targets, I very much side with Mr Linkohr.
We cannot be serious about this without trying to add teeth in some form, moral, financial or otherwise to the concept of targets.
We were not very happy with the early versions from the rapporteur because we felt the targets were there to almost micro-manage the market in renewable energy sources.
That is neither viable nor desirable, but a mixture of the pressure towards targets, combined with competition between effective renewable energy industries, seems to us to be the long-term approach we should all adopt.
Finally, I would make a plea on behalf of my group: let us not set up yet another agency.
Paragraph 22 of this report calls for the establishment of a European sustainable energy agency.
This Parliament and the European institutions have been spawning a blizzard of new agencies all over the European Union.
It does not necessary help us to follow the policies which we wish to follow - it could actually have the effect of ghettoising the policy altogether.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his hard work and particularly the excellent definition of renewables.
This directive should be solely directed towards supporting new renewable technologies that are not yet commercially viable.
The directive, as some of the speakers have already said, needs to have binding targets in order for the Member States and the entire EU to achieve a significant increase in the share of renewable energies in the total energy market.
I note that the Commission is proposing a review in 2005 but I would urge that you also ask the Member States to make annual reports on achieving the targets in the White Paper.
I would also like the directive not to establish any ceiling or limitation on direct support mechanisms chosen by the individual Member States.
It should also encourage fair and non-discriminatory network access as its most important item.
The directive should also contain mechanisms to discourage, as we have already heard, the Member States from their market distorting subsidies to traditional forms of energy, particularly fossil fuels and nuclear.
There are a lot of covert subsidies to the nuclear sector that have been there for a long time and that are long overdue for a considerable review if not a total ban.
Attempts to say that support for renewable energy is a distortion of the market in the context of the vast subsidies for nuclear and fossil fuels that exist in the European Union are totally spurious.
I hope that the Commissioner will really take that point to heart.
The directive should explicitly propose a system of support and advantages for the small and medium-sized companies in decentralised production and distribution of renewable energies.
It should include incentives allowing the Member States to clearly support advantages for the regions, especially rural areas, in respect to labour intensive green production.
Most importantly, the directive should propose mechanisms for the internalisation of external costs of traditional energy production.
Finally, I would urge that it is important that some of the undertakings by Member States to include renewables in the energy mix in the electricity sector be at least equal to the total EU commitment made in the White Paper on renewable energy, as endorsed by the Council and this Parliament.
I would like to make particular reference to the unsatisfactory rate of uptake in the UK, Ireland and France.
Here we can clearly see from empirical studies that network access is by far the best way to achieve high percentages of renewable energy rather than the other methods that have been undertaken in those countries.
Mr President, I believe that all of us are in agreement that the development of renewable energy sources is the way forward.
If we are serious about this, we must be prepared to make funds available for research and development in this area, both at national and European levels.
Parliament recently voted to maintain and increase funding for the SAVE programme.
In my own country of Ireland a total of EUR 125 million has been devoted to developing an environmentally sustainable energy sector.
I am pleased that the rapporteur identifies the links between the issue of renewable energy sources and wider policy considerations.
The creation of an internal market in electricity should provide consumers of electricity with real choice.
The introduction of an element of competition in any industry should lead to more favourable pricing for the consumer.
While it is desirable to create a level playing field it may also be necessary to provide subsidies for certain types of energy in order to promote other objectives.
Clearly the development of renewables is linked to environmental objectives as well as issues of employment, regional development and the promotion of local initiatives.
I would like to see the development of small local initiatives which would strengthen rural development by the provision of, say, 20 to 30 jobs per project.
Such projects should not only be open to the business sector and local groups such as small locally-based co-ops should be assisted in creating such local enterprises.
This report states that support for renewable energy projects must not be viewed as a straightforward subsidy under the state aid rules.
What is important is that Member States be allowed to continue subsidising renewable energy sources which are not yet economically viable.
Apart from the obvious environmental and other benefits, this can actually be justified on competition grounds.
It is clear that there are serious distortions in the energy market with many hidden subsidies to both coal and oil generated energy.
It would be virtually impossible to quantify these subsidies which have been embedded in the industry over decades of generator construction.
We still face a significant challenge in meeting our commitments on limiting greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector under the Kyoto protocol while, at the same time, promoting growth within our economies.
I believe that, while each Member State must work towards the 12% target of renewables, the imposition of a single binding target would not be helpful because of the great differences in the structure of the energy market between Member States.
All I have said so far is on the positive side but, on the negative side, the report specifically calls for peat to be excluded.
Peat power plants work very well indeed in my country and make an important contribution to Ireland' s energy supply.
In addition to that, the report emphatically calls for the European imposition of an energy tax.
I am totally opposed to this approach and I reject this taxation.
Therefore, I regret to say that my final vote on this project will be seriously affected.
Mr President, the need to promote the development of sources of renewable energy becomes a crucial matter every time that issues such as the Kyoto protocol and meeting our commitments to reducing greenhouse gas emissions are raised or when we talk about sustainability in energy policy.
Also, on everyone' s mind is the fact that supporting renewable energies is one of the most important ways of achieving effective results, particularly with regard to controlling carbon dioxide emissions and to attaining the objective proposed in the White Paper, to reach a level of 12% renewable energy by 2010.
Since we are aware of this need, there is a set of relevant facts that we should consider.
Firstly, it should be said that renewable energies currently have the disadvantage of being less efficient in economic terms, which means that, in the first phase, support mechanisms are needed which will make them viable from a business point of view.
Secondly, any support mechanism that is considered must be realistic and consistent, but must, above all, fit into a stable and appropriate legal framework if it is to achieve the desired effect.
In order for any action related to the development of new projects for investment in these technologies to be launched, it will require a legal basis which will ensure that the laws on which it is based are transparent.
Thirdly, renewable energies are characterised by the different situations from which the various Member States are starting, which means that any solution will have to adapt to these differences.
Fourthly, we must not place too many limits on the concept of renewable energy, although it does seem reasonable to impose certain restrictions on support actions for plants whose size and performance require them.
I shall finish by saying that the report by Mr Turmes, on which this House is about to vote, addresses my main concerns sufficiently.
Its content provides the necessary balance for us to be able to rate it positively, but our final position will depend on the outcome with regard to certain key points.
I would not like to finish without congratulating the rapporteur on his willingness to enter into dialogue and for his vigorous and thorough work.
Mr President, I have an interest, though not a financial one, in this subject in that I am chairman of the Northern Energy Initiative, a company which operates in the north-east of England, and has within it a renewable energy agency whose objective is to promote the development of renewable energies.
The UK has a low proportion of electricity from renewable sources, I believe amongst the lowest.
Yet the studies in my home region have demonstrated considerable potential for renewable projects: wind, including offshore, small hydro, landfill gas, waste incineration, biofuels and photovoltaics.
It is important to have EU and national targets, but it is also important to have a European directive which will support efforts at local and regional level, where many of the decisions are actually taken.
In general terms, there is a need to build up an awareness amongst architects and potential customers of the technologies that are available.
Support for demonstration projects should be included in any directive.
Larger developments often fail to get planning permission, sometimes because of public opposition.
More proactive planning guidance, preferably linked to regional renewable targets, and feasibility studies would be helpful additions to the directive.
Access to the grid system at fair prices is crucial.
The disincentive of high capital costs of connection to the grid from remote renewable sites and the prevention of transmission penalties are other issues which the directive should tackle.
I hope that the Commission will take note of these points.
I would urge support for the amendment to assist the promotion of renewables in the remote islands of the Community.
I am sure that this was an oversight in the drafting of the text.
I have to say that the British Labour Members will vote against the exclusion of waste incineration from the definition of renewables, on the understanding that this refers to material which cannot be recycled.
Mr President, the chief aim of an internal electricity market must be fair play.
This aim is clearly visible in the Commission' s preparatory act.
In his report, Mr Turmes, does not in all respects advocate the same way of thinking, however.
The report does contain many good ideas.
The recorded aim of the Commission with regard to the promotion of renewables obviously has to be supported.
We really do have to invest in research into energy sources.
However, we must remember that a free energy market will have to be based in the future on viable, free competition, and not on favouring renewable energy sources by discriminating against the others.
All forms of electric power must have free access to the market.
The harmonisation of taxation and aid schemes is a different matter.
Electricity producers must be able to determine the prices at which they wish to sell.
If the Union starts messing about with the burgeoning electricity markets, for example, by imposing rules controlling the electrical supply, or with guarantees of minimum prices or quotas, we can say goodbye to the free market.
Renewables can be made more competitive by increasing consumer choice.
In this respect the certification of electricity is an idea to be supported.
If we wish to pay more for electricity produced from wind power than from other sources, for example, then we should be allowed to do so.
To no good purpose, the report tries to define renewable energy by raising the question of peat as a special area.
The position with regard to peat cannot be determined according to the same standards as biogases, for example.
For that reason, peat must occupy its own energy class in future, so that its taxation can be determined on a level that is reasonable.
Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on being open to dialogue on all areas connected to the report and to the amendments.
I think we must consider all matters related to renewable energies to be extremely important, bearing in mind the fact that we want to leave behind us a world which future generations will find inhabitable.
It is curious that we are slowly killing ourselves and yet the earth' s contamination is not causing the alarm bells to ring.
What can we do about it?
I think that first we must seek out all renewable energies and take advantage of them, encourage them, promote them and provide the appropriate incentives to make them viable, and at the same time penalise energies that contaminate.
I know that this is all easy to say and difficult to do, but unless we act immediately, within a few generations, we will be stretched to the limit.
My opinion is that we should start by differentiating between compensation and subsidies.
It is common knowledge that most traditional sources of energy, apart from those using water, wind etc., cause a great deal of serious environmental damage, in many cases, such as CO2, acid rain, oil slicks etc.
This damage is usually repaired by public administrations, by means of programmes for restoring and caring for the environment.
In the case of renewables which do not cause any harm to the surrounding environment, I believe it would be reasonable to compensate them while there is no tax on emissions of polluting particles such as CO2.
Therefore, as long as public administrations continue to take responsibility for repairing the damage caused by thermal or nuclear power stations, we will be subsidising these sources of energy at the expense of renewables.
I would finally like to mention the establishment of an appropriate legal framework for this kind of energy, which would foster its rapid development, bearing in mind that, in the long term, renewables must become predominant.
Mr President, Commissioner de Palacio, ladies and gentlemen, to summarise today' s debate, there are basically three issues at stake here.
First, the sustainability of energy sources.
Secondly, security of supply, which has a quite special effect as far as Europe is concerned, not least because of the unstable political situations in the countries which currently supply energy to Europe.
Thirdly, of course, the economy, because energy is a fundamental factor in our international competitiveness and we must therefore ensure that we have an economical supply of energy.
I personally come from Upper Austria and, at present, Upper Austria has broken the energy-saving and energy-renewing records.
Where I come from, renewable energy takes top priority, and Upper Austria has an energy savings agency which runs like clockwork.
The principle of subsidiarity applies here and I think that it was this energy savings agency which inaugurated the energy savings fair held a few days ago, thereby meeting the need for education and information for the public as a whole.
I also think that research and development in this area need greater support.
In the final analysis, we should endeavour in Europe to apply the best practice, i.e. to see where there are models - at this energy savings fair in Wels we presented a thick directory of best practice models - and, at the same time, to use benchmarking to show where we have taken the lead in Europe and where progress is being made elsewhere in the world.
I think that this management system is particularly significant for the future of energy supplies in Europe.
Mr President, firstly I would like to congratulate Mr Turmes on the report which he has prepared, as it will be of great use to the Commission' s work.
I would like to remind you that in April last year the Commission approved a working paper on electricity from renewable sources, whose main objective was to present a thorough overview of the support programmes of the different Member States in the field of renewable energies, as well as to highlight certain conclusions and possible options for the adoption of Community measures in this area.
On that occasion the Commission indicated in its working paper that it had not reached a final conclusion and that a final decision would be adopted on all the issues involved in the light of reactions to the paper itself.
In this respect, Parliament' s contribution is an extremely important element in this process.
This House has always been forthright in its support for active policies designed to promote renewable energies.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate my thanks to Mr Turmes for his work.
Furthermore, and as Mr Linkohr has pointed out, it must be said that it is Parliament that has, in part, forced the Commission to undertake more concrete action in the area of renewable energies and that Parliament has always been a leader and a driving force in this area.
We all agree that renewable energies have to play a key role in guaranteeing our supply of energy, as well as making us less dependent on imports and in fulfilling the commitments we gave in Kyoto.
However, they can also help the EU' s technological development and enable us to export clean technologies to other parts of the world.
I must point out that Mr Turmes' s report fully concurs with these views.
The Commission is already giving its support to the production of wind, solar and biomass energy, small hydroelectric stations and geothermal energy, that is all sources of renewable energy, with the exception of large hydraulic power stations, which we feel we should not support because they have sufficient options available to them.
Furthermore, they have some extremely negative aspects from an environmental point of view, as constructing a dam always involves flooding a valley.
I must, however, say to Mr Turmes that, despite what I have just said, we cannot consider peat to be a renewable energy.
The ALTENER programme is enabling magnificent work to take place and Parliament has always been an ally of the Commission.
It has always cooperated with the efforts of the Commission and, I repeat, has even been a driving force in making the Commission' s proposals more ambitious.
We are now faced with a considerable challenge, which is to establish the most appropriate mechanisms for supporting the development of green electricity in an internal market, an open single electricity market, which is what we are trying to achieve in the European Union.
I can assure you that all issues that have been highlighted here will be carefully considered in relation to the directive on which discussions will begin in the next few days.
Going into specific issues, almost all of the points made in Mr Turmes' s report deserve our support and fully concur with our own studies.
Some aspects are more open to debate, but they also deserve thorough study, even if they must be rejected, in some cases because they are not sufficiently based on fact or because the problems they present are greater than the solutions they propose.
I must repeat that the report stresses the importance of the objective of doubling, from 6% to 12%, the proportion of renewable energy sources in the gross domestic consumption of energy.
In the proposal for a directive, we hope to include some objectives chosen by countries, that is, individual objectives for each country in the European Union.
These would not be compulsory objectives, but ones which can produce results, at least from the political point of view, and I think that this would be a very important step.
I agree with Mr Turmes on the need to protect the different national systems in force at the time that this directive is adopted.
This is what we will do, which does not mean that, in five years time, there should not be a review of the different systems and that we should not commit ourselves to those which have proved to be the most effective and which have resulted in greater development of renewable energies in those countries.
In any event, as you know, on 2 December 1999, in the Energy Council, I gave a questionnaire to the Member States, so I could see what stage we had reached, what stage the issue had reached, and so I could present a directive that could obtain sufficient consensus to quickly conclude its passage through both Parliament and the Council.
The result of this questionnaire, which has been studied by the services, is a document, in my opinion, of extremely high quality, which I hope will enable us to get through the Parliamentary and Council procedures reasonably quickly.
Let us state quite clearly that the proposal simply and straightforwardly seeks to stimulate production in the EU of electricity from renewable energies.
I would like to point out that I have taken careful note of Mr Linkohr' s words on agricultural policy and the possibility of encouraging non-food production.
As a former agriculture minister, I am sensitive to these issues and this is one which, to a certain extent, is also covered in this proposal.
I would also like to point out that our objective in all of this is to have a safer and more reliable supply of energy, which treats the EU' s environment with greater respect.
To conclude, Mr President, other speakers have mentioned repayment.
Mr Vidal-Quadras and Mr Valdivielso both mentioned this a while ago.
Renewable energies today are not competitive in relation to traditional energies, particularly as traditional energies have certain external costs which, of course, are not internalised.
Support must be given to renewable energies.
My personal view - although there are other ideas on this subject - is that, as things stand, we cannot write off other energies, for reasons of competitiveness and growth.
We can, however, support renewable energies, precisely because they are obviously based on respect for the environment and on reducing emissions.
In this respect, we must be able to ensure that those who do commit themselves to renewables have a fair return on their investments.
We obviously have to create a stable framework that will enable investors to make investments which require a sufficient number of years to cover their repayment.
This is one of the issues under discussion in the Commission and which has proved to be more difficult in some cases, together with certain other aspects.
But, ultimately, everyone in the Commission agrees on the need to encourage green energy.
Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur and all the speakers, and to assure them that this element of stability, which will enable decisions relating to medium-term investments to be taken, will also feature in the proposal for a directive that I hope to be able to present to you soon.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m.)