# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
It is true that not all of the Union' s Member States have, like France, had the privilege to have developed very long-standing links with Tunisia, which enable France to understand that the reality of the situation does not match up to the caricature that some fools in the media have managed to spread throughout Europe.
It is true that Tunisia does not match up to our idea of democracy, but how many countries in the world and even in Europe, live up to the idea of what democracy is according to a person who is already a democrat?
Tunisia is actually the first country in the Maghreb to have signed an agreement with the European Union, and everyone recognises the progress that Tunisia has made in adapting its economy and its social fabric to the modernisation required by its links with the European Union and, unfortunately, by acceleration due to liberalisation through globalisation.
I would say that the results that Tunisia has achieved make a good case for the country and that is why the trial it is being subjected to seems somewhat disproportionate given the reality of the situation.
We must, in any event, remember that Tunisia was in the front line of combat when, a few years ago, Muslim fundamentalism threatened the whole of the Maghreb.
In my opinion, Parliament would be doing something it could be proud of if it took into account the whole geopolitical context of the region instead of behaving like some kind of activist cell.
Such behaviour is not even worthy of a non-governmental organisation.
Mr President, the news reached me here in Strasbourg of a hunger strike involving more than one thousand political prisoners in Tunisia.
I would like to make two comments.
Based on Christian beliefs, we denounce this ultimate means of self-defence.
However, we are quick to add our condemnation of authorities which force their citizens into such extreme despair.
The present Tunisian regime does not tolerate any independent minds.
Hence the repression which has lasted for years and is even becoming increasingly harsh.
This is why I wholeheartedly concur with those who submitted oral questions today, particularly Mr Van den Bos.
He is quite right in asking the Council for real action because the EU' s own credibility as a partner of the association agreement with Tunisia is in the balance.
"It is not a case of the population being denied its rights" , according to a Tunisian defender of civil liberties.
He goes on to say, "they might as well forget that these rights even exist."
If Tunisians lead this fight, then the European Union should not and cannot trail behind.
Mr President, I too should also like to express my great concern at the deteriorating human rights situation in Tunisia, a concern that is actively shared by all friends of that country.
For several years now, those who have promoted human rights have suffered, together with their families, continual harassment by the Tunisian authorities and some of them have been given prison terms.
They are regularly followed by members of the state security services; their passports, and those of their families, are confiscated; their telephone lines are cut off or tapped; they are subjected to defamation campaigns or to verbal and physical threats; and finally, their relatives are regularly interrogated.
Given this kind of abuse, the European Parliament today reiterates its conviction that there should be no exception to the respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms.
This rule cannot be flouted without damage being done, because Tunisia is the first European partner to have concluded, in 1995, as a matter of fact, an association agreement with the European Union.
This agreement contains a clause which calls for human rights to be respected, with suspensive effect and provides for political dialogue.
I certainly prefer political dialogue to unilateral sanctions, but, for this very reason, it is our duty to tell our partners that we are extremely concerned about the situation in Tunisia.
It is our duty to ask the Tunisian authorities to undertake all possible initiatives to establish a genuine multiparty political scene, and to guarantee the freedom of the press and freedom of association.
But what form will this dialogue take, Mr Patten?
What practical and specific steps can we take?
How can we make the positions that we adopt here effective?
We can start by asking how things are going to develop in Tunisia.
The Ben Brik affair alone has come to symbolise the exasperation of many Tunisians in the face of the depletion of their freedoms, with the press being only one of the many areas lying in ruins.
There has been a Ben Brik effect, which goes beyond his individual case and in three months, we have seen a whole civil society, which has demonstrated its determination to end the police state, suddenly gain a new dignity.
Over these three months, President Ben Ali has continued to wield the carrot and the stick at those who question his methods or who criticise the state of freedoms in his country.
Given this attitude, we are entitled to wonder if, tomorrow, Tunisia might not become a new hotbed of tension on Europe' s southern border.
Tunisia' s rulers have two solutions today.
The first is to continue to refuse to accept the reality of the situation in line with the principle - quite common in this type of regime - of insisting that everything is fine until the final moment, with civil society having to suffer a new wave of repression and to face up to it with courage and determination.
It would then be the international Community' s task to isolate a power that would be an outlaw and to support the fight of the Tunisian people to regain their sovereignty.
The Tunisian government can also, however, choose the path of dialogue with civil society, in order to decrease tensions and to negotiate a way of pulling Tunisia out of this impasse and to lead it towards democracy.
I think that it is important, as Mr Abitbol said, that we choose our words carefully.
In any event, we must implement every measure that we can to ensure that that is the path they choose to follow.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the situation in Tunisia must be seen in the wider context of the Mediterranean and the countries of North Africa with which the European Union is interested in maintaining dialogue regarding its peace and stability programmes.
Out of all those countries, Tunisia has certainly made the greatest progress in terms of its economy, stability and social services, and Tunisia is the country which is most aware of the importance of a Euro-Mediterranean dialogue on economic, political and cultural issues.
Nevertheless, we clearly cannot disregard the suppression of civil liberties taking place in that country, but I feel that it would not be sufficient or effective for us to adopt a purely condemnatory position, although we must show our disapproval.
We need an action programme which is capable of genuinely improving the situation step by step, through dialogue and by supporting Tunisian society by means of joint agreements and specific programmes on respect for human rights, as we planned to do with the Cards programme for the Western Balkans
In effect, we have to take into account the fact that countries with different traditions from those of Western democratic countries have to mature culturally in their growth towards the full implementation of civil liberties, and that this happens one step at a time, with the result that the whole process takes longer.
Isolation would not pay off and would be likely to undermine the endeavours of those who are working in Tunisia to improve the quality of its democracy.
It is therefore to be hoped that the EU-Tunisia Association Council will assume the responsibility of continuously monitoring the human rights situation in Tunisia by means of a joint action carried out together with the equivalent Tunisian representatives, and that it will create a joint system to monitor the issue which can only bring social improvements to the human rights situation in Tunisia.
Mr President, human rights are being infringed.
There is no respect for press freedom and the rights to freedom of expression and of organisation, all of which are being ignored.
This is something we know about.
It is also known about in Tunisia, both by the authorities and the people.
Naturally, we shall be taking up these violations and criticising them whenever we have the opportunity to do so.
This is an extremely serious matter.
It is a question of universal rights, not only inside but also outside the European Union, and there must be criticism when such rights are infringed.
I think that the best way of levelling criticism is by means of dialogue.
This means people' s real respect of one another, and if Tunisia and its leaders are prepared to respect our views on these matters, then I believe that we, in turn, should note that, in Tunisia, they take quite a negative view of the agreements we have in place.
I cannot find it stated anywhere other than in point 7 of the motion for a resolution of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left that all Tunisian organisations, within both the private and the public sectors, are in fact critical of the association agreement, a state of affairs which we in the EU should, of course, also take on board and respect.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I have just come back from Tunisia where, for a time, I was the guest of a Member of the Tunisian Government, and on no occasion did I see evidence of any of the points which have been mentioned during this debate.
I did, however, see a country which is firmly committed to modernisation and I witnessed the great enthusiasm with which the sectors of environmental development, land reclamation, agriculture, tourism and the construction of large infrastructures are being identified.
I saw that they are attempting to boost their economy in order to avoid further migration which could certainly affect relations between the Mediterranean countries and the countries which are now part of the same European Union as well.
I personally witnessed cultural exchanges taking place between universities and saw that the country is regaining a strong cultural identity and is committed to restoring historic town centres, rural tourism and craft trades.
I noted the high level of involvement of schools in educational programmes with a series of interdisciplinary activities.
And I saw absolutely no evidence pointing to an absence of associationism.
On the contrary: very strong, living associationism exists between young people and women, in particular, and there is also a remarkable spirit of partnership between institutions.
I learned from a question that we are lamenting the fact that the local press refuses to report cases of human rights abuse.
If this is so and censorship is taking place, it means that the freedom of the press does exist there, to the extent that the local press can even refuse to report any of Tunisia' s positions which do deny human rights.
Well then, I do not feel that the situation is so bad.
Rather, I suspect that the European Union is taking political action against not just Tunisia but also the Balkan countries, for example, in deciding to provide greater or lesser financial incentives for the countries depending on the internal policy adjustments which the countries can guarantee.
This would indeed be an operation totally removed from the real meaning of applied and shared democracy; it would have very little to do with human rights and still less to do with relations between potential enlargement countries and the European Union itself.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, Commissioner, most members here in this House - with the exception of the member who has just spoken - are concerned about developments in friendly, neighbouring Tunisia.
Tunisia is our neighbour, because the Mediterranean does not divide, it unites us.
These concerns, as expressed here today, are not born of a colonial or neo-colonial attitude.
We are not talking about unacceptable interference in the internal affairs of a third country.
No, we are talking, as Commissioner Patten has stressed again and again, about critical dialogue based on the agreements which we have signed with Tunisia.
It would therefore make no sense to cancel these agreements.
On the contrary, we must use them to shape this critical dialogue.
We are talking about creating a common area of security, stability and peace, and that includes democracy, that includes respect for human rights, that includes freedom of the press.
When Tunisia keeps insisting that we are also talking about fighting extremism and terrorism and preventing extremist views, attitudes and organisations, then I agree with it wholeheartedly.
But how else is this fight best fought, if not through democracy?
This is also being demonstrated by Tunisia' s neighbours.
Which is why we cannot do without it.
Tunisia keeps saying that it is a question of economic and social development.
But this totally positive economic and social development in Tunisia is precisely the best basis for developing democracy still further and fighting the fight against extremism on democratic soil.
One last comment: we want to help Tunisia, about that there can be no doubt.
We must help Tunisia, just as we must help the whole area, the whole region.
The Balkans are not our only priority.
The enlargement of the European Union is not our only priority.
The Mediterranean is not in the third division, it has equal status and importance.
When Commissioner Patten states, for example, that we are talking about reforms, about closing the gap between commitments and payments, then that deserves our full support.
But we must do that all together and sensitively.
We must do it in a way which does not repulse our Mediterranean partners but which invites them back into the fold.
Mr President, I have two brief comments to make.
Firstly, the Council has taken due note of the legitimate concerns expressed by the Members and we will definitely bear these in mind in our dialogue with Tunisia within the existing institutional frameworks.
Secondly, to enlighten Mr Ducarme, the General Affairs Council planned for 18 June will basically aim to secure approval, within the Council framework, for the common strategy for the Mediterranean which will then in principle be submitted to the Feira European Council.
This common strategy has formed part of the Portuguese Presidency' s programme and may constitute an added value in the Barcelona process.
It contains some extremely important elements for reorganising and siting the whole external policy of the EU in this area in a more integrated manner.
At the last General Affairs Council we made an effort to deal with this issue which has some delicate aspects given that these questions are complex and multi-dimensional.
The extraordinary General Affairs Council, which will be held immediately before the European Council in Santa Maria da Feira, will allow this common strategy to be approved.
This strategy will surely form an element which will greatly assist the EU' s overall action, particularly within the Common Foreign and Security Policy, in respect of the whole Mediterranean region.
Mr President, I shall be even briefer than I was going to be, because the presidency has just answered one of the points put by Mr Ducarme.
I just want to touch on two other points he raised.
First, to say that, speaking for the Commission, we very much hope to bring forward proposals in the next few months - or weeks, if we can manage it - for revitalising the Barcelona process, a contribution to the debate about how that can be done five years after the original agreement.
If the honourable Member needs more information on Tunisia or on the Barcelona process as a whole, I hope he will let me know and I shall try to oblige as rapidly as possible.
Thank you, Commissioner Patten.
I have received six motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 40(5).
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
China's accession to WTO
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions:
B5-0489/00 by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, to the Council, on China' s accession to the WTO;
B5-0490/00 by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, to the Commission, on China' s accession to the WTO.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, on 17 May I asked an oral question to the Council and the Commission on behalf of the Committee which I chair, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy before the - I would say welcome - signing of an agreement between the European Union and China on the membership of the latter of the World Trade Organisation.
In this regard, I would like to make a comment and two requests.
Firstly, on behalf of the Committee which I chair, I would like to warmly congratulate Commissioner Lamy for his patience, perseverance and the skilful contacts he has been holding constantly not only with the Chinese authorities, but also with other important members of the Council of the WTO, in particular the United States, which have allowed both the Congress of the United States and the European Union to reach a preliminary agreement on the membership of China, the importance of which is obvious because it will incorporate into the World Trade Organisation more than a billion people, with all the challenges and possibly positive responses that this will involve.
Secondly, this agreement is positive because it brings with it economic, social, environmental and also geopolitical advantages for China and the world in general, especially the European Union.
What seems particularly positive to us is the opening up achieved in the field of financial services, telecommunications and insurance, which will offer opportunities, with no doubt whatsoever, to our economic operators, and also the gradual opening up of the energy markets in China which, apart from certain economic benefits, will lead to greater compliance with environmental standards in that country.
Another additional advantage is that China, through its entry into the World Trade Organisation, will be subject to its rules.
This is positive in itself and will bring China into a new and different dynamic in terms of closer relations with the rest of the world, although this must not cause us to stop being vigilant with regard to the respect for human rights, social rights and environmental rights.
In this respect I would like to say that there will be difficulties, since the position of the Commission and the Council, which Parliament supports, requires fundamental respect for basic social and environmental rights, China' s acceptance of which, paradoxically, will be more difficult to ensure once China is a member of the World Trade Organisation with full rights.
Therefore, we also fully support the Commission and Council initiative to relaunch the round, which was frustrated at the outset in Seattle, as soon as possible, turning it into a global round.
Those have been my comments.
My two questions are as follows:
Firstly, we are very interested to know whether the Commission is willing to work closely with the United States on this package of financial assistance, which is so important and necessary, so that China may be provided with the administrative and legal apparatus for it to fulfil its obligations within the World Trade Organisation.
The other question is as follows: we have worked very well with the Commission and the Council throughout this process and we intend to continue to do so.
I believe that this cooperation gives legitimacy to a process which is being criticised.
The question is clear.
More than a question, it is a request: at the end of the process, will the agreement with China be subject to the approval of Parliament?
I believe that this hypothesis does not put the Council or the Commission at any risk, since its success is guaranteed.
As I have said, Parliament supports this agreement.
Furthermore, we will all gain in terms of democratic legitimacy with this important agreement, since, I do not need to stress, it is laid down that in important agreements Parliament has a decisive role to play.
Mr President, the conclusion on 19 May of the bilateral agreement on access to the market in goods and services between the European Union and the People' s Republic of China constituted, as we must all recognise, an important step in the process of China' s accession to the World Trade Organisation which, incidentally, has now been operating for 14 years.
The integration of a partner with the economic and political size of China into the multilateral trade system will undoubtedly form one of the most important factors in the world economy at the beginning of this new century.
Mr Westendorp y Cabeza mentioned the size of the Chinese population and market and the importance which this will have in terms of the internal balance of the WTO.
The universal vocation of the WTO will therefore be reinforced and the discussions on the ways of making its operation more effective will from now on be an absolutely essential exercise.
At the level of the WTO, the bilateral negotiations now occurring are just one step towards the multilateralisation of the agreed mechanisms and towards the finalisation of the process in Geneva.
This requires the group' s work towards accession to be continued in terms of the final wording of the respective protocol.
Only at the end of this process will China' s accession be placed on the agenda of a General Council meeting for approval by the WTO members, assuming that these have, in the meantime, carried out the internal procedures required for this purpose.
At Community level, this issue must still be discussed by the Member States as the process usually followed and known as the ad hoc Ecuador process is proving to be too tacit and, as such, is incompatible with the political and economic weight of China and with the specific importance of this particular case.
The European Union will have to give its clear and explicit assent to China' s accession to the WTO and the Council must decide on the overall accession package which must also be submitted to Parliament for an opinion.
I will not answer the second question posed by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza as this has been overtaken by events.
It concerned the mandate conferred on the Commission and whether this was broad enough.
The evidence shows that the mandate was broad enough, even too broad for some countries, including mine, which had certain concerns about establishing this mandate.
As for cooperation and technical assistance actions, we have seen that, despite the problems noted throughout this negotiating process, China has proven its commitment to the multilateral process and has even prioritised this in certain regional choices.
It must now, during this stage, make an additional effort to apply the commitments it has made and to demonstrate the necessary willingness to comply with its multilateral obligations and to respect the rules and instructions of the World Trade Organisation.
It is therefore of the greatest importance that the Chinese authorities carry out the necessary adaptations internally.
For this reason the European Union is already prepared to provide nearly EUR 22 million for actions aimed at certain areas which may initially be more difficult to address due to the particular nature of Chinese legislation.
These actions include the issues of government acquisitions and intellectual property.
The developed countries must cooperate closely so that, through technical assistance measures, China can satisfactorily meet the terms agreed for its accession to the WTO.
This is a fact which these countries have recognised, as was proven at the summit between the United States of America and the European Union on 31 May when this issue was addressed.
China' s accession will constitute a stability factor in the world economy and will give increased importance to the next round of WTO negotiations which we hope can start as soon as possible.
For this reason we must all make an effort to ensure that this objective is achieved.
It is hoped that the accession process can be completed quickly through firm commitments which are compatible with the level of development already achieved by certain sectors of the Chinese economy.
This will ensure that the stability of the markets will not be threatened.
However, in addition to this aspect, China' s accession to the WTO will also have effects at political level, given that the requirements for internal reforms and greater transparency, and consequently greater exposure to external public opinion, will have an impact on the actions of the Chinese authorities in areas other than the strictly commercial area.
However, the next speaker will probably know more about this than I do.
Mr President, I wish to begin by warmly endorsing a couple of the remarks made by the honourable Member, Mr Westendorp - which, I am sure, is always a sensible way of beginning a speech in a debate in Parliament.
First, I should like to endorse in the most glowing terms possible the encomium that he delivered to my colleague, Commissioner Lamy, for the way he conducted these negotiations.
I have had some experience of negotiating with China myself and I have to say that I am lost in admiration for Commissioner Lamy's achievement.
I should like, as he did with characteristic generosity, to say that all of us should also pay tribute to his predecessor, Sir Leon Brittan, who helped to get these negotiations up and running, even though they had to travel several more laps than he thought likely at the time.
Second, I entirely agree with what the honourable Member said about the importance of the outcome of these negotiations.
This agreement is very good for China and Europe; it is good for the Asian region and for the world and, as we saw, it almost certainly had a beneficial effect on the vote in the US Congress.
It is good news all round.
It will be a challenge for China and, in due course, for the WTO.
However, it has always seemed to me that it is something of a misnomer to talk about a World Trade Organisation which has not contained the representatives of between a fifth and a quarter of humanity.
This is a good news story.
I want to deal with the two questions which the chairman of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy has raised.
First, the question about Parliament's assent.
Commissioner Lamy has already had an opportunity to set out in the plenary of this House in March the view of the Commission that China's WTO accession is a trade agreement of major importance and, therefore, that it is exactly the type of agreement that would be submitted for Parliament's assent, were the Commission proposals for the IGC to be accepted.
However, at this stage these are just proposals.
We obviously cannot anticipate the results of the IGC, so we have to stick to current Treaty rules.
As Parliament knows, the China agreement does not fit any of the categories of Article 300(3) that would justify submission for assent.
The agreement will, however, in principle, be submitted for consultation, so the European Parliament will have ample opportunity to express its views on the agreement.
Of course, it is the Council that decides on consultation with the European Parliament.
This is as far as the legal and the institutional answer goes.
On a more political and pragmatic level, I can assure the House that the Commission will work with the European Parliament to ensure that it can make its voice heard.
The House will know that, in exemplary fashion, Commissioner Lamy has held several rounds of discussions with Members of this Parliament during the final phases of the negotiations with China.
I know that he debriefed Members right after the agreement was initialled: he phoned the honourable Member to inform him that he had finalised the agreement.
I can assure the House that he intends to continue this dialogue throughout the internal approval procedures of the European Union.
It is an indication of that old truth that being more transparent invariably means being more successful.
At this stage I should like to add, however, that on 19 May we only concluded - a point made by the presidency - our bilateral agreement with China on her terms of accession to the WTO.
The multilateral phase of China's accession that takes place in Geneva has still to be finalised.
This is not expected to happen before the end of September at the earliest.
In other words, whatever procedures will apply within the European Union regarding China's WTO accession, the issue is really only relevant after the multilateral phase has been concluded, because the approval procedures will start only after this date.
Second, I want to come to the extremely important point which the honourable Member raised about technical assistance to help China to implement its WTO obligations.
We have in the Commission five cooperation programmes in China, which total EUR 25 million.
They are either in place or will be implemented soon.
They include a framework programme which aims to strengthen the relevant Chinese administrative structures and capacities through a series of specialised modules targeting segments in the Chinese administration which will be dealing with WTO implementation.
Other programmes are geared towards helping China to implement specific WTO obligations.
We are currently considering how best to build on these, and new initiatives will be taken.
China's WTO accession and the related considerable needs for technical assistance are likely to generate significant interest from other donors, including the United States and Japan, but also from our own Member States and from the WTO secretariat.
Clearly, close coordination is going to be essential in order to avoid overlaps and to develop synergies between different programmes which each donor will implement in accordance with its own procedures.
The need for coordination will be especially strong where assistance is targeted at the implementation of specific WTO agreements, and we will support close involvement of the WTO in these areas.
As regards the question of coordination with the United States, we will certainly look very carefully at our options.
We have to bear in mind that this will have some effects on the visibility of our European efforts.
The first exploratory talks on China's technical assistance needs and the respective roles and intentions of various donors will take place shortly through direct contacts in Peking and on the fringe of the WTO working party on the accession of China next week.
I just want to repeat that this is an extremely important issue; it is an issue on which Commissioner Lamy and I have already begun discussions.
We want to keep Parliament fully informed about our plans, but I am absolutely certain that, having made this extremely important breakthrough, it is now very important to give as much technical help as possible to ensure that it has the results in China and, therefore, for the rest of the region and the world that all of us hope for and would like to see.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, China was yet another of our trading partners to realise during negotiations in Beijing that the European Union has specific, independent weight as a major global trading area.
The Commission represented coherent positions on the part of the European Union with the support of the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers and implemented many of them.
Competition and the reciprocal opening of markets, freedom of establishment and in the provision of services, intellectual property rights, environmental protection and partnership for sustainable development are just a few examples.
For the rest, our position is based on the principles of free and fair global trade and is shaped by the European model of a social, ecological market economy, many fundamental points of which are already included in European framework legislation.
We expressly thank Commissioner Lamy and his team - and I expressly include his predecessor Sir Leon Brittan here - for the excellent result; the Commission negotiated successfully and competently;
China has moved a long way towards opening its markets and basically accepts the rules specified by the World Trade Organisation in 1994 and further developed since.
There is no need to outline the specific successes in detail.
They range from reductions in customs tariffs, from starting rates of often over 40% to an average of 10%, to the opening of import and export monopolies via joint ventures in the service sector, trade chains and medium-term freedom of establishment for independent European undertakings.
So the results are clear.
But integrating China into world trade also means ensuring that it is in a position to respect and apply the rules of the World Trade Organisation, act as a responsible partner and take on new responsibilities.
We therefore thank Commissioner Patten for his assurance that technical assistance, training for China' s specialists and for those responsible for the new chapter in cooperation will be coordinated with the United States.
But we feel that something else is needed; greater understanding on China' s part of the European Union' s commercial position on the reciprocal opening of the markets.
We are counting on China' s supporting the European Union' s proposals for a comprehensive new round of WTO talks in the short term.
In the long term, we would stress the implications of a more intensive trading partnership with China for peace in Asia, Europe and the world as a whole.
We feel that China will, in the long term, see the obvious need for the rapid economic and social development of China to be fostered within a framework of open markets and democratic reform.
On behalf of the PPE Group, therefore, I welcome the successful outcome of negotiations with China and call on the Council to put this result in political order so that the European Parliament is able to adopt this important decision.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, Commissioner Patten, ladies and gentlemen, my fellow members have already picked up on the main points.
Permit me, therefore, to address just a few aspects.
The European Union has achieved a number of successes, mainly thanks to Commissioner Lamy, who really has achieved some resounding successes.
But this also applies of course to the United States, and the same will apply to the other countries due to enter into negotiations.
In my view, one important point will be not just be to help China integrate into the world economy - it has already more or less done that - but also to help this country take a further step towards the general democratisation of its society.
We have been able to follow what is at stake in all the discussions, in the leading world press and in the lively debate between economists on the matter, but the crucial question is: what will actually happen once China becomes a member of the WTO?
Will it mark the beginning of a further opening of society?
Will it mark the beginning of a new round in politics?
Will it result in institutional reforms in China?
And, of course, will there also be a further opening of the market?
These are the really crucial and exciting questions which we face.
I am sure that it is in the minds of all the honourable members who have spoken and I believe that it is my group' s opinion, that we should use this opening and the integration of China into the World Trade Organisation to help it make a quantum leap.
However, we must not fool ourselves, we must not harbour any illusions, and we must insist that the WTO rules are in fact upheld, because this is, of course, the crux of the matter.
This is where we really will have to get down to brass tacks during further discussions with the Commission.
Because the package negotiated is extremely comprehensive and includes highly critical and sensitive sectors.
Critical voices are already being heard on the part of industry to the effect that success is all well and good, but ex-post control of implementation is equally important.
I think that we will be able to count on good collaboration here, so that this form of implementation can be monitored by Parliament and Parliament can be kept abreast of current developments.
One further point which I should like to address, and which I think is highly important, is our hope that with the opening of the market and with the further opening of society in China, greater respect will be given to human rights.
Human rights are a fundamental element of a modern society.
I think that this a point which we cannot allow to be sidelined, even in talks, even if they do not form a substantial part of purely economic negotiations.
I think that you have always set particular store by this.
Nonetheless, it is important that this point be reiterated constantly.
Mr President, I have two short minutes in which to make four points.
Firstly I would like to join in the warm congratulations to Commissioner Lamy and indeed his distinguished predecessor Sir Leon, now Lord, Brittan.
I hope the brevity of my congratulations does not diminish the warmth of them.
Secondly, a point addressed to the Council.
The Council's attitude towards parliamentary assent to a deal like this is linked to the Council's parallel attitude towards the Commission's proposal for its extension of its own powers over areas such as intellectual property and services in Article 133 more generally.
I have to confess I get the impression that there is a certain degree of institutional territoriality here, particularly in the large Member States, where the trade and industry ministries are very reluctant to see the Commission continue to extend its scope in those new areas in WTO trade negotiations and, consistent with that, also reluctant to see the European Parliament increase its influence.
This simply cannot carry on.
It is such a weird anachronism that a policy that was communautarised back in the 1950s is as unaccountable and non-transparent as it is.
I would plead for the internal territorial interests of Member States to be overcome on this particular point.
Thirdly, technical assistance.
It is great that we are going to coordinate with the Americans, but look at the numbers: EUR 25 million is absolutely nothing in comparison to the challenge we face!
We have a total budget for China of EUR 80 million.
Even if we allocate all of that to China-WTO accession it would still not be enough.
We - the Commission, Council and Parliament - have to be a lot more ambitious in actually allocating much more money towards this enormous task.
Finally, human rights.
I hope the fact that we have signed up to this bilateral deal with the Chinese does not leave them thinking that we are going to be any more forgiving on human rights.
It is all the more important that all three institutions should now be particularly robust about the way the Chinese behave in the so-called dialogue on human rights.
Let us not give them the impression that a deal on the WTO means that we are going to be weak on human rights - it should be the reverse.
We should be all the more robust.
Mr President, if the preceding speakers are to be believed, we now have paradise in view.
The Chinese, in particular, are heading there and nowhere else.
I was reading an interview in China Labour Bulletin the other day about one of the tens of millions of Chinese who have become unemployed because of the famous 'opening up' of their country.
This person was complaining about the unemployment, insecurity and enormous widening of the gulf between the classes.
In fact, this Chinese person was so desperate that she said she wished Mao Tse Tung was back.
From all the analyses I have read, which is quite a lot (both Chinese and Western, liberal and socialist), it is apparent that unemployment is coming to China.
It has already increased a great deal and, through accession to the WTO, it is going to increase a very great deal more.
I am wondering now if the Commission has carried out any other analyses.
I wonder if the Commission has any serious scientific analyses indicating that unemployment in China, contrary to what is apparent from all these other analyses, is going to decline rapidly and that social stability is going to be strengthened instead of the gulf between social classes widening further.
It would be extremely interesting to know.
Another matter is that of human rights.
A number of people here believe that human rights should benefit from China' s accession to the WTO.
Yes, that is possible - I am no fortune-teller.
Parliament did, however, give the Sakharov Prize to Wei Jingsheng, who has a quite different view of this issue.
His assessment is that the WTO Agreement will not benefit human rights at all.
He has actively fought against it because he thinks that it does not make reasonable demands where human rights are concerned.
It would be extremely interesting to know what are the Commission' s and the Council' s analyses of this question.
In what way is Wei Jingsheng mistaken?
We should like to know that we are not doing anything which, contrary to our intentions, is unfavourable to human rights.
Mr President, Commissioner, Minister, it is not pleasant to play the role of someone who repeatedly asks the same questions.
It is not, however, my fault, Commissioner, if there is a wishy-washy consensus in this Parliament.
Nor must you count on my weariness to stop me hammering out evidence which, although on the face of it appears dogmatic, should be blatantly obvious to everyone: The WTO is a machine that should by switched off before it goes any further, instead of carrying on as if there were no problem apart from the stunning failure that was Seattle.
Now, what has happened since that abortive summit?
New negotiations have started in Geneva, in a fug that is not dispelled straightaway by Mr Lamy' s praiseworthy speeches to this Parliament, and the European Union, hot on the heels of the United States, is negotiating the future conditions for China' s accession.
Therefore, we have the right to ask a few questions.
What purpose do the WTO meetings serve if there is no difference between failure and success in the way internal business is conducted?
What credibility can institutional reforms have, given that they are supposed to respond to major investigations, if, even before they are implemented, the path to imminent membership is open to a country which alone comprises one fifth of the world' s population?
Furthermore, are you able to tell us how the European Union and its partners categorise China?
Do you class it as a developing country or as something else?
How do you see the astonishing upheaval in the balance within the organisation that uses this kind of approach to the situation?
Finally, can you tell us what - if anything - the European Union is getting from the United States, as, according to statements by Mr Lamy, the negotiations undertaken with the Chinese have been based on what the Americans had already obtained, with increased benefit for the Europeans.
Commissioner, the quality of Mr Lamy' s work is not, of course, the issue here but, in spite of my repeated requests to see a proper assessment of the WTO carried out, these negotiations are going ahead without such an assessment having been made.
I must say that it looks like we would not be able to undertake any action that might give the impression that doubts exist as to the benefits of liberalising world trade.
I regret the fact that there was such little consultation with the Union' s Member States and the European Parliament which are, in the main, supporters not of the fine cause that is the World Trade Organisation, of which we too are part, but of that of the frantic development of global free-trade, to the detriment of our people' s essential interests.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I listened carefully to Mr Westendorp y Cabeza tell us of the economic, social, environmental and political benefits of China' s joining the WTO.
I do not feel, however, that he was very clear on the political benefits.
Whatever the case, I personally can very clearly see who will reap the political benefit, and that is the Chinese regime.
When I say the Chinese regime, I do not mean the institutions, but a despotic regime.
Some might, of course, agree with Mr Westendorp y Cabeza.
In signing this agreement, we have certainly not dropped our guard where human rights are concerned, because we cannot do so.
Mr Westendorp y Cabeza, we have obtained nothing from the People' s Republic of China.
In terms of improving the rule of law, in terms of strengthening democracy or in terms of respect for human rights, we have made no progress in ten years, none at all!
Every day, we see and read the same news: further arrests of dissidents, further arrests of members of the Democratic Party and the continued colonisation of Tibet.
On this matter, by the way, the World Bank is preparing to double the resources for a huge project that we support, since our States are the main members of that venerable institution.
Over the next few weeks, then, the World Bank will double the ability of Chinese emigrants to colonise Tibet a little more.
That is what is on the agenda.
I think that the Members who have spoken about human rights are well aware, as we all are, particularly having heard Commissioner Brittan over the last few years, that there has never been any question of linking human rights and democracy to the WTO agreements.
We are therefore aware that we are strengthening a despotic regime, a regime that is stockpiling weapons, and which is gaining strength in that part of the world.
We have resigned ourselves to this fact, not thinking that in twenty years' time this regime may bring to bear on us too the pressures that it may shortly bring to bear on the whole of Asia.
We have resigned ourselves to the fact that we are abandoning the Chinese people and the idea of democracy for the Chinese people and, ultimately, for all of us.
Mr President, I, too, would like to congratulate Commissioner Lamy on securing such improved terms and a deal with China.
After such a long history of negotiations clearly all that was needed was the question from our committee to push the matter to a conclusion.
Recently I was visiting Taiwan where people clearly hope that the accession of China to the WTO will lead to improved cross-strait relations, and we must welcome that.
I would have referred to Commissioner Patten knowing well the difficulties of dealing and negotiating with China, but he has already mentioned that.
The prospect of a change in the duty on spirits from 65% to 10% will be a most welcome one in certain parts of the whisky-producing areas of the UK.
I look forward to sharing that news with them in liberal and liquid fashion.
On a larger scale the position achieved in access to, and faster opening up of, the telecoms market is also good news.
China has such huge potential in this market for growth, and European operators have a great opportunity as world leaders looking for new markets.
I welcome this step in the further integration of China into the world economy but we must recall the emphasis that we, in the European Union, place upon other values in addition to trade.
In that context I would like to call, on behalf of my British Conservative colleagues, for European Parliament participation in the half-yearly dialogue on human rights.
If this Parliament were part of that dialogue we might exert additional pressure for improvement in that field.
I hope the Commissioner will listen carefully to that suggestion.
Mr President, while international big business is busy popping champagne corks in celebration of the agreement on China's proposed accession to the WTO, China's small-scale farmers are already quaking in their shoes.
They know that accession to the WTO will be a very mixed blessing for China and that for them, as small farmers, it could spell ruin.
So I beg to differ with Commissioner Patten.
There are many people in China for whom this agreement does not spell good news.
Powerful international agri-business knows that too.
That is why US grain companies like Cargill cannot believe their luck.
They have just been handed the biggest market in the world and can expect US farm exports to increase by USD 2 billion over the next five years as Chinese tariff cuts begin to take effect.
No wonder they are already gloating over bigger, better and more consistent markets.
But while Cargill is so delighted that its profits will rise while Chinese self-sufficiency in agricultural goods falls, the picture is a good deal less optimistic for the people of China themselves.
It has been estimated that increased competition from cheap agricultural imports could mean that about 400 million rural Chinese will no longer be needed on farms by 2005.
It is almost impossible to conceive of such a huge figure or to think about the social dislocation and misery that will cause.
The Commission is offering technical support to the Chinese in order to help them with the enormous economic restructuring which accession to the WTO will bring.
What I would like to see is an equal concern to help with the almost inconceivable social restructuring which will inevitably follow in its wake with - I repeat - 400 million rural farmers out of a job.
Mr Lamy has been quoted as saying that the bilateral negotiations between the EU and China yielded 96% of what the EU was demanding.
Would he like to estimate what percentage of success the Chinese people will get from these same negotiations?
Mr President, representatives of the Commission and the Council, the volume of world trade has soared in recent decades.
Despite the giant leaps forward, many problems remain unresolved and questions left open with regard to world trade.
One of the biggest and politically most difficult of these has been China' s accession to the WTO, and this same problem will again be associated with the implementation of the agreement in practice.
As this is a matter of the world' s second largest economy and eleventh largest exporting country joining the most important institutional system for world trade, the importance of the issue cannot be emphasised too heavily.
I agree with Mr Clegg as regards the impression one gets that the Commission and the Council have perhaps been rather too keen in this matter to refer to the Treaty of Amsterdam and hide behind formal requirements.
I am, however, very satisfied that the Commission is in agreement with us that talks with China concerning its membership of the WTO are a matter that Parliament cannot pass over and that we will have this issue heard in this Chamber.
The fact that the talks on accession will not lead to changing the legal framework does not lessen the importance of the issue.
For that reason, an informal dialogue free from the exact wording of the basic agreement, which the Commissioner mentioned in his speech, is more crucial than ever before.
It is in the interests of the European Union as a whole to support China in the reform of its economy, administration and legal system.
It is sensible to implement the technical assistance package from the EU and the United States in a context of collaboration; this is necessary to guarantee the speedy and single-minded implementation of the reforms.
Of the reforms in the public sector, that concerning state-owned companies is vital for continued economic growth in China.
In this connection I will make my sole comment regarding content: the percentage of ownership by foreign companies was not fixed at the level the EU was aiming at.
That was a very bad mistake.
Another important political question is how the economic life of the country is to be reformed, as that is closely linked with the fate of China' s socialist system as a whole.
The debate is closed.
Mr President, on a point of order, when I inquired this morning about the time of this debate I was told it would start shortly after 3 o'clock.
When I came for this debate at 3 o'clock I was told it would be taking place later, towards 5 o'clock.
Clearly there is pressure on our agenda today.
I wish to put forward a proposal that might relieve pressure on the end of today's agenda, namely, the debate previewed for the late payments directive - the report of the conciliation procedure with the Council.
This is an issue which is now entirely without contention.
Everybody supports this matter.
The rapporteur, the shadow rapporteur and the chairman of the committee would all support a suggestion that this be turned into a vote without debate.
That would end pressure on the agenda right at the end of this evening.
Possibly we could have a vote on it now.
Mr Chichester, I do not feel in a position to make a decision, not even with recourse to the Rules of Procedure or the advice of officials.
I am only going to chair an hour and a half of Questions to the Council and then, when the sitting begins, the person holding the Presidency - who will be informed of your intelligent proposal - will make the relevant decision.
But we take very good note of this proposal.
Question Time (Council)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0487/2000).
We will examine questions to the Council.
Question No 1 by (H-0434/00):
Subject: Increase in Community budgetary resources Much time has been devoted so far at the Intergovernmental Conference to issues such as the need to revise the decision-taking procedure in the Council of Ministers and the number of Commissioners.
Little attention has been paid, on the other hand, to the need for a substantive increase in Community budgetary resources so as to facilitate the process of enlargement and to enable the Union to address the increasingly difficult tasks facing it both domestically and in external policy.
How does the Council view the prospect of a substantive increase in Community budgetary resources, what could be the 'ceiling' of such an increase and how realistic is such an objective under present conditions?
Mr President, the size of the Community budget is a general issue which has been addressed periodically, particularly within the wider debate on the future financing of the European Union prior to the negotiations on the EU financial frameworks.
However, the current context is not favourable to increasing the budget, as was demonstrated in the Agenda 2000 negotiations, and this is not the right moment to reopen this debate.
Within the Interinstitutional Agreement reached on 6 May 1999 on budgetary discipline and improving the budgetary procedure, of which the financial perspectives are an integral part, you will remember that amounts were established which represent an annual maximum limit on expenditure for the European Parliament, Council and Commission.
These three institutions undertook to respect these limits.
The Council currently considers that there is no need to revise the financial perspectives.
With regard to expenditure arising from enlargement, the aforementioned Agreement specifies that, in the event of enlargement of the EU to include new Member States during the period covered by the financial perspectives, the European Parliament and the Council, deliberating on a Commission proposal, will jointly adopt financial perspectives taking into account the need for expenditure arising from this enlargement.
However, this alteration of the financial perspectives must respect the maximum limits contained in the guidelines on the financial perspectives for an enlarged Union with 21 Member States, as indicated in Annex II to the Interinstitutional Agreement.
This clearly depends on the results of the accession negotiations.
I should like to thank the Minister for answering the question which I tabled, but I think that he has not answered the specific issue which I raised, which is this: in the year in which I have been an MEP, I have noticed that, although the number of EU programmes and initiatives is multiplying continuously, implying new, additional spending, no additional resources are being budgeted for them.
On the contrary, resources budgeted for other commitments are usually cut back; this happened, for example, in order to find money for Kosovo and for developing the Balkans, for the earthquakes and for other issues which have arisen.
I just wonder why we are not making an effort to take payment appropriations up to the legal ceiling of 1.27% of the GDP of the European Union, so that other programmes do not have to be sacrificed, and why the European Union is taking on more and more and, at the same time, limiting payments of approved appropriations, which account for a mere 1.10% of GDP.
Also, can the Council reassure the people in the poor countries of the European Union that enlargement will not result in budgetary cutbacks...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, I understand the Member' s concern and realise that this is shared by several sectors in the EU.
The truth is that the changes which have been made to the funding allocation plan, particularly in the last year, have not affected the Union' s compliance with its undertakings in these areas.
These changes have also been made based on appropriations that remain unspent in certain areas.
However, if the situation worsens to the extent that some of the commitments made by the European Union cannot be kept in accordance with the financial perspectives, then this mid-term revision may clearly occur, as specified in the financial perspectives and for the first time by qualified majority voting.
In this way, some of the expenditure arising from enlargement, if this takes place in the meantime, may be covered.
However, given that we are currently in the first year of implementing the financial perspectives, there is no reason at the moment to justify any reassessment of the commitment made in Berlin.
The Committee on Budgets and the European Parliament agreed in the end in Agenda 2000 to reduce the 1.27% proportion of GDP by 2006.
The citizens of Europe want a thrifty administration and the purpose of the concept of real stabilisation is to achieve a further net improvement in the quality of the work of the Council and the Commission.
It should enable us to work even more efficiently in the future in the European Union.
Do you believe that the concept of real stabilisation can be continued after 2006?
I am very happy to answer the honourable Member' s question.
I was involved in the Agenda 2000 negotiations and I clearly recall the concept of real stabilisation which was proposed.
In practice this meant reducing the amounts established.
In our opinion the European Union will sooner or later have to make a choice.
It must opt either for a structure with a solid set of policies and a corresponding budget at the same level or simply for a kind of savings fund.
If we were to regard the Community budget as a kind of savings fund and were to act increasingly through subsidiarity in terms of financing, the future of the EU' s policies would very probably be in doubt, particularly from 2006.
This is my personal view.
As the author is not present, Question No 2 lapses.
Question No 3 by (H-0446/00):
Subject: Plans for a common position of the EU at the Ospar Convention What plans are being negotiated in the Troika for the presentation of a common position by the EU at the meeting being held this month in Copenhagen of the OSPAR Convention on the control of radioactive and toxic pollutants in the marine environment?
Mr President, negotiations within the OSPAR commission on issues coming under the Community competence are conducted, as you know, by the Commission in consultation with a committee of representatives of the Member States.
If, at the end of these negotiations, the parties to the OSPAR Convention were to adopt a decision which, in the Commission' s opinion, should be incorporated within Community law, the Commission would be responsible for preparing a proposal for a decision by the Council on the adoption by the Community of this OSPAR decision.
The Council would analyse this proposal with due care.
The position mentioned by the Member has not been presented to date to the Council and we cannot, therefore, comment on this matter.
I know that the Portuguese presidency is very familiar with this issue.
As you know, the OSPAR commission met in Sintra two years ago and some progress was made on pollution of the marine environment.
My question pertains particularly to radioactive emissions.
I know France is part of the troika and will be taking up the presidency in July.
France pushed quite hard and was part of the agreement on lowering radioactive emissions, but a recent Greenpeace study shows that there are quite strong emissions of radioactivity from Cap La Hague.
Is the Council aware of this study?
Would it like more information about this study?
Will it bring it to the attention of the French presidency?
On the one hand they claim to be controlling radioactive pollution to the marine environment, but on the other hand we have proof that there is radioactive pollution, so there is some contradiction there.
The Council needs to get its act together.
I take the point about the Commission's proposals and I look forward to discussing this further with the Commission when we have a result from Copenhagen.
Neither Ireland nor Denmark have so far sent the Council any proposals on radioactive waste.
Given that the Council as such is not a member of the OSPAR commission, only the European Commission can adopt a legislative measure in this respect.
Therefore, any information which may be received in this respect by the Council will be welcome.
Question No 4 by (H-0449/00):
Subject: Indication of religion on identity cards The independent data protection authority in Greece has raised the issue of the religion of Greek citizens being recorded on their identity cards, saying it affects people' s private lives and can lead to discrimination against certain individuals.
In view of Article 13 of the Treaty, can the Council say whether both the compulsory indication of religion currently applicable and the possible removal of this obligation, to be replaced by a voluntary indication, are compatible with the legal and political 'acquis' of the European Union?
In which Member States is religion one of the items recorded on citizens' identity cards?
Mr President, the Council has never been asked to discuss the issue raised by the honourable Member.
In principle this does not come under the Community competence but is the exclusive competence of the national authorities and in particular, as stated by the Member in his own question, of the Greek High Authority for Data Protection.
As I said, no proposal has been presented to the Council on this issue.
If the conduct of the Greek authorities led to any infringement of Community legislation, the Commission, as the Guardian of the Treaties, would clearly not hesitate to take the necessary steps to bring any action before the Court of Justice in respect of this infringement.
However, this does not come under the Council' s competence but is rather the responsibility of the Commission.
It is up to the latter to determine whether or not the reference to religion on Greek identity cards complies with the principle of non-discrimination on religious grounds.
However, from a preliminary analysis of this issue, we feel that the mere reference to religion does not in essence constitute any violation of the legal and political acquis of the European Union, if this reference is only for information or even statistical purposes and if it is not accompanied by any specific measures discriminating against those practising a particular religion.
In any case we are talking about actions by free and democratic countries.
In order to challenge a measure of this type, a specific legal framework for complaints exists at national level.
Clearly, the Community bodies can be appealed to following action before these national bodies.
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his reply.
Yesterday I tabled the same question to the European Commission.
I received its reply today.
However, there is some confusion in the matter which, as far as Greece is concerned, is an extremely important matter.
I thank the President-in-Office, although I noticed that he contradicted himself in his reply.
On the one hand he says that it is not a Community matter, it is a matter for the Member State.
On the other hand, however, he raises the question of compliance with the law.
The President-in-Office obviously has in mind the reply which the Commission gave on precisely this issue, which says that a reference to religion infringes Directive 46/95 on personal data.
Does the President-in-Office agree with this reply, if that is what he has in mind?
Or does he not have it in mind, which would demonstrate a huge lack of coordination between the Council and the Commission on a very important issue?
Mr Alavanos, there is no contradiction in this respect and the problem is very simple.
As this issue is not covered by a Community provision, it is solely a question of Greek national policy and is subject to Greek law.
Clearly, this situation will only change if a Community provision is transposed into Greek law and therefore itself becomes a Greek law.
The problem lies in determining whether or not, at this stage of the process, this reference constitutes an infringement of Community law.
Only the Commission would have the authority to act in this respect.
As it has not acted so far, this means that this is not currently a Community issue.
Therefore, at this stage, this issue does not have a Community dimension.
If this situation changes, the Commission will then be able to take the appropriate decisions, particularly in conjunction with the Court of Justice.
Mr President, I must intervene, although I had no intention of doing so, because Greece is labouring under the misapprehension that, if they are to become Europeans, Greeks must stop stating their religion on their identity cards, as they have done for the past seventy years.
The President-in-Office' s reply is correct.
There are no plans to intervene, it is a matter for national law and that is what Greece has been practising up to now.
The principle introduced for personal data resulted in a decision whereby the reference to a person' s religion was an infringement of personal data.
However, I know for a fact that the Community directive on this issue states that, if the person in question agrees to a reference to their religion, then it is not prohibited to include such personal data.
And that is precisely what our party and the Greek church want: a voluntary reference.
Whoever wants to, can state their religion, and whoever does not want to, need not do so.
I would like to remind you that this Question Time is for questions to the Council.
It can in no way be used to explain the positions of governments or the sensibilities of certain countries.
Question No 5 by (H-0450/00):
Subject: Turkey disputes the sovereign rights of Greek islands in the Aegean Prompted by the NATO exercise 'Dynamic Mix' , Turkey has put the spotlight back on its long-standing dispute concerning the established regime of Greek sovereignty over islets and island rocks in the Aegean.
In addition, it has made accusations concerning development and environmental activities by Greece in the areas in question, many of which are funded by relevant European Union programmes.
To be specific, in its representations to the Greek Government on Wednesday, 10 May 2000 Turkey referred to 'military and other activities by Greece on geographical formations of disputed sovereignty in the Aegean' .
Could the Council say whether it agrees with this challenge by Turkey to Greece' s sovereign rights and whether this position accords with the spirit of the agreement which was achieved, following Greek concessions, at Helsinki, and also with Turkey' s current status as an applicant country?
Mr President, the Council does not have any information, rumours aside, on any representations made by Turkey to the Greek Government on 10 May 2000.
As the honourable Member mentioned, the Helsinki European Council recognised Turkey as an applicant country.
At this same European Council, the applicant countries were also urged to make every effort to resolve all existing border disputes and other similar issues.
Unresolved disputes must be brought before the International Court of Justice within a reasonable period of time or at the latest by 2004.
The Council will then re-examine the situation.
With regard to relations between Greece and Turkey, which form the basis of this whole issue, the Council can only welcome an improvement in these relations.
It is hoped that this positive process will continue so that the issues relating to the Aegean are successfully resolved in accordance with international law.
It should be recalled in this respect, as this is also extremely positive, that Turkish troops participated in the NATO exercise which took place in part on Greek territory.
Turkish troops have never before participated in exercises on Greek territory.
The Council notes that the Greek Defence Minister described the cooperation between Greece and the Turkish armed forces as excellent and added that the exercises were carried out with full respect for all the sovereign rights of Greece.
This is an important point.
I must also note that, in terms of bilateral relations, the Foreign Ministers of Greece and Turkey, while at the NATO Summit in Florence, presented a proposal to include a range of good-neighbourly measures on the agenda for negotiations between Greece and Turkey.
The aim of these measures will be to consolidate the climate of security and harmonisation between these two countries.
These are in addition to the confidence-building measures in the Aegean.
We must all cooperate, in all bodies and in all areas in which these issues are raised, to ensure that tensions are not heightened in any way and to eliminate the ghosts of the past in this respect.
Minister, I too am personally in favour of closer relations between Greece and Turkey, but subject to certain specific conditions.
And I must say in this respect that I am truly surprised by what you said at the beginning, to the effect that the Greek government has not even informed the Council of Turkey' s challenge of Greece' s sovereign rights.
Obviously it sees it as an unnecessary luxury.
It feels that Turkey can proceed unimpeded on its path towards the European Union, violating Greek sovereignty all the while.
But that is a matter for the Greek government.
I should like to ask you, the diplomatic language of your reply notwithstanding, whether or not you consider that Turkey should make moves in order to meet the requirements of the Helsinki resolutions and what you think these moves might be.
Mr Hatzidakis, in my opinion Helsinki represented a moment of great balance in terms of the concerns of those involved, namely Greece, Turkey and also Cyprus as a third party.
The decision taken to recognise Turkey as an applicant country was made in view of this overall balance.
However, certain conditions were indicated in the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council, particularly with reference to the resolution under international law of the conflicts involving the Aegean.
A timetable was also set for this which is indissociably linked to Turkey' s ambitions for its accession to the European Union.
We must all bear in mind that we should be trying, in this specific area, not to aggravate the bilateral tensions which may arise here or there, where these clearly do not involve fundamental principles of identity and the basic interests of the country.
We must realise instead that it is essential to reduce these tensions.
It is particularly important that we use the time factor.
At the moment signs are apparent on both the Greek and Turkish sides, with effects evident also on the Cypriot side.
We should allow these countries some time before we start systematically highlighting the small incidents which may ultimately stop us from seeing the bigger picture which, after all, is much more important than these small incidents.
It would be politically more responsible at this time to try and reduce the tensions.
We must therefore particularly support the efforts which the authorities of the two countries have been making, especially through their respective Foreign Ministers, in order to prevent certain incidents from being exploited, for the sake of the overall situation which is itself of considerable significance and whose resolution may be vital to ensure the balance of the geographical area concerned.
Mr President-in-Office, I should like to be a little more specific.
For Greece, as far as Turkey is concerned, there is only one issue which needs to be settled and that is the boundaries of the continental shelf in the Aegean.
Turkey has disputed a number of issues in the Aegean at one time or another.
And one of these issues is the status of the grey zones or island rocks in the Aegean.
My question is quite specific.
Do you consider, given the spirit of the Helsinki resolutions, which call on Turkey to settle its border and similar disputes with its neighbours by 2004, that the status of the island rocks or grey zones in the Aegean counts as a border dispute?
What is the Council' s opinion; is this what it is calling on Turkey to do?
To settle as a border dispute the status of the Aegean, where Greece does not acknowledge that there is an issue?
Mr Theonas, these issues are part of the dispute between Greece and Turkey.
So far these two countries have adopted a totally antagonistic attitude towards these issues, as there are points which Turkey wants to discuss under international law but which Greece considers do not fall within this context.
Conversations and negotiations are now occurring in this respect and bilateral contacts are being made, accompanied by confidence-building measures.
We should allow some time for this process to develop before becoming involved in any potential conflicts.
We know that these differences of opinion exist and that up to now these have formed the essence of what seems to be a conflict about the Aegean which could basically, under international law, be viewed in linear terms.
We know that this is not the case and that we all have different ideas about the same subject.
This is also true of Greece and Turkey but there is now a negotiating framework for this.
We must bide our time and ensure that this negotiating framework can operate, particularly bearing in mind the currently positive Greek-Turkish relations.
Question No 6 by (H-0451/00):
Subject: Political intervention in Georgia's problems Georgia, the newly independent state, is encountering serious difficulties in consolidating democracy and raising its citizens' standards of living.
Its attempts are being hindered by the problem of the breakaway of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and the wave of refugees mainly taken in by Abkhazia.
In its resolutions, Parliament has condemned this situation and has asked the Commission and the Council to support the Council of Europe' s initiative to set up confidence-building measures in the area.
Does the Council have any strategy for this sensitive region?
Does it intend to operate a policy designed to safeguard peace and security in the region?
Mr President, the Council is clearly concerned about the internal conflicts in Georgia which still need to be resolved.
It is also concerned about the difficulties which are being experienced in terms of consolidating democracy and improving the standard of living of the people of that country.
We are therefore giving political and economic support within the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement which entered into force on 1 July 1999.
During the EU Summit with the three Heads of State and Government of the Caucasus in June of last year, an important declaration was approved which sets out the bases for relations between the European Union and the Southern Caucasus.
This same resolution indicated the importance of developing regional cooperation, establishing friendly relations between the countries and sustainably developing their economies.
Moreover, the European Union indicated that it was ready to use its support instruments in order to create a suitable environment for resolving conflicts in the Caucasus.
In this respect, the Cooperation Council between the European Union and Georgia, which was held on 12 October, decided that the cooperation in 2000 should particularly revolve around intensified efforts to find a solution to the conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
I must remind you that the European Union is the largest donor of aid to rehabilitation projects in South Ossetia and is ready to support measures aimed at creating a climate of confidence, particularly by rebuilding the north-south infrastructures which connect Russia to Georgia.
Moreover, the EU has also been giving assistance to almost 300 000 displaced persons within Georgia who were forced to abandon their homes due to the conflict.
The EU is encouraging the resolution of this conflict so that these people can return to their homes as quickly as possible and is ready to offer additional assistance in this event.
The Council supports all the efforts made by the competent international bodies, particularly the OSCE in South Ossetia and the UN in Abkhazia, with the aim of contributing to acceptable solutions which can return the political and economic relations to normal and ensure the return of the refugees under safe conditions.
The war in neighbouring Chechnya represents an additional threat to Georgia.
The Council fears that this conflict may spread to Georgia and welcomes the extension of the OSCE' s monitoring mission along the respective borders.
At the request of President Shevardnadze, the European Union is now studying possible ways of helping to reinforce and ensure the efficacy of this monitoring mission.
Thank you, Mr President-in-Office, for the information which you have given me.
It became clear during my recent visit to Georgia and from what was said by representatives of the Georgian Church during the recent meeting between the Patriarchate and the European People' s Party that, in the eyes of the people of Georgia, European policy is ineffectual because, apart from humanitarian aid, it has not helped to solve any of the problems.
The problem of refugees, which include many Georgian citizens of Greek descent, has not been solved.
And I should like to ask you what additional measures you feel need to be taken and extended, as you have just said?
And one more question: do you believe that the conflict to which you referred is part of Russian policy in this region?
Also, has the Council taken account of this possibility in its policy in the region?
Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, with regard to the measures which the European Union can adopt in this area, I can only point to the plan mentioned and the set of initiatives which the EU has introduced on the ground.
You should remember that we have a limited capacity for intervention in certain areas and that, as was said today in other respects, the difficulties in the EU' s external action framework and the financing of this framework limit the EU' s capacity to be present in all conflict situations.
However, given the strategic importance of the area, the European Union has been doing whatever it considers possible in this respect.
I agree that other measures may be possible but there is not currently a framework of financing which would allow us to go further, particularly in terms of acting to reinforce the infrastructures.
As for the situation in Russia, regardless of political opinion and what may be underlying the Russian position, there are currently no practical signs which point to an objective intention by Russia to destabilise these countries.
Effects are being felt, as I said, from the war in Chechnya and are likely to be felt in the future by neighbouring countries but I cannot infer from this that there is necessarily an intention on the part of the Russian authorities to spread any kind of instability in neighbouring areas.
Question No 7 by (H-0454/00):
Subject: Human rights: Egypt Further to the European Parliament resolution of 20 January 2000 on the violence in Upper Egypt, what steps has the Council taken to ensure that the Coptic Christian community in Egypt is fairly and justly treated and, specifically following recent events, that those arrested at El-Kosheh were offered a fair trial and, indeed, that the arrests were made with no element of religious discrimination?
The Council has on several occasions discussed the fundamentalist violence and assassinations carried out against the Coptic community in Upper Egypt.
We are continuing to closely monitor this situation.
In the meantime a series of positive events has occurred, in particular the release of the secretary-general of the Egyptian Organisation for Human Rights and the implementation of the law on non-governmental organisations which it is hoped may bring about greater freedom of expression.
At every opportunity and at various levels, the European Union has reminded Egypt of its concern about the human rights situation and about the need for Egypt to respect fundamental freedoms, particularly given its status as a member of the EU-Mediterranean partnership.
The negotiations on the Association Agreement with Egypt were concluded last year and it is envisaged that this will shortly be signed.
Once in force, this Agreement will turn the political dialogue between the European Union and Egypt into an institutional matter, especially in the area of human rights, which will naturally enable greater intervention and more scope for political pressure in respect of anything which may be regarded as non-compliance by Egypt with its obligations under this Agreement.
Article 2 of the draft Agreement specifies that the relations between the parties, like the provisions of the Agreement, are based on respect for democratic principles and the fundamental human rights set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
This will naturally form the backdrop to the bilateral relations and political dialogue which are integral to this Agreement.
In this context, we will of course continue to remind Egypt, as we have done prior to the establishment of this legally binding framework, of its responsibilities and, in particular, of the need to respect human rights and to preserve fundamental freedoms.
I wish to thank the President-in-Office for his reply.
I would say this question was prompted by the very large number of letters I receive from constituents about this particular issue.
It is perhaps the issue I have received more letters about in the last year than any other.
It strikes me from what he said that it is very strange that after several of the Coptic Christians had been attacked and disturbed by the others, that it was only Coptic Christians who were arrested.
The President-in-Office said in his reply that the Council will remind the Egyptians of their responsibilities and wait until they have signed the association agreement and can bring an institutionalised political dialogue to bear.
But why does he not use the signing of this agreement as a basis on which to force the Egyptians to come to a more equable, reasonable and non-discriminatory approach to their Coptic Christian citizens?
Mr Purvis, as I have already said, we have not waited for the signing of the Agreement to indicate to the Egyptian authorities, when appropriate, our disapproval of any kind of conduct which does not respect fundamental rights.
This issue has been addressed in the bilateral political dialogue and has naturally been raised within the normal framework of relations between the European Union and third countries.
In this particular case we believe that the Agreement has its own negotiating context and it would not be right, after the Agreement has been approved by the European Union and agreed by the Council, to make its final signing dependent on the resolution of an issue, however important this may be, which is only one part of the whole picture.
On this particular issue and regardless of whether we strictly agree with your reading of the situation that the Coptic community is being subjected to specific measures, our information indicates that, even if the Coptic Christians are being affected the most by these repressive measures, this does not point to an attitude of particular retaliation against the Coptic community.
There is an ongoing conflict between traders and certain local communities which has affected the Coptic community but which does not necessarily indicate a specific intention by the Egyptian authorities on this issue.
However, the European Union will continue to carefully monitor this problem and will certainly raise this issue with the Egyptian authorities regardless of whether the Agreement has been signed.
Mr President, I was in Egypt at exactly the time when these events took place.
I saw that the situation was serious, but that, as you said, the Egyptian authorities were making a huge effort.
Nonetheless, I should like to ask whether we perhaps need systematic monitoring of the situation of minorities throughout the Mediterranean, i.e. for the Barcelona process, especially the situation of the Christian minorities living in the Mediterranean, some of whom are in a far worse situation in other countries than in Egypt.
I can only agree with the honourable Member when he says that there are situations in other countries in the southern Mediterranean which seem more serious than this issue.
It is practically impossible for the European Union to constantly monitor all situations in all the countries with which we have a relationship within the Euro-Mediterranean partnership.
Within the Common Foreign and Security Policy and particularly bearing in mind the assessment being made, especially in the framework of our political dialogue within the association agreements, we continue trying to highlight our concern about the gravity of various situations.
We cannot expect the European Union to operate as a kind of international human rights monitor.
There are other specific institutions to do this work.
However, we will ensure that the due consequences are felt in our bilateral political relations with regard to any negative development in these respects.
I also agree that there are much worse situations in other countries within the Barcelona process, some of which perhaps do not occur to us when we are speaking, which must also be duly assessed.
However, the European Union cannot be expected to do the work of the international institutions in this area.
Question No 8 by (H-0457/00):
Subject: Significance of Euro-11 Will the Council say on what issues Euro-11 has, since coming into existence, taken decisions that have been of political significance to the European Union and its Member States?
Mr President, Euro 11 must be one of the biggest mysteries within the Community institutions because this question comes up on a regular basis.
The third phase of economic and monetary union saw the beginning of informal meetings of the Euro Council or Euro 11 as it also known.
This brings together the finance ministers of the countries in the euro zone.
These meetings are held monthly and before the formal meetings of Ecofin which involve all fifteen Member States.
Euro 11 meetings essentially address issues relating to the specific responsibilities which the eleven countries share in matters involving the single currency.
Whenever the issues go beyond this scope, the meetings are extended to all the Member States as is laid down.
In all cases where decisions must be taken, Ecofin takes these in accordance with the procedures established in the Treaty.
This was the guidance given by the Luxembourg European Council of 12 and 13 December 1997.
Any other mystery for which the operation of Euro 11 may be criticised can only stem from a failure to understand this reality and the information which is actually in the public domain.
The issues discussed by Euro 11 and transferred subsequently to Ecofin, which is attended by all the other countries which have not adopted the euro, are widely known, even in the press.
Mr President, I should like to thank the Presidency for its answer to my question.
The fact is that, in those countries which are to decide whether or not to join the common currency, such as Sweden and Denmark, there are discussions taking place about the significance of Euro-11.
I think it is important that the Presidency should again state that Euro-11 has no formal right of decision-making whatsoever.
The question, however, is that of whether any individual questions in the informal Euro-11 discussions can be pointed to which have subsequently led to formal decisions in ECOFIN.
I wonder if the Council of Ministers can provide examples of any such concrete questions from the discussion in Euro-11 which have led to a new policy' s having been created.
The honourable Member' s question raises an interesting point.
As Euro 11 and the institutionalisation of the third phase of economic and monetary union require a form of closer cooperation which is pre-established in the Treaty, the question is whether an acquis will be created in Euro 11 which must be transposed to the full Union.
There are currently no elements of policy coordination between the countries in Euro 11 which naturally affect or should affect their behaviour in Ecofin.
However, it makes perfect sense that countries which are part of an effective policy model and which are involved in implementing policies involving, for example, the single currency framework can separately define and coordinate a position.
However, this can only be ratified in Ecofin.
This point is important for understanding that perhaps in the future, when different policy integration models exist, we will see more elements and more ways of working of this kind.
This may be the future and we will see whether the Feira European Council integrates closer cooperation into the Intergovernmental Conference.
If so, we will very probably see several models emerge.
How can we avoid this?
For a country such as the honourable Member' s perhaps the problem will be solved by being part of the Euro Council.
However, until this decision is taken by the authorities in his country, the Euro Council will consist exclusively of the eleven countries which have actually adopted the euro.
I understand the answer of the President-in-Office of the Council in the following terms: that there are no instances of negotiations in the Euro 11 having, as it were, pre-empted the formal negotiations and decisions in the competent council, which is ECOFIN; that no acquis has been created; and that what takes place, rather, is an exchange of opinions on the problems encountered by the 11 countries which participate in the euro.
I think I heard the President-in-Office of the Council say something along the lines that there were agendas for these informal meetings and that these agendas were to be publicly available.
I have never seen any such agenda, and I should like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council to state clearly to what extent agendas are available in advance of the meetings.
The reason why both Swedish and Danish MEPs are raising these questions is that we have obtained the impression that the Euro 11 is an influential body.
However, I understand from the answer of the President-in-Office of the Council that formal authority and the power to make decisions of a legal and political nature still lie with ECOFIN.
We must be clear on this, Mr Krarup.
Issues relating to the single currency are addressed jointly but solely by the eleven members of Euro 11.
If Euro 11 wants to address any other type of issue which does not concern the single currency, this decision is shared with the other Member States which are not part of Euro 11.
It is as simple as that.
What cannot be avoided is that the coordination of the policies of the Euro 11 countries, particularly on the single currency, and the effect that these policies have on the overall context of the EU' s economic and financial policy do not appear to be linked to the EU' s own coordination.
It is natural that there is prior coordination between these countries and it is natural that this coordination ends up having some influence on the final decision taken in Ecofin.
This happens at contact group level and in the relations between various countries in various contexts.
I know of several cases in which government sectors of EU countries meeting at Council level have talked separately and coordinated their positions so that these appear linked in the institutional contexts of the Union.
You will say that this is not part of the normal procedure.
That is true in that case but in the case of Euro 11 this is institutionalised in the Treaty and it is this which is specified.
There should be no doubt on this.
Mr President-in-Office, from what you have just said, is there therefore an understanding or an expectation in E-11 that after they have had an informal discussion about the euro in Euro-11, they will all vote the same way when they go to Ecofin, even if they disagreed originally?
Is there a procedural expectation that all eleven will vote the same way in the formal decision-making in Ecofin?
Mr Newton Dunn, all I can say is that the ministers are responsible for their own positions.
Therefore, if at the Euro 11 meeting they have different opinions but the discussion leads them to a joint conclusion I do not see why this same position should not be taken in Ecofin.
I do not see any disadvantage in the existence of various levels of coordination, particularly when these are institutionalised in the Treaty itself.
Question No 9 by (H-0458/00):
Subject: Trying to discover, through clouds of secrecy, what the Council has decided In previous answers to me, the Portuguese Presidency has insisted that everything decided by the Council is open to the public.
I have expressed continuing deep scepticism about the Council's claims.
As a test case, will the Council inform me precisely where in the Council's published documents I could have discovered that Belgian fishermen had been persuaded to stop fishing in the Irish Sea by Britain's Fisheries Minister secretly giving them 190 tonnes of the British North Sea plaice quota and ten tonnes of the British sole quota in the English Channel?
I discovered this from a newspaper, but where could I have found it legitimately through the Council's officially allegedly open documentation?
The Member' s question begins by noting that the Portuguese Presidency has insisted that everything decided by the Council is open to the public.
Yet this assertion by the Council causes the honourable Member some confusion.
On the specific case mentioned, what is happening is as follows.
The fact that Belgian fishermen will not be fishing in the Irish Sea does not stem from any Council decision as the regulation approved by Council provides for fishing quotas to be granted to Belgium in these waters.
It actually stems from each Member State' s right to exchange with other Member States the fishing quotas allocated to them.
In accordance with the basic regulation of the common fisheries policy, the Member States, having notified the Commission, may exchange all or part of their fishing quotas.
The same article establishes that Member States shall annually inform the Commission of the criteria which they adopt internally for distributing their fishing quotas.
Therefore, the quotas available to Member States are established and allocated by a Council decision, with each Member State being responsible for distributing these among the national fleet or, if appropriate, for exchanging part of these quotas with another Member State.
In this case the latter only needs to inform the Commission to ensure the effective control and management of fish stocks.
We therefore cannot find any Council document which refers to the exchange of notes between Belgium and the United Kingdom given that, under Community legislation, it is Member States which are responsible for deciding this by mutual agreement and given that this does not require approval by the Council.
However, with regard to the overall distribution of quotas, the honourable Member must be aware that this is published in the Official Journal, in the minutes of the Council of Ministers' meetings and also in the annexed declarations.
We do not feel that there has been any breakdown in the transparency for which the Council is responsible.
Up in the gallery, listening to you and me, are visitors.
Everything is open here in Parliament.
They can hear what we are discussing and agree or disagree.
But the Council of Ministers meets in secret.
Maybe you can slide out of this example and say it is a Member State talking to the Commission and they send them a letter.
Nevertheless these matters are done in secret.
If we - you and I - want the public to understand and agree with the decisions we take, surely you agree with me that it must be done in public?
I do not agree, Mr Newton Dunn.
No government in the world takes its management decisions in public.
We can discuss the issue of whether or not legislative decisions should be taken in public.
This is something which we have been discussing in the Intergovernmental Conference.
However, we have not yet reached a definitive conclusion and until then the Council rules are what they are.
I do not feel that this is a negative practice on the part of the Council as we are actually working in line with the provisions of the Treaty.
Question No 10 by (H-0460/00):
Subject: Tibet and the World Bank Is the Council aware of the World Bank's 'China Western Poverty Project' proposal to move tens of thousands of non-Tibetan farmers into Amdo, thereby breaching international law concerning population transfers to occupied territories?
Is it also aware that this project has been condemned by the German and United States Governments but supported by the British Government?
Will the Council press the World Bank to abandon the scheme and the British Government to withdraw its support?
Mr President, I will be very brief.
The Council has not examined the issue raised in the Member' s question.
The Member States are responsible for assessing the specific projects to be financed by the World Bank.
With regard to projects for Tibet financed by the European Union through its cooperation programme, the EU' s position is that these projects must benefit native Tibetans.
Can I say firstly that I was astonished by the Minister's response to my honourable friend on the subject of human rights in Egypt.
If Europe does not stand for human rights then I do not know what it does stand for.
I would like to test him, if I may, on Tibet because Tibet has now been illegally occupied by China for many years.
Does the Minister agree that no matter how many years before Tibet regains its freedom, no European state should recognise the illegal actions by the Chinese Government in Tibet and that the transfer of tens of thousands of non-Tibetan people into Amdo is illegal under international law?
The World Bank has now recognised this and I understand is abandoning its so-called Western Poverty Project proposal.
The British Government has not yet withdrawn its support and all I ask the President-in-Office to do is to remind all Member State governments on the Council - including Britain - that they must not endorse or be seen to endorse illegal acts and abuses of human rights and national rights against the people and the nation of Tibet.
Mr Bowis, I note your concerns and we will certainly convey these to the Member States.
However, I must say that the European Union has not ignored the issue of Tibet.
For example, troikas of heads of mission have been sent on fact-finding missions to Tibet.
This issue is also regularly raised in the dialogue on human rights between the European Union and China.
The last round which took place in Lisbon on 25 February was preceded by a dmarche with the Chinese authorities which included the problem of human rights in Tibet.
The European Union is not hiding from the issue of human rights in Tibet.
However, as the Member must be aware, the European Union has not in recent years taken a clear position on the basic issue.
No definitive decision has been made within the European Union on tackling the basic issue and this is a point which must be raised openly.
The European Union has a lot more than just the ability to send investigative parties, have discussions, make recommendations and so forth.
In the case of Egypt, as has already been said, we have the European-Mediterranean programmes and association agreements.
In the case of China we have very many major trading arrangements and, potentially, their accession to the WTO.
Could we not use our power, our muscle, in order to achieve our human rights objectives and not just go on talking and talking without seeing any results?
I can only repeat what I said about the fact that, within the European Union, no official joint position has been adopted on the Tibet issue, regardless of the human rights issue.
On this issue of human rights in particular, the reactions and attitudes of the EU must be proportional to the importance of the issue.
Although this is certainly an important issue in terms of discussing China' s accession to the World Trade Organisation, for example, it cannot be used to block negotiations of this significance.
We must find a measure which is appropriate for the reactions and the various situations.
Question No 11 by (H-0462/00):
Subject: Effective action against death boats in the Straits of Gibraltar The policy on containing immigration and strengthening barriers along the Straits of Gibraltar is based on a seriously flawed approach and has attracted public criticism from the Andalusian government and the Ombudsman.
Does the Council not believe that, if this project is to bear fruit, an agreement needs to be concluded with Morocco to combat the mafias operating in this area and introduce effective surveillance measures such as observation vessels, in order to prevent people from dying in the attempt to cross the Straits and ensure that the planned investments in the north of Morocco are in fact carried out?
The Member' s question refers to the Council' s actions, firstly with regard to the checks carried out by Member States at external sea borders and secondly the measures which may be taken in the country of origin in order to prevent illegal migration and combat the activities of traffickers.
Measures to reinforce the effectiveness of the checks carried out by Member States at their external air and sea borders have been implemented, particularly within the Schengen area, and are now being integrated into the Community acquis following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Although these measures are carried out by Member States, the Council controls their actual application through its competent bodies.
By way of example, based on a decision of the Schengen Executive Committee of 18 December 1998 on the coordinated use of consultants in respect of documents, measures are being introduced which are intended to combat illegal migration by air and sea in cooperation with various African countries.
Moreover, a 1999 decision of the Schengen Executive Committee approved a mutual aid project for the exchange of officials to give assistance and advice in carrying out security and control tasks at external borders.
In addition to the Schengen acquis, practical measures of the same type are also being taken on behalf of the European Union.
These are generally based on the Community acquis and particularly on the common position of 25 October 1996 which established the assistance and information missions carried out away from the border.
Such measures are coordinated within the competent bodies of the Council but do not for the time being cover any African countries.
In terms of addressing the deep-rooted reasons for people wanting to escape and emigrate from certain African countries, we can refer to the action plan for Morocco approved in the Council in October 1999.
This action plan is one of a set of five, each containing an exhaustive and coherent approach focused on the existing situation in a country of origin or transit of asylum-seekers which is regarded as being important.
For each country selected, the action plan presents a balanced combination of options which the European Union offers in terms of foreign affairs, development and humanitarian and economic assistance.
In the action plan for Morocco, which specifically covers the situation referred to by the honourable Member, this country is regarded as a country of origin and transit for economic migration to the European countries.
The measures recommended in this action plan include using existing channels and improving information-gathering, distributing correct information on immigration, creating strategies for combating illegal trafficking and promoting measures intended to apply the readmission agreements.
Also recommended is the promotion of direct foreign investment and vocational training, in which small companies are also involved, and assistance for the voluntary return and reintegration of Moroccans who live in EU countries.
In signing the action plans established by the High Level Group, the Tampere European Council of 15 October 1999 recognised that the European Union still lacks an overall approach to the immigration phenomenon which covers the political, human rights and development issues in countries and regions of origin and transit.
This is an important point.
To achieve this objective, poverty must be combated and living conditions and employment opportunities must be improved, conflicts must be prevented and democratic states consolidated.
This requires greater coherence in the internal and external policies of the Union which are the responsibility of both the EU and the Member States.
Partnership with third countries also constitutes a key element in the success of this policy.
The EU is aware that, in order to implement the action plan for Morocco, partnership and cooperation with the Moroccan authorities will be needed.
In this context, in June of last year, a mission to Morocco took place before the action plan was finalised in order to establish a dialogue with the Moroccan authorities.
Another mission of this type is now planned for the end of this month, specifically intended for holding discussions with the Moroccan intermediaries.
As I have said, the EU' s policy covers development and humanitarian and economic assistance for Morocco.
The consolidation of the action plan for Morocco is clearly a long-term strategy but it is through the dialogue now under way in this context and on the Association Council that progress will be made.
I would like to believe from this long answer, which I did not fully understand, that the Council has a well-intentioned attitude to this very serious problem.
Given such an inconsistent state of affairs as the European Union giving more resources and being more effective, for example, in the control of meshed drift nets, in the control of fishing, than in the field of the rafts used for illegal immigration, I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council if it would not in his judgement be appropriate for us to have a periodic assessment of the situation in the Straits of Gibraltar and a report on the tiny advances made in this area.
I believe that you have been very explicit, that you have answered in many words, but these words disguise a low level of effectiveness.
The European Union, together with Morocco, and employing control measures for ships in the Straits, would thereby prevent these losses of human lives which now number more than a thousand, and which are our responsibility.
The Monitoring Centre for immigration is nothing more than a story in the press.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, are you not in favour of a periodic assessment?
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, firstly I must say that I agree with you.
This is indeed a very serious situation involving regular and even daily human tragedy which must be addressed.
The Spanish authorities have been in contact on this issue with the Moroccan authorities and the Spanish Prime Minister, Mr Aznar, had a meeting just recently with his Moroccan counterpart about this problem.
Development measures are being introduced in the northern area of Morocco, which are starting to improve this situation and the economic conditions that have led to these migratory flows.
As for the possibility of us periodically carrying out a quantitative assessment of these incidents, I believe that the Spanish authorities may be able to provide the necessary information in this respect.
This information is in fact widely available within Spain as it is distributed by the Spanish authorities.
What I want to try and explain to you - and this is why my original explanation was so long - is that the measures taken by the European Union in this respect or which are intended to have an effect in this respect are long-term measures which obviously cannot provide an immediate response to a given situation.
They are measures which are intended to work at the root of this situation by creating the conditions to keep the Moroccan people in their own country.
They are development measures which are within the spirit of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership.
I realise that your immediate reaction may be that the practical effect of this type of long-term measure is limited.
I did say that these measures would involve many small steps.
We must all realise that the European Union has a set of policies which it aims to implement and that these policies involve strategic choices.
These choices cannot be systematically prejudiced by overly general actions leading to worse humanitarian effects than may have occurred anyway.
We must realise that, in their bilateral relations with Morocco, the Spanish authorities are currently responsible for solving part of the problem.
The European Union is generally involved in a series of projects, in the context of its relations with the southern Mediterranean countries, which include projects for development, population settlement and guarantees of improved economic conditions.
We cannot turn the European Union into a kind of technical instrument for the practical resolution of specific situations.
Question No 12 by (H-0466/00):
Subject: Decision concerning deployment of EU military personnel The decision to strengthen EU emergency forces for crisis management has raised the question of the legal basis for the deployment of EU military personnel.
According to the Swedish government's interpretation of the decision taken at Cologne in 1999, a relevant UN Security Council resolution has to have been adopted.
Will the Council therefore state where and when a formal Council decision was taken to the effect that military personnel from the European Union may be deployed only after a UN Security Council resolution has been adopted?
Mr President, the decision by the Member States to develop their military capability by 2003 was taken in Helsinki.
The headline goal specifies a capacity of 50 000 to 60 000 personnel.
This decision reaffirmed that the European Union' s crisis management actions will be conducted in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter and the objectives of the OSCE' s Charter for European Security.
The Helsinki declaration, which was approved by the Heads of State and Government of the Fifteen, expressly states that the European Union recognises the primary responsibility of the United Nations Security Council for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The need to respect the principles of the UN Charter and the Charter for European Security is clearly recognised, so much so that the report to be presented by the Portuguese Presidency to the Feira European Council next Monday stresses the fact that, in the area of crisis management and conflict prevention, the European Union must establish close cooperation with the United Nations, the OSCE and the Council of Europe.
Yet a UN Security Council resolution is not needed to generally legitimise the EU' s action.
However, the EU undertakes politically and at the highest level to respect the primary responsibility of the Security Council.
Therefore, for a given operation, the Union undertakes to respect this responsibility and the resolutions adopted by the UN Security Council on a case-by-case basis.
However, you should note that some of the Petersberg tasks may be carried out without the authorisation or approval of the UN Security Council.
In fact the Petersberg tasks include, and I quote, 'humanitarian and rescue tasks, peacekeeping tasks and tasks of combat forces in crisis management, including peace making' .
Therefore, only in the latter, for which the use of military force is required, is the existence of a UN Security Council resolution considered necessary.
It is clear that the implementation of actions, particularly humanitarian ones, does not require legitimisation by the UN Security Council.
This does not mean, however, that the principles of the UN Charter do not have to be respected when carrying out this type of task.
Thank you for your answer, but I am afraid that it still does not provide proper clarification.
On the one hand, it is said that deployment is to take place in accordance with the UN or OSCE Charters; on the other hand, the Council' s representative says that no decision needs to be taken in the Security Council.
The Swedish Foreign Minister has stated that the expression 'in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter' is to be interpreted as 'following a decision in the UN' s Security Council' .
She also said, in the course of last year' s conference in Cologne, that, if other countries wanted to align themselves with the UN, Sweden would have the option of using its veto.
I should first of all like to know whether the Swedish Government has informed its colleagues in the Council as to whether it is planned to use the veto in the event of an EU action, that is to say an EU military action, being taken in the absence of a decision in the UN' s Security Council.
Moreover, I should like to hear a still clearer statement.
Can or cannot EU military personnel be deployed without a clear decision in the UN' s Security Council or in the OSCE?
It ought to be easy to answer yes or no to that question.
Mr Gahrton, the Petersberg tasks have several dimensions.
Some are purely humanitarian, for example rescue tasks.
Do you really think that we need to have a UN Security Council resolution in order to carry out a rescue task in a serious humanitarian situation?
I also clearly said that any situation which may involve the use of military force, namely peace-making, naturally requires recourse and subordination to the Security Council.
As for the other tasks, we only have to comply with the obligations accepted by the European Union in the context of the UN, particularly bearing in mind that some EU countries are members of the UN Security Council.
Therefore, the spirit of the UN Charter will naturally be followed in the type of activity which the European Union may carry out within those Petersberg tasks which do not involve the use of military force.
I am still not quite clear about your answer and would just like to ask whether you think that governments in neutral countries are being somewhat economical with the truth?
Mr Gahrton said that his government stated that it is only after a UN Security Council resolution has been adopted.
But from what you have said, that is not the case.
It appears that governments in neutral countries have a tendency to mislead citizens.
Is that the case?
Mrs McKenna, the agreement reached in Helsinki allowing these new military structures to be established was a carefully considered agreement which was prepared under the Finnish Presidency.
As you know, Finland is a country which has very legitimate national concerns in this respect and which clearly will have taken these aspects into account.
What we are currently trying to create within the European Union, and will eventually create, is a capacity for specific intervention which, in those areas not requiring the use of military force, will not need a mandate from the UN Security Council.
In other areas a resolution will of course be necessary.
We expressly accept the need for this Security Council resolution where military forces are to be used in a given context.
The traditionally neutral countries, particularly the EU Member States which are not members of NATO, have managed to safeguard all their concerns in achieving this balance because this issue is clearly very delicate for these countries.
They are not deceiving their people nor are they being economical with the truth.
They are saying exactly what their commitment is.
Clearly, their right of final veto over any decision is always guaranteed by the decision-making mechanism itself.
Therefore, they can decide on a case-by-case basis as they see fit.
This is the fundamental rule of the European Union for any situation requiring the participation of military forces.
Mr President, there were approximately one hundred military conflicts in the Nineties, the majority of which were civil wars.
I want to ask whether, in connection with the scenarios that have been gone through, a consensus has emerged that it will not be possible to deal authoritatively with certain types of conflict under the existing Treaty.
In other words, is it agreed that certain military conflicts come within Nato' s or some other organisation' s sphere of authority but definitely not under the EU' s?
I will only say that this military capability, this intervention capacity of the European Union and this extension of its area of activity are all specified in the Treaty of Amsterdam which entered into force in May last year.
It is only since then that these issues have been raised.
Question No 13 by (H-0471/00):
Subject: Arms supplies to Mexico The forthcoming export of P-90 revolvers to Mexico is further proof that Belgium is not very particular about human rights.
Following the insurrection in Chiapas there is evidence of increasingly serious violations of human rights in Mexico, with torture, arbitrary arrests and 'disappearances' etc.
The European code of conduct on arms exports, adopted on 8 June 1998, prohibits exports of arms to countries where there is a risk of the arms being used in an internal conflict.
Does the Council feel that these supplies of arms to Mexico are in conformity with the European code of conduct?
If so, is there not a case for tightening up the code of conduct?
If not, what will be the Council's response to the Member State involved, Belgium?
As you know, the European Union' s position on arms exports is set out in the code of conduct approved in June 1998.
Respect for human rights is one of the code' s main conditions which must be met in order for authorisation to be granted.
Although decisions are taken individually by each Member State, the latter must take full account of the provisions of the code of conduct.
This is therefore a matter of political good faith.
The Council does not receive any information on the reasons why Member States grant or refuse export licences and therefore cannot assess the grounds on which these decisions are based.
However, particularly since the establishment of the code of conduct, the exchange of information on arms exports has begun to occur within the European Union.
This exchange is the subject of an annual report and will clearly help to identify common ways of tackling the problems.
We must realise, however, that this issue is still subject to subsidiarity in that the decisions are taken by each Member State, even though the code of conduct forms the backdrop and reference for these decisions.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, allow me to hide my amazement at your reply.
It is, of course, the case that with this conduct of conduct, we only have a very weak tool at our disposal to combat inadmissible arms exports.
I would like to ask you if there has ever been consultation within the Council to tighten up this code of conduct or to make it more easily enforceable?
I fear that the same fate that has befallen our foreign and security policy as a whole, and which has been discussed so many times, will also befall this code of conduct.
At the end of the day, we rely on goodwill and, if that is not there, we might as well forget it.
Mrs Maes, I almost totally agree with what you have just said.
However, the current code of conduct was the only one possible.
I can say this as I attended and participated in the negotiations on this code.
The reality is that the code clearly gives no guarantees with regard to monitoring how the Member States interpret their responsibilities.
Quite frankly, there has not been until this moment, within the European Union, a consensus on or even a majority inclination towards reconsidering this issue.
The code of conduct was regarded at the time as a very important qualitative step forward in terms of the disparate practices of the Member States which existed at that time.
The aim was to tie the various Member States to a basic set of principles and to the observance of certain standards, while still leaving them completely free in this matter.
This is what is happening today.
I realise that the code of conduct is very weak, it particularly does not have a binding nature and cannot go any further than a political sanction.
Therefore, publicising this type of situation - and I am not just referring to the situation raised in the question - particularly where this is taken up by the media, will put healthy pressure on the Council.
In this way the European Union will one day be able to guarantee that the practices of its countries and those involving certain types of lucrative activity will be in harmony with the principles which the EU claims to defend.
This is the big test that the European Union and its Member States will have to face in the future.
Question No 14 by (H-0474/00):
Subject: Restoring normal relations with Austria In view of the response given earlier in the year by the Council to the recent political developments in Austria and of the need to promote the best overall interests of the European Community, will the Council now state if it is prepared to restore normal relations with Austria at every level?
I would have been surprised if there had not been a question on this issue which is why I am glad that it has finally come up.
The Council of Ministers of the European Union does not have to express an opinion on a decision taken by 14 Member States in the context of their bilateral relations with Austria.
This is not a matter for the Council.
It would be different if, by not complying with any aspect of the Treaty on European Union, Austria were found to have infringed the principles of Article 6, for example, and therefore had to be punished or the application of the provisions of Article 7 had to be justified.
As this is not the case, what is happening now in the relations between the 14 Member States and Austria is a bilateral issue which is not the responsibility of the Council.
Thank you for agreeing to take the question.
I am certainly taken aback by the President-in-Office's response.
The fact is that the sanctions were imposed by the Council.
I cannot see how the Council can now wash its hands of at least discussing the possibility of lifting those sanctions.
I should like to ask the President-in-Office if he is aware that recent public opinion polls in Austria indicate that over 80% of Austrian citizens want to see the sanctions lifted.
How then can the Council continue to ignore the democratic decision of the Austrian people?
Does the President-in-Office not agree that failure to lift the sanctions now is undermining the democratic foundations on which this Union was established?
I would ask him to give this House this evening an assurance that he will use his undoubted influence to have the matter discussed at the summit in your country next week.
Certainly, what is happening does not reflect the European aspiration to unity.
I am extremely disappointed that the Council, in this way, would want to wash its hands of what is a very serious matter.
Mr Hyland, the Council is composed of fifteen countries.
I am not aware that Austria has participated in any debate or vote in Council in which any type of measure has been adopted against it.
No EU body has adopted any measure against Austria.
During the term of the Portuguese Presidency, there has been no working body of the European Union in which Austria has not had, like this Parliament, the option of full and active participation with regard to the whole of the EU' s operation.
The bilateral decisions, not sanctions, which were taken by the 14 Member States in respect of Austria are political acts which one country is entitled to adopt in respect of another.
Every country has every right, with regard to the development of the political situation in another country, to adopt an attitude and to draw the due consequences from this.
The consequences in this matter are that Austrian candidates are not being supported in international organisations, Austrian ambassadors are not being received at a level above director-general and there is a freeze on political visits.
These are the famous 'sanctions' .
If any country has interpreted this attitude more extensively then this is a matter for each country.
These 'sanctions' are therefore bilateral as each country is doing what it wishes in this respect and the responsibility is collective.
The responsibility for the position taken by the 14 Member States was freely assumed by these countries.
Any of these countries is free to disengage itself from these measures and we have to ask ourselves why up to now none of the 14 countries has done this.
This issue is therefore not a matter for the Council.
The Austrian authorities have had the opportunity to raise this issue within the European Union.
It was in fact raised by the Austrian Foreign Minister during the informal meeting of foreign ministers.
It was raised the day before yesterday by the Austrian Foreign Minister in Luxembourg and Doctor Wolfgang Schssel will very probably take the opportunity afforded by his presence in Santa Maria da Feira to raise this issue.
However, this decision is not a Community decision but a bilateral one, whether you like it or not.
I wanted to ask the President-in-Office to clarify something.
You are saying that the Council is not getting involved in these bilateral measures because, strictly speaking, it is not a Council decision.
So has there not been any consultation within the Council at any time?
It is nonetheless being mooted that the sanctions will be brought up again in Feira.
You are saying that Austria might raise the issue again, but that is not possible in a Council meeting.
It will thus need to be raised again in separate meetings of a bilateral nature.
Do you yourself not think that this is a little peculiar?
It does not seem peculiar to me for the following reason.
As I said at the start, in terms of strict compliance with its Community obligations as specified by the Treaty on European Union, Austria has not behaved in any way which may lead to action in the specific context of Article 7.
This is clear and no one can dispute this just as no one can dispute that the Austrian elections were free and that the Austrian people are free to choose the government they want.
What can also not be disputed is that the other governments are free to be unhappy about the Austrian Government if they consider that this government contains a party which does not respect a set of basic principles which these governments have collectively undertaken to respect and which Austria has also undertaken to respect.
What I must say to Mrs Maes is that we are all Austrians in that we all have citizenship rights which must be respected in Austria.
We are therefore not indifferent to a political development which may lead to the presence, in the executive bodies of a Member State government and therefore a friendly government which shares with us and which has decided to share with us a basic set of principles, of a party which clearly conducted an electoral campaign based on other principles.
With regard to the issue of using the Community bodies to raise this issue, we are a free Union in that each Member State has the right to raise this issue formally or informally in the specific context of the Union.
As this is not an EU matter, this issue was never placed on the agenda and this will not occur under the Portuguese Presidency in any formal Council body.
The representatives of the Austrian Government are clearly totally free to raise this issue and will have every opportunity to debate this if the Member States want to do so.
At the Lisbon European Council, the 14 Member States decided to entrust the Portuguese Prime Minister with giving a collective response.
At the informal meeting in the Azores there was a debate and several Member States expressed their opinions on the situation.
I am not sure what will happen in Feira but clearly Doctor Wolfgang Schssel is totally free to express his opinions and to see the reaction of the other Member States to his words and arguments.
I would like to ask the President-in-Office, finally, if he and his Council recognise the outcome of democratic elections within this Union?
Secondly, does he believe that the Portuguese presidency acted in haste as a result of a series of telephone calls throughout Europe when that decision was taken?
Would it not have been wiser to summon a meeting of the heads of state for an important decision like this which - remember - will have consequences long after our time here in the European Parliament?
I would like to hear the views of the Portuguese presidency, and maybe other presidencies, when others coming from the extreme right or indeed the extreme left enter government within the Union.
This should be a Europe of unity and solidarity.
To use a slang word it is a 'cop-out' to say that it is not a matter for the Council.
Someone must take an initiative to resolve this serious problem.
It has given stature to an individual who does not deserve that stature.
In fact it has strengthened his position, not weakened it.
I will start with the last part of the honourable Member' s question by saying that we were not the ones who gave stature to someone who does not deserve this.
It was Doctor Wolfgang Schssel who did this by agreeing to an alliance with the party of Mr Haider.
With regard to the result of the Austrian elections, I clearly said that we fully respect the result of these elections.
Austria is a free country and one where the elections are held in a totally legal manner and with full transparency.
The problem is that the result of this free election, as has happened in the past in other countries, brought a certain party to power.
You should realise that there is actually something strange in the Austrian internal situation.
The party which received the most votes was the Social Democratic Party which did not want to form a government.
The party with the second highest number of votes was the FPO which was not invited to form a government.
It is rather strange, in terms of usual constitutional arrangements, that in a European country the second-placed party was not invited to form a government but the third-placed party was instead.
Therefore, this is not a case of business as usual.
It actually involves a kind of reassessment given the potential capacity of Mr Haider to become the leader of an Austrian government.
We do not dispute the Austrian elections and we do not dispute the right of the Austrian people to choose the government they want.
However, no one can force us to enter into relations with a government containing a party which has so far not renounced what it said in its electoral campaign nor the gravity of what it said.
It is a shame that this is not being clearly emphasised.
The gravity of what was said by Mr Haider and by the FPO in the elections is something which should make us all think, bearing in mind the future of Europe.
We should think about the racist and xenophobic statements which have been systematically made by this party.
Curiously, it did not distance itself from these during its last conference, and instead reaffirmed all its pride in its past statements when it had a specific opportunity to rectify the current situation.
Nothing leads us to believe that there has been any positive change which may justify a new attitude of the European Union and, in particular, which may create the opportunity for any type of discussion on this matter within the European Union.
We do not feel that this issue is a matter for the European Union but is rather for the other 14 governments to decide.
So far - and we will have to wait and see what happens next - these governments have maintained a position of recognising that this situation is serious and that it requires a change, but not necessarily by the 14 governments.
There is in fact an almost media-wide presumption that the change in attitude at this time should come from the 14 countries.
Why?
What has changed in the Austrian situation which could lead us to change our attitude?
Only time?
We consider that it is the Austrians and the Austrian Government which must change if they want us to adopt a different attitude.
That is the essence of the matter.
Why systematically place the onus on the 14 countries?
Why must the 14 Member States change?
What has happened in Austria to justify this change?
Clearly this does not necessarily mean that we will not consider other ways in the future of assessing the development of this situation and in fact this is what will happen in the coming days.
Thank you very much, Mr Seixas da Costa.
I would like to thank you for your continual presence, your unselfishness, the intelligence with which you have replied to us, as well as your patience, and we would like to wish you much success in your personal role as Minister and also to the Portuguese Presidency.
May this success match that of the Portuguese football team at the beginning of Euro 2000.
May you achieve much for Europe!
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed, Questions Nos 15 to 28 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes Questions to the Council.
(The sitting was suspended at 7.35 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.).
Change to the agenda
On the recommendation of the Presidency and in accordance with Rule 111 of our Rules of Procedure I propose an amendment of the agenda for this current part-session.
By letter of 8 June 2000, the Council requested from Parliament its opinion of the proposed Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 974/98 on the introduction of the euro 2000/137(CNS) and a proposed Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1103/97 which lays down various provisions on the introduction of the euro 2000/134(CNS) before the European Council in Feira on 19 June 2000.
The Committee on Economic Affairs has decided to apply the simplified procedure in accordance with Rule 158 of the Rules of Procedure to both texts.
I therefore propose that they be included in accordance with the procedure without debate.
Is there any objection to the proposal?
If not, the agenda is thereby amended and the deadline for the presentation of amendments is 10.00 a.m. on Thursday 15 June 2000 and the vote will take place on Friday 16 June 2000.
(Parliament gave its assent)
Reconstruction of Central America
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0133/2000) by Mr Marset Campos, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on a Community Action Plan for the reconstruction of Central America [COM(1999) 201 - C5-0111/1999 - 1999/2114(COS)]
.
(ES) Mr President, in 1998, Hurricane Mitch devastated Central America (Honduras, Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala) resulting in 20,000 victims and losses of more than EUR 5 billion (10% of the GDP of those countries which are already burdened by eternal foreign debt).
It destroyed crops, homes and infrastructures of every type, thereby jeopardising the future of its peoples.
Europe' s response was immediate and significant, through the Stockholm Conference, and it was consolidated, following the European Parliament' s proposal, in the Commission' s initiative which we are currently debating.
I would like to highlight four issues.
The first relates to our assumption of responsibility in the event of these catastrophes.
The connection between our economic activity and the increase in pollution, with the greenhouse effect and the onset of climate changes makes it advisable for us to immediately ratify the Kyoto protocols on the reduction of the gases which cause this effect.
Furthermore, our model of unequal development leads to poverty and indebtedness in these countries.
It is a contradiction to preach the reconstruction of Central America taking account of respect for the environment, according to a model of sustainable development, while we continue to maintain the same economic relations with those countries.
The second issue involves the global objective of our assistance.
The Commission' s proposal is sensible insofar as it centres its attention on two fields: health and education.
However, it should be more ambitious, so that it may coordinate and integrate all the different initiatives in those countries.
This requires a substantial increase in our staff, a measure which this House supports.
This action will allow for synergy between the different forms of aid and will guarantee that the effort made will not be limited merely to reconstruction - since, in that event, things would continue in the same way - but will offer an opportunity for regional integration, harmonious and sustainable development, creating wealth and general well-being, and for the consolidation of democracy in these countries which have just thankfully left behind years of violence and confrontation.
In this respect, two facts worry us.
The threat of hostility between Nicaragua and Honduras as a result of border disputes would cast doubt upon the good sense of our aid, and we therefore think that both of those countries should be subject to the decisions of the International Court of Justice.
The other is the recent re-emergence in Guatemala of political kidnappings, such as that of the university professor Mayra Angelina Gutirrez, political killings, such as that of the Community leader, Jos Amancio Mendoza, or threats against journalists (the case of Gerardi or the Nobel Prize winner, Rigoberta Mench) which are of concern.
Aid for reconstruction must be accompanied by firm and accountable commitments to safeguarding human rights on the part of the Guatemalan Government.
The third question concerns the way in which we are going to carry out aid and regional coordination and integration.
It is essential that we incorporate the most dynamic and responsible sections of society, the indigenous peoples, as well as the full and broad participation of women, the social organisations which display efficiency and solidarity and, lastly, that there is no partisan use of aid nor fraud in its management.
That is why we need to carry out internal and external audits of the application of our aid.
Increasing our effectiveness as the European Union also means that we must participate officially in the Stockholm monitoring group.
The fourth and last point is currently the most important: the amount of aid.
Although it is considerable, we believe that the amount indicated by the Commission, EUR 250 million, is insufficient given the magnitude of the disaster and the slow rate of the area' s recovery.
The European Parliament therefore requests a significant increase.
We are concerned by the items appearing today in the press indicating that the Commission intends to reduce all European Union aid, including that destined for Latin America, because of its commitments in Kosovo.
We believe that we cannot behave in such an absurd way, since for Latin America this aid offers hope of escaping underdevelopment and freeing itself from the heavy yoke which originates from the North.
The European Parliament has already stated that it would not commit itself to any action which would mean cuts in the aid to other parts of the world.
We therefore insist that this is a crucial and key point.
If we behave in this way, we will ensure that other actions, both with the European Investment Bank and with other financial bodies, are significant and would aid the immediate execution of the programmes approved.
All of this should be accompanied by the presentation of periodic reports to the European Parliament on the evolution and assessment of the results obtained.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the warm and excellent cooperation of all the members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy and its staff, as well as the Committee on Budgets, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy and the Committee on Development and Cooperation.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, some regions in the world are struck by the hand of fate several times in quick succession.
In the 1980s, the European Union made a major commitment to Central America in the San Jos process, in order to help establish peace and democracy in this region.
This process was a success.
And then, just a few years ago, these countries were again hard hit, this time by a terrible hurricane, and they are still suffering the consequences.
Thank goodness that Europe is again taking action, offering assistance and helping to reconstruct Central America.
We need to publicise the fact that the European Union is funding at least 62% of public development aid in Central America.
This entitles the European Union to play a political role in Central America, which is not just the preserve of its large neighbours;
Europe too can make a contribution here to peace, democracy and reconstruction.
We therefore welcome the Commission' s proposal.
The Committee on Budgets supports the idea of earmarking EUR 250 million for this region for the period from 1999 to 2004.
It is also a good idea to make this aid conditional upon a commitment by the countries to work together.
That was the model used in Europe after the Second World War, when the duty to work together, cooperate and overcome borders were the sine qua non for Marshall Plan funds.
Our contribution to reconstruction aid will likewise be conditional upon a commitment to peaceful coexistence and cooperation.
I also expressly agree with the rapporteur: we should not allow the reconstruction of Kosovo to be funded, as it were, from the budget for Central America.
If the reconstruction of Kosovo is a European task decided by the Council, then it must also provide the necessary funds, which is why we are voting today on a sum of money as a direction marker, a direction marker which was decided before the conflict in Kosovo.
The Commission report predates the Kosovo conflict and we have made no changes to it.
We stand by the sum proposed for Central America.
I think that is the most important signal we can send out today.
Mr President, our committee undoubtedly agrees with Mr Marset Campos' s report.
However, I should like to draw the House' s attention to a number of points which, as far as we are concerned, are right at the top of the international aid priority list.
International aid must, without fail, be well coordinated.
The Commission, for its part, must set up suitable structures on the ground.
However, it must also cooperate as efficiently as possible with the international organisations which have been working there for several years already.
The same applies when it comes to involving the people affected, especially the indigenous population.
We must work with these people on the ground during both planning and implementation, that is essential as far as we are concerned.
Not only does it save costs, it increases efficiency and, more importantly, prevents fraud.
We know that in El Salvador, for example, the erstwhile Caldern government diverted aid of EUR 1 million in order to win votes in the right-wing camp.
If we really want to help the countries devastated by the hurricane, then of course we need to do more than just implement a few aid projects on the ground.
We all know that full well.
It is therefore essential that we remit foreign debts and build up regional and, above all, sustainable structures in both the ecological and the economic sense of the word.
The Union must also guarantee these countries access to the markets for their products, which must be assessed from both an ecological and a social point of view, because there is little point in giving out aid, on the one hand, and excluding these countries from our markets, on the other.
I take the same view as the previous speakers, that it is unacceptable for the Council to argue that money now needs to be diverted from Latin America to Kosovo.
Robbing Peter to pay Paul can hardly be called a policy; on the contrary.
The Council keeps heaping more and more tasks on to the Commission and the European Parliament; it also needs to ensure that they can be funded by entering the relevant amounts in the budget.
Mr President, as the rapporteur, Mr Marset, has said - and we support his words and his report - Hurricane Mitch has been the worst natural disaster in the history of Central America.
The human losses number more than 10 000 deaths; almost another 10 000 have disappeared and more than 2 million people have been affected; the material damage amounts to more than EUR 5 billion which is equivalent to 10% of the GDP of Central America.
A significant part of the economic and social infrastructure has been destroyed and there has been a great reduction in the region' s capacity for production and export in the short and medium term.
The countries most affected, Honduras and Nicaragua, are the poorest in the region.
The destructive effect of Mitch was exacerbated by deforestation and the lack of an adequate system of flood control, which demonstrated once again that environmental degradation affects the poorest most and highlights the intrinsic link between poverty and environmental deterioration.
As the Commission has said, the consequences of Mitch will considerably reduce the results of the efforts towards economic recovery and investment made there during the last decade by the European Union.
In April 1999, the Commission approved a special action plan, provided with EUR 250 million, which this Parliament fully supports in the terms in which it was approved.
With regard to the model for implementing this programme, the Committee on Development and Cooperation supports option 1 proposed by the Commission.
Only in the event that it is not possible to carry out option 1 as a result of a lack of sufficient human resources, could option 2 be considered valid, by means of the contracting of highly qualified European experts.
As draftsman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation I must not end without asking, once again, for the cancellation of the foreign debt of the Central American countries, an initiative which must be dealt with by the European Union as a whole and in a coordinated fashion and not only by certain Member States acting on individual and particular initiatives.
Lastly, I believe it is also necessary to ask, within the strategic reconstruction plan, for the proposal of measures aimed at increasing credits from the European Investment Bank in that region.
Mr President, I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Marset Campos, on the excellent report which he has presented to us.
This report has inevitably been influenced by the tragic consequences of Hurricane Mitch.
The European Parliament - and I believe we should remember this - reacted immediately by calling an extraordinary meeting on 4 November 1998 which was attended by the Commissioners then responsible.
In its resolution of 19 November, the European Parliament expressed the terms in which the European Union would respond to the situation created by Hurricane Mitch.
This response had to be formulated with the greatest diligence and speed through the approval of a strategic plan for the region within the shortest possible time limit.
I remember the date: November 18-19 1998.
We must say that this request by the European Parliament, at least with regard to diligence and speed, has not been attended to, and this is a cause for regret.
The lack of human resources, while it may be an excuse from an administrative point of view, cannot and must not be a pretext for the establishment of political priorities, especially in the case of basic needs of countries which have suffered disasters on a massive scale.
To transfer this responsibility to the budgetary authority is not correct.
The Commission must at all times ensure the appropriate allocation of resources in accordance with the priorities agreed.
Commissioner, this morning, in the debate on the common security and defence policy, I had the opportunity to tell your colleague, Mr Patten, that I have never had, do not have and will never have any hesitation in decisively supporting the Commission with a view to clarifying and broadening the scope of its competencies.
On the contrary.
However, as other Members have said during this debate and as I had the opportunity to say also to Mr Patten during the budgetary debate, it is difficult for me to understand why the Commission has no difficulty in managing the EUR 800 million which it proposes in the preliminary draft 2001 budget for the Balkans but that, nevertheless, it has difficulties managing EUR 250 million which have been set aside in the plan for reconstruction in Central America, which are not envisaged for one year, but for four years.
In any event, Commissioner, the countries of Central America have not carried out a policy of genocide and ethnic cleansing.
They have included, unlike other geographical areas in their agreements with the European Union, a democratic clause which provides an essential element on which the whole relationship is based.
The countries of Central America have taken on very painful processes of structural adjustment which have meant great sacrifices for their societies.
They have done their duties with regard to the multilateral institutions and have fully complied with what the European Union expected of them.
Mr President, European civil society has already shown how sensitive it is to the tragedy suffered by the peoples of Central America.
It is now time for our institutions, in the face of a disaster of this type, to be a match for our civil society and for the circumstances.
Mr President, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Marset Campos, for his excellent motion for a resolution and also for the great clarity of vision with which he has interpreted the spirit of this resolution, which must not be limited to solidarity but shift the focus onto much more tangible political initiatives.
I do not wish to trawl through the figures recording the consequences of the hurricane again.
I would simply stress the fact that the social and environmental damage concerns us far more than the economic damage caused, and it is that which is affecting this region.
And since misfortune is never fair, particularly when meting out its after-effects, it is the poorer bands of society which, as always, have been worst affected.
I would like to start by describing a paradox: the region hit by the hurricane, which is often hit by hurricanes as violent as this one, also includes Florida.
Yet although Florida suffers the same weather conditions as Central America, it reports infinitely less serious damage.
This is my point: we must start from here and consider the environmental and social vulnerability of Central America if we are to realise that the emergency relief culture and policy will not suffice, and this must be the focus of European Union aid.
This resolution has the advantage of going beyond emergencies.
The Community action plan is a chance to combine the reconstruction process with an element of change - change which these countries genuinely need - and to invest in a new economic and social development process based on the priorities of health, education and high quality services, which, in these countries, are directly responsible for the quality of life, and, above all, the quality of their democracy.
The resolution explains in great detail that all this is possible provided that two conditions are upheld and satisfied.
First of all, we must activate the monitoring and inspection measures, in order to avoid wastage, unlawful activity and fraud.
To this end, the resolution calls for the European Union to have sole responsibility for planning, execution and monitoring of the aid.
We are calling upon the Commission to take up its responsibility, and we consider it vital that it does so if we are to provide effective aid.
However, the second condition is much more important: we need to increase the Commission' s financial and human resources.
The funds appropriated are not sufficient and the staffing is certainly inadequate.
In an area which has been greatly affected by political violence, the provision of aid - which is intended not only to provide emergency relief but to facilitate the restoration of democratic order as well - specifies and assumes a quality of preparation and a level of human resources which is quite different from that which has hitherto been envisaged.
We consider that greater and more effective use should be made of the cooperation of non-governmental organisations, which represent not only extremely experienced and extremely reliable resources in the countries concerned, but, above all, tangible resources which enable us to make our intervention more dynamic and more effective.
In other words, Mr President, Members of the Commission and the Council, I feel that it is time for the European Union to stop just declaring its solidarity and secure genuine, substantial fairness.
This plan must do more than just provide immediate alleviation of the effects of the hurricane: it must also bring about redistribution of the country' s resources and restore the country' s opportunities.
The resolution adopted by the European Parliament in November 1998 was also a step in this direction in that it referred to the cancellation of the foreign debt of the countries in the region, which amounted to USD 17 billion.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the invitation to the Commission and the Council contained in the resolution to support the total and immediate cancellation of the foreign debt.
Mr President, there is little to add at this point in the debate, especially after the excellent report by Mr Marset, which I agree with completely.
However, I would like to stress certain things that he has said.
It is very important to speak of behaving cooperatively - we have spoken about behaving sensibly - by focussing especially on education and health programmes, as the report itself says, and he has also spoken about coordination and the need for staff.
For those of us who were in Kosovo just a few days ago, we must specifically highlight something which has been said by many of the visitors in the delegation.
That is, that, unlike other interventions, the main feature of the one carried out in Kosovo is that it was directed in an integrated and perfectly coordinated fashion, which increases the efficiency of our action.
On the other hand, as Mr Salafranca has pointed out very clearly, I also absolutely share his disagreement not only with the budgetary restrictions, but also with the difficult fact that obstacles are placed in the way of countries such as those in Central America in whose agreements certain clauses have been included, while we do not act in this way in other regions.
For those of us whose leitmotif for political action is solidarity, we also require efficiency, the sustainability of programmes and the creation of policies in the places where we take action, which will help these treasured societies of Latin America to reach higher levels of development and social justice.
I will end, Mr President, with the following quote: "We must be rebels, but we must also be competent" .
To interpret this in another context: let us show solidarity, but, in doing so, be efficient.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I think that the awful disaster caused by Hurricane Mitch sets three main challenges for European policy.
First: we must help with reconstruction in these countries.
The Commission document provides a good basis for this, although some of what is written in it has yet to be implemented in practice.
I think it is particularly important to use the know-how of European organisations and organisations in Member States for reconstruction and to involve non-governmental organisations and local experts.
I do not think that calling for more new posts in the European Commission every time a new challenge arises is always the right response.
Perhaps Commission staff could be reassigned.
Secondly: we must give these ill-fated countries greater access to European markets than we have done in the past.
It is paradoxical that Nicaragua and Honduras, which were two of the least developed countries even before Hurricane Mitch, fail to qualify for the same treatment as many, many others, such as the ACP countries, which we treat well, and rightly so.
I cannot see why Nicaragua and Honduras still fail to qualify for the same treatment.
I do not want to quote the perennial example of bananas - the report does that.
I support this passage and also what Mr Kreissl-Drfler has said.
I would like to quote the example of sugar.
In the case of sugar, which is an important product for Nicaragua, Nicaragua has no access of any importance to European markets.
It might help if we were to facilitate its access to the European markets.
The third challenge is that we need to fight the causes of these disasters.
I am well aware that we cannot simply say that the increase in greenhouse gases caused Hurricane Mitch.
However, there are many scientists who assume that it probably did.
We just cannot say for certain.
But all the scientific committees agree that the number of disasters such as this will increase significantly if we industrialised counties continue to pump out the greenhouse gases at the same rate.
They will of course affect all of us, but they will always affect poor people most, which is why we must at last take more decisive action here.
Mr President, I should like to follow on from Mr Liese' s closing comment on climate change, to which Mr Marset Campos also referred.
It is perhaps not by chance that we have suffered tremendous devastation in Central America, Venezuela and Mozambique, not to mention in Europe, and it is likely to increase.
It seems reasonable to suppose that it is not increasing by chance and that it really is the result of man-made climatic changes.
I would therefore like to see a link established between how we view these disasters and energy policy.
There really is a link and I should like to draw your attention to it.
I only wish there were not.
The second point I would like to make is that aid should be used to integrate Central America.
This has been a perennial cause for concern to the European Parliament and we have called for it on many occasions.
In the final analysis, of course, this is up to the people of Central America.
But perhaps the shock triggered by Hurricane Mitch gives us an excuse to overcome the hostilities and difficulties between the individual countries.
In any case, the people would be grateful and, for the rest, our aid would be worthless without any progress with integration.
The third point I should like to make concerns the implementation of this aid.
I do not envy the Commission this task because I know full well that, in a few years' time, a report on the alleged or rightly criticised misuse of funds will land in our lap and I should like to point out that the cost of controlling these funds often exceeds the gain.
I hope that we shall be giving the Commission a certain amount of room for manoeuvre in the use of these funds because the speed at which programmes are implemented is often much more important than accounts in black and white down to the last penny.
I know that this is a comment which a parliamentarian should not make nowadays, but I make it nonetheless because I am right.
Finally, I should like to point out that the hurricane in October 1998 went beyond Central America.
It is now June 2000.
In other words, we too are an unwieldy apparatus and perhaps we too need to consider how we can speed up the process.
Even if we pass a resolution today, we are still a long way from building up the country; on the contrary, it will take many years, perhaps a generation.
I consider that to be far too long.
.
Mr President, I wish to begin by thanking, on behalf of the Commission, the European Parliament for the quality of this report and congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Marset Campos, on his report on the Commission communication on the Action Plan for the Reconstruction of Central America.
I am also grateful for the support and confidence that Parliament has given the Commission on the implementation of this important Community Action Plan.
The EUR 250m regional programme for the reconstruction of Central America, spread over four years, will contribute to the reconstruction and the transformation of the four countries most devastated by Hurricane Mitch - Honduras, Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala.
The programme is based on the principle of sustainable development, as has been underlined by several speakers.
It provides for assistance in education, vocational training, public health and social housing.
The primary beneficiaries will be those who live in extremely disadvantaged rural areas where the consequences of the disaster are most acute.
Attention will be paid in particular to the indigenous peoples and to reducing vulnerability to this kind of catastrophe in the future.
The Commission is aware that the success of such an ambitious and complex programme also depends on the degree of coordination among the various actors present.
A coordination group is being set up between the Commission and the Member States.
Another important element will be the Stockholm Follow-up Group.
Until now the Commission has always been involved in an informal way in the activities carried out by this group.
In order to ensure maximum transparency, the Commission will submit an annual report on the progress of the RPRCA to the Member States and Parliament.
A first report of the activities carried out by the Commission has been distributed among the parliamentary Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.
Following the initial emergency and other post-Mitch aid, we are now actively preparing the implementation of this reconstruction programme.
The mobilisation of the statutory personnel necessary for decentralised management and implementation of the programme certainly delayed the rapid launch of the programme, as has been emphasised by several speakers.
These problems have now been overcome.
The first official will arrive in Managua on 17 July and the remaining officials in the following weeks.
No further delays are expected at this point.
The Commission is taking all necessary steps so that the programme can be in place and operational within the following three months.
I quite understand the arguments Mr Salafranca raised about human resources.
As you know, it is not a question specific to this debate.
However, you should bear in mind that for the Kosovo programme we set up a specific agency.
In the case of this programme we had to deal with the staff who were available, due to the constraints of human resources.
Let me stress - and I share the view of Mr Salafranca and others - that the amount of time it has taken to get this aid to the region is wholly unacceptable.
We cited it as an example in our recent proposals for the overall reform of our external assistance programmes.
It is just another reason why the Commission, and Commissioner Patten in particular, is so determined that we should drive forward those reforms so that we stop letting others and ourselves down in this way.
Since the issue has been raised by several speakers, I should like to take this opportunity to guarantee that the financing of Kosovo will not be to the detriment of money allocated to Latin America, and definitely not to this specific programme.
Additional measures have been adopted by the Commission in the framework of the Community Action Plan.
These include the European Community contribution to the HIPC debt initiative, and approval of an improved General System of Preferences Scheme for Central America and Council Regulation of 21 December 1998 applying a multiannual scheme of generalised tariff preferences has been extended to 31 December 2001.
In addition, the Commission is taking part in the HIPC debt initiative, contributing some EUR 50m to both Honduras and Nicaragua.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.
Asylum procedures
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0123/2000) by Mr Schmitt, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the Commission Working Document: Towards common standards on asylum procedures [(SEC(1999) 271 - C5-0157/1999 - 1999/2148(COS)]
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Treaty of Amsterdam has at last paved the way for joint action in the area of asylum law and refugee and immigration policy.
In my view, this was long overdue, because the decision to move from a purely economic community to political union was taken a long time ago.
That the Treaty of Amsterdam moved in this direction was therefore all the more important.
Unfortunately, when it happened, Parliament was only granted the right to be consulted on moves in the relevant legal areas, which is why I expressly state here that I trust that the Commission will continue to ensure that Parliament remains fully involved, despite the fact that it only has a right of consultation.
Having said which, one thing must be made clear: given that, officially, we only have the right to be consulted, we shall only have any effective influence on the Commission and on how the relevant legal provisions develop if we, as a Parliament, agree on common principles and waive the need for full implementation of individual political goals.
I think that we have chosen a good approach to this issue over recent months during our discussions of the Commission' s working paper.
I know from my own group, I must add, that, because of how the report is drafted, the view of hardly anyone here in the House is wholly represented.
That is precisely what happens when you make compromises and try to find a consensus.
You are satisfied on many points, but not always 100%.
Allow me to highlight the main points which I think are important for future asylum procedures.
First: we must summon up the courage to separate the three main groups, i.e. asylum, on the one hand, and the temporary admission of refugees from crisis regions and immigration policy, on the other.
Secondly: we must ensure that qualification procedures are shortened and simplified, without sacrificing sufficiently high standards of careful examination.
Thirdly: our aim must be to allow asylum seekers to apply for asylum just once within the European Union.
However, this means ensuring the same procedural law applies everywhere and is applied uniformly.
This means training officials in charge of processing applications to a high standard.
These officials must have access to cross-border information.
And we must also ensure that asylum seekers are treated in exactly the same way, wherever they make their application.
This includes welfare, accommodation etc.
We need to guarantee that, in theory, you will face the same procedure everywhere, irrespective of whether you make your application in Spain, Germany or England.
If we can guarantee that, then inversely, it is only logical to rule that just one application is allowed.
Fourthly: I think that the Member States of the EU should be required to draw up a uniform, binding list of countries subject to a visa requirement and safe third countries and countries of origin.
I know that some people are critical of this.
But, in my view, it is the only way to ensure that officials take decisions on the basis of the same criteria and to create legal certainty for applicants in the Member States.
One important point which I should like to address, and which we have made clear several times in the report, is that the burden must be divided between the Member States.
How exactly this burden will be divided obviously still needs to be discussed.
But one thing is clear: the door on which the majority of asylum seekers or refugees knocks cannot be left to chance.
One country alone should not have to bear the burden.
I know that asylum law is a difficult and politically sensitive issue but I think that we have made a start in the discussions in committee over recent months.
We have discussed extremely constructively and fairly with each other.
This discussion has encouraged me and I am convinced that Parliament is now in a position to give its joint support to the continuing legislative process and, possibly, to discuss other difficult issues, such as an immigration law, constructively.
Mr President, allow me to start by thanking Mr Schmitt, not just for his report, but also for the excellent cooperation and for what he has just said to us.
He speaks from the heart.
Common principles were indeed seen as more important than individual political objectives.
I should also like briefly to thank my committee, the Committee on Legal Affairs, for the confidence which it placed in a neo-parliamentarian, someone who has just climbed on board, in entrusting me with this sensitive issue.
The right to asylum is enshrined in various treaties but, because of different definitions and interpretations by national courts, the law is applied to differing degrees.
This obviously contradicts the principles and objectives of the EC Treaty, Title 4 of which refers to asylum policy as an important means of establishing an area of peace, security and justice.
Establishing a uniform asylum law and harmonised implementing provisions is therefore a Community objective.
The document presented by the Commission starts by explaining that legally binding instruments need to be adopted for the asylum procedure.
Eight specific points are dealt with: Communitisation of the Dublin system, EURODAC, minimum standards for admission, minimum standards for recognising refugees, minimum standards for granting or withdrawing refugee status, complementary, subsidiary protection, temporary protection for displaced persons and, last but not least, a division of the burden.
The Committee on Legal Affairs has also achieved a consensus which pleases me greatly; here too individual political objectives had to be put aside and we drafted a good opinion which was useful for Mr Schmitt' s report.
I think that we shall have a highly constructive vote in favour of our common ideal tomorrow.
I wish us all the courage and strength to push forward on the final point which you addressed.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to highlight two positive things.
The first is the working document presented by the Commission, which was the starting point for the report.
It is a sound basis for instituting a debate which should culminate at some point in a legal act setting out common standards for an asylum procedure.
The second is the report, which I particularly wish to highlight, because the rapporteur really has succeeded in finding a broad consensus right across the political divide on a very delicate matter.
That is no easy task and we have all experienced quite the opposite here, which is why this is an excellent piece of work.
I should like to pick up on three points which I think are particularly important and which I would ask the Commission to take into consideration.
The first is the question of how to divide the burden and has already been addressed.
We must not concentrate on just one aspect; we need to remain receptive to a distribution in terms of people.
If you look at refugee movements, you will see that they always affect the same countries.
Austria, for example, where I come from, is always near the top of the list when it comes to admitting temporary refugees or asylum seekers.
It is on a par with Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands.
Others have a much lighter burden to bear and greater solidarity between the Member States is needed here.
I should like to highlight the question of shortening and simplifying the qualification procedures without - and that is the crux of the matter - compromising careful examination.
It is an important point, because asylum seekers are entitled to a fast decision and a fast answer on their future status.
The third point is that which gives legal certainty and which, when implemented, helps to ensure that identical decisions are taken in all Member States.
It is the point which requires us to keep up-to-date lists of safe third countries and countries of origin.
It will help enormously if we manage to draw up these lists.
It attracted a broad consensus but I fear that this consensus will not perhaps hold up if all the amendments proposed by the Greens are included.
They want much that is positive, but they want a lot that is total, as Mrs Merkel once remarked.
If, for example, they want to implement the total extension of the definition of refugee or total access for asylum seekers to the job market or work to reverse the burden of proof, then the consensus achieved with their vote in committee will be jeopardised.
I call on them to consider withdrawing these proposed amendments so that the broad consensus can be maintained.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Pirker has addressed an important aspect of the debate now behind us, namely the fact that this was the first time we have held a debate over several months in a political field in which, for as long as I have been here in Parliament, we have only ever become entrenched, which was marked by a willingness all round to compromise and, more importantly, by the ability all round to compromise.
So let me say straight away that you, Mr Schmitt, have carried out what I see as an exemplary piece of work.
We always extend our ritual thanks to the rapporteur but, in this case, I should like to do so in a special way, by saying that you have astounded all of us sitting on the left side of this House.
The Secretary-General of the Berlin CDU, an important regional branch of the Christian-Democrat Union in Germany, has quite clearly stated in the report submitted here, and which bears his name, that he is in favour of maintaining the individual' s right to asylum as a fundamental right.
As a German Social Democrat, all I can say is well done!
Your party leadership in Berlin - I mean the federal, not the local leadership - maintains exactly the opposite, namely that an immigration law is needed and that the individual right to claim protection is therefore no longer needed.
Assert yourself in your party.
I guarantee that you will have the support of the German Social Democrats, if no-one else.
It is clear from what Mr Pirker has said that you have obviously been engaged in real missionary work in your group; but good works deserve to be praised.
What we have achieved - and Mr Pirker has indicated that he is ready to vote in favour - is a report which addresses the standards which need to be applied to the asylum procedure so that comparable conditions and requirements for applying for and claiming asylum can be created uniformly throughout the European Union.
When we speak of standards, we mean formal processes, procedural processes and we must do our best, in doing so, to guard against loading them with ideological connotations or questions of principle of a long-term, political nature.
That is one of the reasons why we are telling our fellow members in the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance that we reject all their proposed amendments except one.
This one amendment deals with remand pending deportation, which we too feel is an instrument worth examining.
I am not judging that.
We shall reject your proposed amendments because we need to learn in this Parliament, as legislators, that we should and must deal in the legislative process with the subject matter which needs to inform the law.
But here we are talking about the procedural, not the substantive right to asylum.
That is something else entirely.
The Greens' proposed amendments contain a discussion of the content, not the form of asylum law.
As you will certainly have noticed, we in the Socialist group have not filed any more proposed amendments to plenary; nor do we need to because the Schmitt report as voted by the committee corresponds in a very large measure to what we, as Socialists, have in mind: the fundamental vested right guaranteeing everyone who wishes to use it access to the procedure.
It is important to us to have a guarantee of legal support in the procedure in a form which ensures above all - and we consider this to be tremendous progress - that those involved in the procedure are dealt with in a language which they can understand, i.e. that they are given the support they need to understand the procedure, that they can claim legal counsel in every case, that they can appeal to the court against the initial administrative decision and, as the most decisive point for us - I would remind my German fellow members of the debate within Germany - that this appeal has a suspensive effect.
That is a huge step forward for us.
It also means - and we went into this in considerable detail in our contribution to the debate in committee - that, where the applicant has temporary leave to stay during the appeal procedure, this procedure cannot take years; on the contrary, there must be a fast-track procedure, because the public and the applicant both have a right to swift completion of the procedure.
All in all, Mr Schmitt has submitted a report which we in the group of the Party of European Socialists can support and I am fairly certain that this report will get what it deserves, i.e. a large majority.
Mr President, fellow members.
A word on a personal note: Today is the last sitting in which I shall act as coordinator of the group of the Party of European Socialists.
I shall soon be devoting myself to different tasks in my group.
I should therefore like to take this opportunity to thank all my fellow members, Mr Wiebenga, Mr Pirker, Mr Ceyhun and Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, with whom I have worked so closely in this capacity over recent years, for always cooperating with me so fairly and trustingly.
Mr President, we from the Liberal group will deeply miss Mr Schulz' s pure and crystal-clear democratic input in this area of policy.
It is unfortunate, but we wish you all the best in your new job.
This was the fun part of what I wanted to say.
What shape is the European asylum policy in?
That is hard to say, as there is not really a European asylum policy to speak of.
We in this Parliament, the delegates as well as their predecessors, have for years been pushing in the right direction.
So far, the European Commission, that is to say the present Commissioner' s predecessor, failed to come up with the goods but, prior to the Treaty of Amsterdam, had little say in the matter anyway.
The previous European Commission may have had the will, but did not have any power.
The bottleneck, as we quite often noticed, was located within the Council of Ministers.
Most governments showed willing too, but they were subject to the rule of unanimity.
Then there was the Tampere Summit.
Dozens of proposals were submitted there, also in this area of policy.
Things were looking up, according to many journalists.
They had, however, overlooked the fact that the crippling policy of decision-making on the basis of unanimity still applied.
It is unlikely that a scoreboard will be able to unlock this paralysis within policy.
All it will do is make it clear to the outside world which body and country are responsible for the paralysis within policy.
What needs to happen now?
All sorts of things need to happen.
As far as we, the Liberal group, are concerned, both the European Commission' s working document and Mr Schmitt' s report, which we are discussing today, are a useful leg-up to the next phase and, in our opinion, and I would echo the opinions of previous speakers, Mr Schmitt has adopted a level-headed approach in his report.
We will be voting in favour of the tenor of the report and we are backing it.
Mr President, the Treaty of Amsterdam made one thing clear: there is no way of getting past a common asylum and immigration policy.
The initiatives of the European Union on reuniting families, the anti-discrimination package, temporary protection for war refugees and, at long last, the attempt to harmonise asylum law make this very clear.
Now, with the Schmitt report - for which, by the way, I thank you in my capacity as coordinator of the Greens - we have the first clear stand by the European Parliament, even if a number of sensible proposed amendments - our proposals, which are also recommended by the UNHCR - have been rejected.
Mr Pirker, I do not see a problem with this - you can reject them again tomorrow.
One way or another, we shall be voting in favour of Mr Schmitt' s report.
These are the usual parliamentary rules of play and with them we can all live happily under one roof - that is my assumption.
Tempus fugit!
We must implement the Treaty of Amsterdam by the end of 2004.
There are difficulties at hand though.
The national states are often not prepared as yet to support European rules.
But this should not divert us from our purpose.
Mr Schmitt' s report goes in the right direction and calls on the Commission to take specific steps by proposing legislation.
I hope that we will be able to persuade the Member States of the merits of our approach.
Mr President, the Schmitt report draws Parliament' s attention to the extremely topical issue of defining clear, common standards governing the right to asylum.
This is necessary not only for legal and administrative reasons but also and especially in order to uphold the dignity of asylum seekers.
Clear, well-defined rules governing the matter are also necessary in order to avoid the right to asylum being confused with the problem of immigration.
I used the word 'problem' intentionally, for the very reason that the absence of an adequate immigration policy has meant that our citizens often perceive all forms of immigration as a problem, a burden and even a hazard, instead of as a social and economic resource and a source of cultural enrichment.
In Italy, for example, unregulated or, even worse, illegal immigration is related to organised crime.
In this confusion where illegal activity is ever increasing there are no rules and no certainties.
In particular, the human rights of neither European citizens nor immigrants are genuinely being upheld.
It is therefore urgent for us to define an immigration policy, and therefore also a reception policy and a migration flow control policy, a policy which takes into practical account the genuine existence of social phenomena and which refuses to be conditioned by ideologies.
This is the framework within which the right to asylum must take its place: it is a sacrosanct right which every self-respecting civil society must uphold.
This paper from the Commission paves the way for a drastic extension to the opportunities for implementing binding EU legislation.
It is a leap forward in the development of the Union, and that is what is behind my wishing to remind you of a simple fact, namely that the root cause of the asylum problem is social breakdown in countries in the vicinity of the EU.
East, and especially south, of the EU' s borders, an increasing majority of people live in a sea of social destitution and political oppression, and it is that which triggers the asylum problem.
The EU is the region' s superpower - economically, politically and militarily.
Political breakdown in neighbouring countries in the Balkans and in North Africa is the EU' s responsibility.
It is not just a question of passivity and sins of omission.
It is a question of the EU and the Member States having, by virtue of economic hegemony, political dominance and military power, contributed actively to the forms of social breakdown that turn our fellow human beings into refugees.
Do the EU' s institutions and Member States now want to change these basic conditions?
No, for these are the EU' s very rationale.
Is the main message of the Commission' s working document and of the report we have before us that there is a willingness to do something about the core problem?
No.
Nor are Christian love of neighbour and human solicitude, or even just general decency, the pivotal factors.
This document is another building block - and an important one - in that Fortress Europe we are constructing with all the means at our disposal to keep our wretched neighbours out in the cold.
It is not a question of our being obliged to guarantee legal rights to our fellow human beings.
Rather, we ought to be exercising justice in the sense of sharing the burden fairly, with the rich countries giving in accordance with their abilities.
We should not regard refugees as interested parties.
Moreover, the flow of refugees is limited.
Mr President, Commissioner, rapporteur, I would firstly like to acknowledge Mr Schulz.
I would like to say to you, Mr Schulz, from the bottom of my heart, something which I would like somebody one day to say about me: you have been a good adversary, that is to say, a hard adversary, always frank, forceful, often discomforting and there is no doubt that we will miss you.
Mr President, allow me now to come to the point and say that this seems to me to be an important Commission document because it genuinely launches a debate which many previous documents pointed to, in particular the Tampere conclusions, but the content of which needed to be clarified.
There is, without doubt, a great need to clarify the existing differences between the asylum procedure, reception conditions, the interpretation of the definition of a refugee, the links between that asylum procedure and the 'Dublin mechanism' procedures and other forms of protection and, in this respect, this document perfectly focuses the debate.
I am not going to mention all of the points highlighted by the other speakers, but I would like to insist on two points in particular.
Firstly, I believe that the Commission correctly relates the issues concerning asylum procedures, the object of a future directive, to the Dublin Convention procedure and the notion of a safe third country.
I must say in this regard that I have put forward an amendment which is against the system of lists.
It is problem of method.
Fiji was a secure country until a few days ago, and overnight it ceased to be one.
If we employ a system of closed lists, difficulties will arise in terms of keeping the lists up to date, which would cause enormous harm.
The other amendment which I have signed concerns the distribution of burdens.
We are all aware that the principle of solidarity requires a distribution of the consequences stemming from the current asymmetry in requests for asylum.
Firstly, we must say that if we achieve harmonised asylum procedures, the level of requests will also tend to become more homogenised.
Secondly, I would like to say that this report has one virtue which I would like to highlight amongst others - although I have been critical on some points - and that is that it very much insists on legal certainty, on judicial safeguards, on the asylum seeker' s right to defence and, in particular, on everything contained in point 4 and, of course, on everything relating to legal assistance, with the possibility of making contact with NGOs and the UNHCR.
Evidently, this fits in very badly with the measures on distribution by quotas which have an image which is closely connected to deportation.
Therefore, Mr President, I hope that certain groups, and in particular the PPE Group, will reconsider this amendment, which takes up the amendment of the Group of the Greens precisely.
In other words, it is not an amendment of a conservative or any other origin, nor of any particular geographical origin.
It takes up an amendment of the Group of the Greens which was not approved in committee and I believe it should receive the support of the House.
Mr President, now we have heard words of praise, we Greens, but we have also been attacked slightly.
Perhaps you are right to attack us, Mr Pirker, when we think slightly beyond what is planned here in this document.
For example, with regard to access to the labour market.
However, a fellow member in your group, if I remember correctly, our new Home Secretary, expressed a similar thought once.
We are also concerned here about the independence of asylum seekers and about social realities.
Mr Schulz has reproached us Greens on the same count.
As I said, perhaps you are right, but if we are talking about the individual right to asylum, then this also implies that there must be an individual examination in special cases.
That also forms part of the legal framework.
We cannot just evince an interest in what happens within the EU and consider that we have nothing more to do with what becomes of an applicant outside the EU.
It is no longer our sovereign territory, which is why this one proposed amendment is highly important and significant, precisely in order to ensure that there is no risk of persecution in the land of origin for rejected asylum seekers present on EU sovereign territory and that asylum seekers enjoy effective protection against refoulement in the third country to which they are deported.
That is the responsibility which we simply wish to accept in engaging in this debate, a debate which - and here you are right - needs further discussion and needs to be examined in much, much greater detail.
We have made a start, a good start and must progress hand in hand.
I shall be pleased if we progress by so much as a millimetre.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I must start by congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Schmitt, on his excellent report and on his suggestions for rationalising the Commission' s proposals.
The disappearance of internal borders and the creation of the area of freedom, security and justice require us to make an effort to harmonise our asylum and immigration policies and to reinforce checks at external borders.
As has already been said, if we are to address this problem seriously we must establish a clear distinction between the entry of asylum-seekers, within the meaning of the Geneva Convention on the status of refugees, the entry of migrants for economic or other reasons and the temporary reception of refugees from regions in crisis.
These are all different situations which must be treated differently.
The applications for asylum are not distributed evenly, as Mr Pirker pointed out.
There is clearly a disproportion in the number of asylum applications being recorded in each Member State.
This disproportion is bad for the European Union as a whole because it creates inequalities between Member States.
The procedures for granting legal refugee status and the conditions for assessing applications must therefore be harmonised so that these are equivalent in terms of the level of protection of asylum-seekers.
A cost-sharing policy must also be established.
Solidarity must be for all.
It is essential that common rules are adopted on the reception of asylum-seekers, on the requirements to be met in order to obtain refugee status and on the process of granting or refusing this status.
In particular these rules must prevent asylum applications being made simultaneously in several Member States.
Mr President, today marks the beginning of the second year of our mandate as Members of the European Parliament.
I hope that the next four years will be better and more fruitful for all of us.
I would, however, say that we have started our second year of parliamentary activity on an upbeat by discussing and - tomorrow, I believe - adopting this major initiative on the definition of common standards on asylum procedures.
There is nothing more European than this, and I therefore welcome Mr Schmitt' s report.
I support the report and agree with every word it contains.
A pensioner who, as a member of the Pensioners' Party, always comes to see me off at Bergamo airport when I come to Strasbourg, said to me: "Yes, I agree.
Exiles should be granted asylum.
It is right for refugees and those who have been persecuted who have to flee from their own land to be granted asylum, but I live on ITL 700 000 a month which is a day and a half of your travel allowance.
Who is going to help me?
I would be willing to help and even accommodate asylum seekers."
And I replied, "Do not worry.
You will see that the Commission will also use those who do not have work who are admitted into our country to help elderly people who are not self-sufficient and who need help."
In addition to this, I would argue that it is right for the burden of providing asylum to be divided, at last, between all 15 Member States of the European Union.
I hope that the Commission will bring this about, starting with the events in Kosovo, so that the States which bore the brunt of providing asylum for Kosovars will be reimbursed by all the other States.
Mr President, having seen over the years very difficult discussions in Parliament relating to this subject, it is indeed a pleasure for me this evening to see such widespread support for this report.
The sense of consensus is to be welcomed.
It is a good working document and we have a good basis to start working, so I congratulate the Commission as well.
I feel slightly uncomfortable, given that Ireland is the home of the Dublin Convention and has only very recently begun to receive an appreciable number of refugees and asylum seekers, that unfortunately, the Dublin Convention is not working terribly well.
About 85% of the people arriving in Ireland have not been stopped at the original port of call or processed in the country in which they originally arrived in the Community.
While I can fully appreciate and have great sympathy with the concerns of colleagues calling for burden-sharing, there is a fairly large amount of informal burden-sharing going on anyway.
Reception countries are happily turning a blind eye to the people passing through their countries on the way to third countries.
Having said that, I believe very strongly that we need to harmonise legal procedures so that we can offer a safe haven to those many people seeking refuge in the Community and also so as to have a humane and caring reception procedure that is uniform throughout the Community.
Because of the work I have been doing in this particular area I am very concerned about the criminal activities of some asylum seekers who are exploiting members of their own communities, through trafficking in women and young people.
Cooperation between police forces, where there is widespread information on prostitution amongst young girls in the Member States, has unfortunately to be an intrinsic part of our asylum policy.
What is clear, particularly in my own country at the moment, is that we must challenge the alarming rise in racism and xenophobia within our communities.
It is a deeply disturbing phenomenon in my own country.
We need clear implementation of good, humane laws and we will all benefit from them.
I thank Parliament for the support that has been expressed for this communication.
I especially congratulate the two rapporteurs, Mr Schmitt and Mrs Echerer, for their excellent reports.
I would ask you to convey my good wishes to Mr Schulz, who is no longer here.
I am sure he will come back to this debate, if not for functional duties, out of enthusiasm.
The Commission has now received reactions on this working document from several Member States, from numerous NGOs, and with the report of Parliament, will be in a position to fulfil one of the commitments of the scoreboard, which is to present a directive on minimum standards for asylum procedures.
It is my intention to present this proposal for a directive in the autumn of 2000.
I should like to remind the House that the Commission proposed to the Tampere European Council to adopt a single European asylum system.
But the decision of the European Council in Tampere was to endorse an approach based on minimum common standards.
So the directive is, in my opinion, the most relevant instrument to address these minimum standards for asylum procedures which will have to reflect the cornerstones of the policy of the European Union with regard to asylum as was underscored by the European Council in Tampere: an absolute respect for the right to seek asylum, a full and inclusive application of the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and maintaining the principle of non-refoulement.
The Commission welcomes the approach the European Parliament has taken in many parts of the motion for a resolution.
The Commission endorses the recital calling for asylum policy to be conducted on as factual a basis as possible.
We fully agree with Parliament that common standards of asylum procedures should not be based solely on the premise that administrative and judicial activities have to be expedited but should likewise be informed by the need to preserve the dignity of asylum seekers.
We have to recognise that finding a balanced solution between simplifying the procedures on the one hand and guaranteeing legal certainty and respect for the rights of asylum seekers on the other hand is not an easy task.
But we are determined to come up with a solution that can be considered with a broad consensus as a balanced solution.
The Commission shares the view of the European Parliament that entry of asylum seekers, migration for economic or other reasons and temporary admittance of displaced persons and refugees in the event of a mass influx must be treated as entirely separate matters.
The resolution calls for temporary protection within three years.
On 24 May 2000 the Commission adopted a directive on minimum standards for giving temporary protection in the event of a mass influx of displaced persons and on measures promoting a balance of effort between Member States in receiving such persons and bearing the consequences thereof.
We have already sent such a proposal for consultation with the European Parliament.
I should like to say that this proposal on temporary protection addresses explicitly the question raised by several speakers on burden-sharing as we have adopted an approach on burden-sharing on the proposal we have already submitted to the Council for a European fund for refugees.
So I should like to stress that this proposal cannot be seen as separate from the other proposals that are already on the table and that they take into account the sensitive question of solidarity among Member States.
I should like to remind the House that with regard to asylum, the scoreboard that has been submitted reflects the conclusions at the Tampere Summit where a two-stage approach was adopted by the Heads of State and Government.
The first step consists of harmonising standards relating to asylum and protection, and the second step is the introduction of a common asylum procedure as such.
To achieve the first step, the Commission will not only come up with a proposal for a directive on common standards for fair and efficient asylum procedures, which we are now discussing, but will also bring forward, inter alia and as soon as possible, proposals on the determination of the state responsible for the examination of an application and on common minimum conditions for reception of asylum seekers.
I should like to remind the House that, as I have already said, we have already put forward for consultation by Member States a working document that aims to replace the Dublin Convention by a Community regulation, having in mind the concrete experience and the vulnerabilities and deficiencies that have arisen in the application of the Dublin Convention.
With regard to the second step, the Tampere conclusions invited the Commission to come forward with a communication on a common asylum procedure and a uniform status for those who are granted asylum valid throughout the Union.
It is my intention that by the end of the year 2000 this communication will be brought forward.
The Commission notes - as has been emphasised by several speakers - that the European Parliament has taken a general position on rationalising Community law on asylum matters in this resolution.
The Commission will not only study the resolution very carefully in order to prepare its proposal for a directive on common standards on asylum procedures - that I reiterate will be presented in the autumn of this year - but will also reflect on them whilst preparing the communication it will put forward by the end of this year on a common asylum procedure in the long term.
I sincerely feel encouraged by the fact that this communication has such broad support in the House.
With such commitment, both from the Commission and Parliament, I sincerely hope we will succeed.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Crime victims in the EU
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0126/2000) by Mrs Srensen, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Rights and Freedoms, Justice and Home Affairs, on the communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee on crime victims in the European Union - Reflections on standards and actions [COM(1999) 349 - C5-0119/1999 - 1999/2122(COS)]
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, in this communication, the Commission has certainly demonstrated its willingness to make a tangible contribution towards improving the position of crime victims.
It points out that within an area of freedom, justice and security within the European Union, citizens must be entitled to effective legal protection.
The Commission would also like to launch a discussion on the treatment of victims and would like to see measures taken to improve their plight.
The Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs feels that a number of the proposed measures are too dependent on the goodwill of individual Member States and it calls for rules at a European level.
Why is this so necessary?
There are countless examples known to us of how victims have been treated in recent years: child abductions, in which case the parents and relatives are also the victims, victims of terrorist attacks, victims of organised crime, break-ins, robberies and the like, stalking, not to mention intimidation.
But victims must not suffer twice: firstly from a crime and secondly from the system.
There is a need for clarity concerning the rights of victims and for transparency concerning their status.
The measures proposed in the Commission communication appear to be geared exclusively towards victims from one Member State in another Member State, or third country victims legally resident in one Member State in another Member State.
However, the package of measures should also take account of Member State victims in third countries and third country citizens illegally resident in a Member State.
The status of a victim should not have any effect on his rights or on the possibility of acquiring such rights.
In the context of the enlargement of the European Union, particular attention should be paid to the treatment of victims from the candidate countries.
Since they are concerned with both civil and criminal procedures, the Treaties provide the European Union with instruments for increasing the protection of crime victims on its territory.
It is regrettable, however, that the unanimity rule currently applies.
The scoreboard submitted by the Commission for reviewing progress in implementing the area of liberty, security and justice should be modified in such a way as to guarantee and speed up the legislative follow-up to the present directive.
It is disturbing, however, that the measures concerned with aid to crime victims are not intended to come into effect until 2004 in this scoreboard.
We cannot let victims wait for that long.
By providing measures in 2001, victims will at long last be able to look forward to fair treatment.
After all, treating victims with understanding and dignity also plays a preventive role.
The proper treatment of victims will help destigmatise them and enhance their emblematic role.
When granting aid to victims, it is important not only to provide financial and legal assistance, but also to take measures first of all in the field of anonymity, privacy and safety of the victims, as well as in connection with the religious and cultural aspects, and to provide medical, psychological and social assistance.
In addition, it is important to recognise the family of the victim as fellow victims and as witnesses, and to recognise the right to be assisted by an interpreter and to be questioned in the mother tongue.
A special system should also be set up for the legal, psychological and physical protection of victims of domestic violence, stalking and genital mutilation.
In particular, additional measures are required for minors.
For this purpose, specially equipped rooms need to be provided where the questioning of minors can be registered on video, so that they are not obliged to be confronted more than once with a traumatic experience.
It must immediately be possible to provide the victim with material, medical, psychological and social assistance which is free of charge at the time of being offered.
Victims should also be informed of the availability of the various forms of assistance.
It is extremely important that, depending on the nature of the crime, specialist assistance is provided.
In this context, it is important to do away with a number of prejudices: some forms of crime are regarded more seriously in some countries than in others.
There is also evidence of a discriminatory response to victims reporting crime.
Member States should be obliged to set up special police units for crime victims.
I would also draw attention to the importance of a legal basis for, and harmonisation of, the measures for protecting victims.
The study carried out under the Grotius programme by An Wergens provides the requisite basic information.
The useful experience available in respect of existing measures in certain Member States can play an important role in harmonising measures or drawing up a common package of measures.
An initiative of this kind is a first step towards crime prevention.
But given the fact that organised, cross-border crime is on the increase, the initiative should culminate in a common prevention programme on a European and international scale.
Finally, pending the introduction of a harmonised instrument for cross-border protection of victims, the Member States themselves and the candidate countries, in conjunction with NGOs, will need to enhance the protection of victims.
It is also important to assess safety aspects in urban development and spatial planning in order to prevent crimes.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentleman who have been so patient.
Talking about strengthening the position of crime victims is like relating a story with a happy ending.
From the beginning, we met palpable resistance from many quarters, but now most people agree that this is something important and commendable.
This applies to all the European institutions.
We need to focus upon the victims' perspective and upon strengthening their rights in the Union.
People who make use of their freedom of movement should not have to be exposed to crime.
If they do in fact become crime victims, they should at least not have to suffer twice and end up in a worse situation than citizens of the country concerned who are themselves crime victims.
This applies irrespective of what the particular crime might be.
The position of crime victims ought therefore to be strengthened on a number of levels.
One can hardly talk about strengthening the position of crime victims without also talking about crime prevention measures.
In November 1997, Parliament took the initiative and requested an action plan regarding preventive measures.
An action plan of this kind was adopted by the Council in December 1998.
These questions were highlighted again in Tampere in the autumn of 1999.
We have embarked upon a new process.
The best way of helping crime victims is, in fact, to ensure that no crimes are committed, but that cannot always be done in practice.
The best way of preventing crime is to disseminate information.
To be able to devise an effective crime prevention strategy, we need in fact to know what we are talking about.
For example, there are still no definitions of the concepts of crime victim and organised crime.
In addition to introducing crime prevention measures, the position of crime victims must be strengthened in more concrete terms once crimes have actually been committed.
It is partly a question of making people more aware.
Crime victims ought also to know to what rights and possible forms of aid they are in fact entitled.
Most Member States have services which provide crime victims with some form of first aid.
Travellers may, sometimes more than the local population, require various forms of specific aid.
This may take the form of special measures including help with language and translations, as well as psychological help.
The police, social services and non-governmental organisations of various kinds will, of course, be involved in providing these forms of aid.
European cooperation has, in actual fact, already been devised and is in the process of development.
In particular, the European Forum for Victim Services has developed sound guidelines relating to the position of crime victims.
The Commission' s proposal involves introducing minimum standards for receiving crime victims with a view to being able to provide them with information and support where necessary.
This is excellent.
The police will play an important role because they are the point of first contact, and special training is often required in this connection.
It is difficult for foreign crime victims to follow the legal proceedings at a distance, which is why special measures are also required to guarantee the legal position of foreign crime victims.
Discussion of this issue began in the Commission during the last session under Commissioner Gradin of Sweden.
The issue will be taken up again under the Swedish Presidency.
In actual fact, this is, in a way, a story with a happy ending because there is quite a lot of agreement as to the objectives.
Thinking European is often the same as moving Europe forward.
In this case, we have common interests across party divides and national frontiers.
There ought, therefore, to be good opportunities to think European.
I therefore welcome the Commission' s communication and I want quite especially, of course, to thank Mrs Srensen for her work on this report - a report we fully support.
We shall then wish to urge the Commission to come back with directives.
We hope for concrete action in the future.
The necessary conditions are broadly present.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, when these issues are addressed, the public authorities are usually more concerned about the aspects of dissuasion and security, crime prevention, approval of penal frameworks and action by police forces and the legal apparatus.
However, it is also essential that we consider the people most affected by crime: its victims.
Whoever they are, we cannot allow them to become a double victim, firstly of the crime and then of the system.
Adequate protection must be guaranteed for crime victims within our Union and it is essential that equal treatment for these victims is also guaranteed, whether in court or before the authorities.
Active means of support must also be developed.
The personal dignity of the victim must be respected and their safety, privacy and family must be protected given that this Union which we are gradually building is based on respect for rights and freedoms, guarantees of safety for people and their property and effective legal protection.
In other words, this is a Union based on the values which characterise contemporary democracies.
We therefore welcome the Commission' s initiative which is clearly compatible with the effort to create an area of freedom, security and justice.
It is essential that there are minimum rules on the protection of crime victims which ensure, throughout the European Union, an adequate level of legal assistance in cross-border proceedings.
This is particularly important on issues such as access to justice, protection and effective application of the rights of victims in proceedings or their right to participate, receive the necessary aid, obtain and provide information, understand and be understood and so on.
Victims must also have the right to compensation for damages, including court costs.
Mr President, I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report.
It is an important area and she has rightly drawn attention to it.
It refers to the new powers of the Community over the last few years: rights of asylum, immigration and general cooperation in civil matters.
It is therefore crucial that we use these powers to improve the position of victims of crime.
At the time of the crime, especially personal, physical or violent crime, many victims, if not all, will be vulnerable, distressed, upset, probably angry, and desperately in need of support.
As the rapporteur has said, they do not need to become victims again.
Nor do they need to feel that they are being branded almost as criminals themselves.
We need to ensure - and this report goes a long way towards it - that the procedures do not negate the situation or make it worse, but rather, that they support and assist the victims.
The rapporteur has said that we also need to make certain that safeguards are in place so that there is no intrusion into the privacy of victims.
We must in particular draw attention to intrusion or possible intrusion by the press.
I am particularly pleased that this report includes support in the language or dialect of the victim of crime because sometimes that is an area that is overlooked.
Likewise the necessity for training of police officers and others in authority.
Ethnic minorities, very often women, children - those who sometimes find the system difficult - will be the ones who are most at risk in this sort of situation.
Those who perhaps are in fear of authority are especially vulnerable.
The PSE Group is pleased to support this report and to congratulate the rapporteur.
However, there will be no surprise that we will reject those amendments that have been put down in the name of certain members of the TDI Group.
Those amendments do not improve the report; rather they are a crude attempt to add the biased, distorted and racist sentiment of the signatories concerned.
I congratulate the rapporteur on her work.
I congratulate the Commission on bringing this forward, and I wish it every success in the future.
Mr President, on behalf of the Liberal Group, I should like to welcome this report and to thank Mrs Srensen for her excellent work in drawing up such an important document.
I welcome the underlying Commission communication, but I would say, on behalf of my Group, that we regret that this communication was not much stronger.
It is quite clear that the Treaties provide the Union with the instruments that are necessary to strengthen protection of the victims of crime.
I think, for example, of some of the conclusions of the Wergens report, and we would have expected more from the Commission than proposals for greater dialogue and the exchange of best practice.
We need clear measures to help victims with access to assistance, justice and compensation.
However, it must be said that if we feel the Commission could do more, the biggest problem is by far the Member States.
It seems to us incredible that seven Member States have still not ratified the 1983 Convention on compensation for victims of violent crime and that standards of justice are still so low in so many Member States.
Let me give just one brief example from my own constituency.
Mr Pike, a lorry driver in my constituency, was recently assaulted by his employer in the Netherlands.
Mr Pike is not a wealthy man and the cost of legal redress is high.
He does not have access to legal aid in Britain because he has to employ a lawyer in the Netherlands to help him.
He does not have access to legal aid in the Netherlands.
He is unable to secure any compensation or, indeed, any justice for the injuries he has suffered.
Unless we are able as a Union to help in relatively clear and simple situations like this, our citizens will not have confidence in the single market and will not feel part of the European Union.
I hope that we can take up some of the ideas put forward in this report to improve their situation.
Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur, Patsy Srensen, for the care and accuracy of her report.
On the other hand, I would like to focus my attention on the presentation of various amendments to the draft text which include people affected by terrorism as the victims of crime in the EU.
I completely agree with this, as well as the fact that certain groups use violence to try to impose their ideals.
What I believe, Mr President, is that when we speak of imposing ideals, and of victims, we should not only refer to terrorist organisations, of which there are too many and which must cease to exist in a democracy such as the one we want for Europe.
In this respect, we must also reject and condemn the impositions and violence sometimes exercised by bodies and apparatus of the states, as in the case of GAL and other previous cases in Spain.
Democratic justice must apply to all without exception, and moral reparations and material, medical, psychological and social aid etc. must reach all the victims of terrorism without exception, including, of course, the victims of the above-mentioned state-sponsored groups.
Only in this way, acting fairly, will we achieve a Europe which lives in peace and prosperity, which is the founding aim of our Community and I believe that this is still our greatest aspiration.
Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for her valuable work.
The Commission has tackled a very important issue in its communiqu.
The question of more effective help for the victims of crime will not be solved merely by improved legislation.
We can only make permanent improvements through combined, broad-based dialogue on the part of NGOs and the national authorities.
Compared to the authorities, NGOs often, in practice, have more flexible and versatile approaches to problem solving.
For example, Internet-based info-banks and service telephones provided through voluntary work could be developed in parallel with the services provided by the authorities.
The rigid nature of the courts and especially the high costs involved often prevent victims of crime from discovering their rights.
The situation is in untenable conflict with EU principles of the rule of law.
People have to enjoy true justice without having to pay for it.
The minimum level of legal protection in the Member States of the EU must not be allowed to slip to that which exists in the United States.
The EU and its Member States must also ensure that the victims of crime do not have to suffer twice over for the wrong done them.
In particular, when it comes to organised crime, many victims forsake the opportunity to go to trial as a result of pressures or for fear of vengeance.
EU Member States must develop more effective cooperation among the authorities in post-trial situations, for example, in the areas of plaintiff and witness protection programmes.
The added value of Europol in this process must also be investigated carefully.
Mr President, I welcome the Commission communication on victims of crime in the European Union, since it studies the process of creating common policies, as well as greater cooperation between the Member States at a time when we are all aware, including this Parliament of course, of the need for this type of communitisation.
Bearing in mind the enormous number of citizens of the European Union who suffer as a result of crime and, in particular, terrorism, I welcome this report which we are debating today since it contains certain points which, in my view, are particularly noteworthy.
One is the sensitivity it shows by specifically highlighting the fact that there are certain social groups - women, children, immigrants, homosexuals - who are more vulnerable than the rest of the population, as well as the fact that there are also certain sectors who, ignoring the most basic democratic principles, prefer to use violence to impose their objectives.
We must start by achieving a common definition of the concept of the victim to include families and dependants, since they also suffer the consequences of crime.
On the other hand, I also fully share the opinion that everybody resident in the Union should be clearly included, so that they may be subject to all the different measures that we are debating today, regardless of their status.
Nevertheless, it is regrettable that the adoption of the proposed measures is to be postponed until 2004, since I believe that they must be adopted as soon as possible.
From another point of view and bearing in mind the ever increasing importance and influence of the media in our society, special attention should be paid to the way in which the media deal with the reality of these people, which is not always respectful of individual rights, above all when we are talking about minors, whether they be victims or delinquents.
With regard to these people it is also necessary to apply certain measures so that they can rebuild their lives correctly, not only from an economic point of view, but also through psychological, legal, medical and social assistance.
To sum up, they should be guaranteed full protection and, for that purpose, I am convinced that it is absolutely essential to cooperate with the NGOs and associations in the sector in every Member State.
I must finally stress my deep concern about the need to pay due attention to the victims of terrorism, since these are people who suffer from a very serious and specific form of crime which, unfortunately, does not only take place in my country, Spain, and which threatens democratic coexistence and freedom.
Mr President, as the Commission says in the introduction to its communication, we cannot seriously speak of a citizens' Europe without dealing with the rights of victims.
I would like to express my agreement with what has been said by other speakers about the hope that the Commission will be more ambitious than it has been in this communication.
I also urge it be ambitious.
Please allow me, Mr President, to focus on the problem of the victims of terrorism.
I must begin by expressing my regret at the fact that a certain Member who spoke previously gave the impression that he reluctantly accepted the importance of the victims of terrorism, and then straight away focussed on other issues.
However, I would like to highlight the importance of this report and Mrs Srensen' s cooperation.
This is a balanced report which has been sensitive to the victims of terrorism, because if there are three groups of victims which must receive our special attention, they are, as the Treaty says, victims of trafficking in human beings, victims of crime against children and victims of terrorism.
I must therefore congratulate Mrs Srensen, since she has hit the nail on the head by stressing that certain groups need specific attention.
We must not forget that complete attention must involve psychological attention.
This complete attention must also involve the consideration of family relatives as also being victims.
This is especially true in the case of terrorism.
Therefore, Mr President, I believe that this is a step which we hope will encourage the Commission to implement, with the Treaty of Amsterdam in their hands, more ambitious measures in this area.
This, as the Commission says very clearly, is an obligation for all of us if we want to be able to speak proudly of a citizens' Europe.
Mr President, first of all, I should like to mention, as a starting point, Mrs Cederschild' s speech.
It has traditionally been felt that victim protection is primarily a matter of compensating victims.
It should be noted that the Commission communication differs from this in offering a broader approach to issues of the European level protection of victims of crime.
I must stress the role played by my predecessor, Anita Gradin, in initiating debate on these issues within the Commission and the European institutions.
This broader approach takes the view that the issue of victims also necessitates work on prevention, information, practical help and the status of victims in criminal trials.
I should like to stress the fact that the Tampere European Council endorsed this broader approach.
That is why it declared that it is in the Union' s interest to adopt minimum standards for the protection of victims of crime, specifically with regard to access to justice for these victims and their right to compensation, including the reimbursement of their legal fees.
This issue must not only be addressed at European level, but the Tampere Council also recommends establishing national programmes to finance both public and non-governmental measures for the assistance and protection of victims.
The Commission is therefore delighted at Mrs Srensen' s excellent report, on which I congratulate her.
We are fully prepared to work in accordance with the broad general guidelines presented in this report.
The Commission agrees fully with the approach for the need to develop victim support networks, particularly language support.
By the same token, we share the rapporteur' s concern at the special attention that needs to be paid to particular categories of victim, such as foreign nationals, minors, and victims of sexual violence, the trade in human beings or terrorist acts.
It is equally important that we improve the training of staff likely to come into contact with such victims.
Lastly, Parliament quite rightly stresses the importance of protecting the privacy and anonymity of victims and witnesses, specifically where the media is concerned.
This is a sensitive issue, but one we must support, as it is crucial to safeguarding the dignity of victims of crime.
What are we currently doing?
So far the Commission has collected the views of non-governmental organisations, and we feel that it is very important to hear Parliament' s opinion too.
We are paying close attention to a proposal for a framework decision on the protection of victims in Europe, which is already under consideration by the Council.
This proposal was submitted by the Portuguese Presidency and we agree with its broad philosophy.
This proposal for a framework decision, which, as you know, is a legislative instrument specific to the third pillar, provides for the development of all victim support mechanisms and for making it easier for crime victims located far afield to take part in trials by setting up systems for giving evidence in either written or video form.
The proposal also provides for separate waiting rooms for victims to be established, enabling them to avoid, as much as possible, meeting the perpetrator of the crime against them.
We are already, however, working at a level beyond this framework-decision.
As Mrs Srensen pointed out, moreover, the Commission is anxious to make use of all courses of action provided for in the Treaty to provide better protection for victims, and here I am referring to Articles 65 and 66 of the Treaty establishing the European Community and to Article 31(E) of the Treaty on European Union.
Indeed, it is the Commission' s view that the measures dealing with the provision of victim support, that is, the standards which the support services must meet, the creation of victim support helplines, and all the issues to do with information and with linguistic support for victims of crime, should be regulated by instruments that come under the first pillar.
The same applies to the intervention mechanisms for possible compensation funds with regard to the joint regulations, the conditions of eligibility for the funds, the possibility of advances, and coordination with insurance schemes and between national victim compensation funds.
We are already establishing contacts with the future Swedish Presidency, which, this autumn, with support from the Grotius programme, will be organising a special seminar specifically on compensation mechanisms.
Similarly, in a very practical move, the Commission has already decided to carry out a study into the feasibility of establishing a European victim aid system in the form of a free multilingual telephone helpline.
Many Members have expressed regret that the Commission' s scoreboard only provides for measures on aid for crime victims from 2004 onwards.
As I have already had occasion to explain several times, 2004 is the cut off date to which we are bound under the 1998 Vienna action plan.
Nevertheless, as you see, the Commission is already committed to working without delay on this issue, which is so important for the people of Europe, and I hope that we will have achieved tangible results even before 2004.
Thank you, Commissioner.
I should just like to say, if you do not mind, that I could be tempted to take bets on what language you use to address Parliament.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow, at 12 noon.
Late payment in commercial transactions
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0154/2000) by Mr Murphy, on behalf of the Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on combating late payment in commercial transactions (C5-0225/2000 - 1998/0099(COD))
Mr President, unfortunately Mr Murphy cannot be here with us this evening and I therefore have the honour of representing him here today.
However, I am at a disadvantage.
I was not involved in the work of the conciliation committee, although I have studied the documents.
So please forgive me if I am not quite as well informed as the members who helped in the conciliation procedure.
I should like to thank those members because, even as someone who was not involved, I can say that this is an important directive.
It is important to SMEs, it is important to the public sector, it is probably a far more important instrument for promoting employment than many of the resolutions passed here in this House.
I can still remember the earlier debates: late payments are a breach of contract and this directive stipulates that the purchaser must pay the vendor the full sum owed within 30 days of receipt of the goods.
Otherwise, he must pay a penalty in the form of interest etc.
Discussions with the Council gave rise to a whole series of problems which we have now managed to settle, several sittings later.
One of the main problems was the question of retention of title, whereby the vendor retains ownership of the goods pending full payment.
It was also agreed that freedom of contract cannot be invoked in order to limit the effects of the so-called anti-abuse clause.
We have agreed on a clear regulation here which ensures that the debtor cannot procure additional liquidity or additional advantages at the creditor' s expense.
In addition - and this was an important point - the principle of equal treatment between the public and private sectors has been acknowledged.
As far as interest is concerned, we have compromised between the 6% proposed by Council and the 8% proposed by Parliament, agreeing in the conciliation procedure on 7%.
All in all, it is a reasonable result and, I repeat, it is a result which will mainly help SMEs in the Union.
I personally was most surprised to read that late payments were one of the main reasons for bankruptcies in Europe.
Apparently some 450,000 jobs are lost in the EU every year as a result.
We often spend a great deal of money on very few jobs.
Here we are achieving the desired effect cost-free, as it were, and I think that Parliament should make it clear to the outside world that it has done job security a huge service.
Allow me to close with one more comment regarding the Commission.
Late payments are a breach of contract even when it is the Commission which is late paying.
This does not figure in the directive but, in my experience as an MEP, we often hear complaints when we visit SMEs and large companies alike, that the Commission is often far too late honouring the payment commitments which it has entered into in research promotion or other areas.
I hope that the Commission will be guided by the spirit of this directive and make its own payments on time, because here too, I repeat, this is breach of contract.
My warmest thanks once again to everyone involved and I hope that Parliament will vote in favour of this compromise tomorrow.
Mr President, about four or five years ago, former Commissioner Christos Papoutsis told me at a meeting that he was considering some sort of attempt to regulate late payments.
I smiled and told him that I wished such a thing were possible, because it would be a relief to millions of SMEs, but that I thought it would be extremely difficult.
I am pleased that we now have before us a directive making that wish come true.
We have heard and we know what it costs SMEs, what it costs the European economy, what it costs workers when certain companies, which can and do throw their financial and purchasing weight around, or public sectors which can and do throw their weight around, acquire extra liquidity free of charge, at no cost to them, but at the expense, mainly, of SMEs.
Approximately half a million workers lost their jobs and one in four companies went bust because bigger and stronger companies got away with not paying them on time.
Today marks the beginning of a new era, an era which will, of course, dawn in two years' time, once this directive, which gives SMEs different prospects for a different future, has been transposed into national legislation.
It gives them reason to believe that they too have the power to trade in a fair competitive environment, an environment which has been missing all these years, an environment which the SMEs of the European Union have been trying in vain to achieve.
Have you any idea how soul-destroying it is when a small businessman, with limited access to bank loans, is expected to subsidise companies with a far bigger cash flow or the huge public sector of a country?
It is a bitter pill to swallow.
What I can say is that the negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council were a most pleasant experience.
Of course, I can say now that it was a pleasant experience because the outcome has been extremely positive for Parliament.
And it would be no exaggeration to say that Parliament was the institution of the European Union which understood exactly where the interests of European society and European business lie, which is why we used all our arguments and exerted all our pressure to persuade the Council that all the European Parliament' s proposed amendments went in the right direction.
And, of course, I must thank the SMEs and Parliament and the Executive Commission, which also helped to achieve this result, and it is a good result.
Finally, I should like to close by saying that every SME in the European Union and millions of workers in small- and medium-sized commercial, handicraft and professional companies in the European Union will look towards us tomorrow, towards the plenary of the European Parliament in Strasbourg, in the belief that a new day has dawned for them.
Mr President, I have already received many reactions from within the SME world to the text that we will be adopting tomorrow and, partly on behalf of all these SMEs, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the work.
I hope that Mr Linkohr will pass on these congratulations to Mr Murphy.
I would also like to thank the Commission for its cooperation, which has been as constructive as ever.
We should be proud of the common text which we will be adopting tomorrow and which we were able to adopt in the Conciliation Committee.
It is regulating what should be regulated.
Nothing more, nothing less.
It is also regulating matters to the extent that they need to be regulated at European level.
Again, nothing more, nothing less.
And it is regulating matters in a legally well-organised way.
We can defend it perfectly from all angles, both with regard to transactions between traders and transactions between traders and the government.
Mr President, as early as in 1993 - at the very outset of the internal market - we, together with Parliament, asked the Commission to submit a proposal to regulate late payments.
Initially, the Commission' s reaction was low-key, in the form of a recommendation.
It subsequently took a tougher line with a proposal for binding rules.
It took all of us two years to make the political choices and to formulate them in a technically correct manner.
We have now provided the framework; all that is left now is the transposition.
The Member States have been given two years to do this in.
Let us hope, together with the thousands of SMEs in whose interest it is for the Member States to respect the transposition period, that our Member States act more swiftly.
In fact, let us encourage them to do so.
As far as I am concerned, a European Cup should go to the Member State which manages to finish its homework first.
I have another question for the Commission.
I should like to have known whether it plans to formulate proposals on conditions for setting up debt-collecting agencies, which is one of the issues which we discussed for a long time in the course of the preliminary work but which we left out of this directive for a good reason.
My question is whether the Commission is planning to make proposals in this respect at a later stage and, if so, when?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in my view, this directive is, without doubt, the most important directive for the small and family-run businesses of Europe.
A good day' s work deserves a good day' s pay.
But some have had to wait for it longer than others.
The stronger the partner, the more power he has to make a business wait.
Here, for the first time, we have a regulation which ensures that the company' s liquidity is secured once the service has been provided, and within a foreseeable period of time.
I am delighted that we are debating today in the small circle, because you can see that this directive is totally uncontested and that the European Parliament stands fully behind this directive.
We know that some 450,000 jobs are lost every year as the result of late payments.
When we talk about job security and job creation, then we have a very important and crucial directive here which helps us to secure 450,000 jobs a year in Europe.
That deserves the headlines in the press but, as you know, the fight for jobs is already taken for granted.
I am proud of the fact that the European Parliament is making such an important contribution to this.
This initiative was intensively promoted to start with by Marianne Thyssen, Mr Folias and Mr Murphy and we are proud of such an excellent result in the House.
Payment within 30 days, precautions to ensure that payments are actually made and that the company receives the money within 90 days.
It is a sensational result.
Congratulations!
I am proud to be a member of this Parliament.
Mr President, allow me to begin by congratulating everyone who has been involved in the creation of this directive and especially those who have done the hard work of negotiating during the conciliation procedure, which I know has been hard, although I personally have not followed it - I followed the two readings, but not this third reading.
As the esteemed Member, Mrs Thyssen, has said, this directive deals with what it can and must deal with, no more and no less.
I believe that this is a magnificent definition.
The Commission' s initial proposal was much more ambitious, but since we are moving in that pioneer territory of the internal market - that territory which involves elements which are still the competence of the Member States such as procedural rules and civil law, ownership reservations, or Article 5 of the procedure for the recovery of non-contested debt etc...- the Commission' s proposal was not in accordance with the Treaty, since we lacked a legal basis.
The present proposal is less complete, if you like, but no less effective.
I believe that it will have significant repercussions, which have been listed by previous speakers.
Above all, I am going to highlight one more, and that is that it opens up the road to seriously dealing with the need to fully enter into this pioneer territory.
This is because, today, there are still genuine obstacles to the perfection of the internal market, genuine obstacles to the four freedoms laid down in the Treaty, precisely because we do not have a clear legal basis.
Now, with the Treaty of Amsterdam, we may have a clearer legal basis, but we must make a great effort to establish effective coordination and harmonisation in all of these areas.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, rarely does a directive have such wide-reaching social implications as the one we are discussing today.
It will affect millions of small businesses and millions of individuals who carry on economic activities, even though this may not as yet be apparent.
In my opinion, the forecast, as it was established at the end of the negotiations between the Council and Parliament, is precise and essentially correct.
A balance has been found which will certainly influence the relations between buyers and sellers significantly.
It is a measure which facilitates the market, not one which places restrictions on it, although it does lay down rules - for rules are sometimes essential in order to maintain the free market - and it is therefore a positive preventive action which essentially protects the weakest: both those who are weakest financially and those who are weakest socially.
There are some areas of Europe - including certain areas of Italy, for example - where a very successful company has a substantial, decisive, unambiguous influence on the market, which almost amounts to a monopoly.
Clearly, this company influences not only prices but also time frames, including settlement periods.
This is sometimes negative for those who need to work and are forced to have recourse to this company.
The issue is that of equal conditions for public and private industry, which I see as a positive thing and which will affect, or, rather, will be a positive development for public accounts.
In fact, you will be aware that public companies settle within a certain period, and this time limit means that it will no longer be possible for private companies who deal with the public sector to impose large, excessive burdens on public companies.
Consequently, public expenditure will also be reduced.
Mr President, in one way it is a good thing that the public in the 15 European states does not take too much notice of what we are doing, especially on evenings such as this where you, Mr President, the Commissioner, seven members and roughly the same number of officials must stand by our posts.
This is an issue which is seemingly unimportant but which in fact affects several million companies - I myself am a small businessman - and tens of millions of consumers.
There is a proverb in Italian: Non e mai troppo tarde - it is never too late!
But it is too late for many small and medium-sized enterprises, family businesses and young entrepreneurs.
And many companies will not survive the delay before what we will hopefully decide by a large majority tomorrow is actually transposed into law.
Unfortunately they will no longer be able to take a positive view, as entrepreneurs, of this positive step in the right direction.
It will help SMEs, bring greater legal certainty and improve property rights; in the final analysis it is an employment programme, providing help for young enterprises and family businesses but also protection for the consumer.
I think that this aspect cannot be stressed enough.
All that is left is for me to thank all those involved, who have striven over the years to achieve this result.
I hope that the intended beneficiaries will indeed be able to reap the benefits of it as quickly as possible.
Mr President, the Commission should like to take this opportunity in this debate to congratulate the European Parliament and particularly its rapporteur, Mr Murphy, on the very positive result achieved in the Conciliation Committee.
The tough negotiations, as good negotiations always are, have made the adoption of this directive possible.
I am convinced, and several speakers have underlined this, that this is a particularly important directive for European businesses as it affects all commercial transactions between these businesses and between authorities, in both the public and private sector.
In saying this I believe I have responded to a comment made by Mr Linkohr.
We hope and we are convinced that the directive will have a positive impact on the daily commercial transactions of all businesses, whether these are large multinationals or small and medium-sized undertakings.
However, it is only right to point out that this type of directive is essentially intended for small and medium-sized undertakings because, given the operating rules of the market, it is these which will gain the most positive benefits from the effectiveness of the directive on late payments.
I am convinced that we have therefore adopted a legal framework which is simultaneously serious, rigorous and effective.
The Commission will do everything in its power not only to guarantee the appropriate transposition of this directive into national law during the next two years but also to reassess the late payment situation in the future in view of the actual application of the directive.
I must conclude by again congratulating Mr Murphy and this House on the decision to be taken.
Mr President, I had asked the Commission whether it intended to submit a proposal on conditions for the setting up, and mutual recognition of, debt-collecting agencies in Europe.
I appreciate that this does not fall within the remit of the Commissioner and that he is unable to provide me with an answer right now.
But I would like to receive a reply in due course, because this issue has been the subject of many a discussion in previous meetings.
Mr President, given the Cartesian evidence that this is not an issue falling within my area of responsibility, I can only say to the Member that I have noted her question and that, as usual, the Commission will certainly give her a direct answer.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
(The sitting was closed at 11.30 p.m.)