# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	MultiUN
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-MultiUN/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/MultiUN.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
United Nations
Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
Sixty-sixth session (21 February-11 March 2005) Sixty-seventh session (2-19 August 2005)
General Assembly
Official Records
Sixtieth session
Supplement No. 18 (A/60/18)
General Assembly
Official Records Sixtieth session Supplement No. 18 (A/60/18)
Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
Sixty-sixth session (21 February-11 March 2005) Sixty-seventh session (2-19 August 2005)
United Nations • New York, 2005
Note
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Chapter Paragraphs Page
Letter of transmittal 1
States parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 1 - 2 3
B Sessions and agendas 3 - 4 3
C. Membership and attendance 5 - 6 3
Officers of the Committee 7 4
E. Cooperation with the International Labour Organization, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Law Commission, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the right of everyone to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health and the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights 8 - 13 5
Other matters 14 - 15 6
Adoption of the report 16 6
PREVENTION OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION, INCLUDING EARLY WARNING AND URGENT PROCEDURES 17 - 20 7
Decision 1 (66) on New Zealand Foreshore and Seabed Act 2004 18 7
Decision 2 (66) on Darfur 18 8
Decision 1 (67) on Suriname 19 9
Decision on follow-up to the declaration on the prevention of genocide: indicators of patterns of systematic and massive racial discrimination 20 10
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS, COMMENTS AND INFORMATION SUBMITTED BY STATES PARTIES UNDER ARTICLE 9 OF THE CONVENTION 21 - 414 13
Australia 21 - 48 13
Azerbaijan 49 - 70 18
Bahrain 71 - 94 22
France 95 - 124 26
Ireland 125 - 152 30
Lao People's Democratic Republic 153 - 181 35
Luxembourg 182 - 203 40
Barbados 204 - 228 43
Georgia 229 - 255 46
Iceland 256 - 275 51
Nigeria 276 - 306 54
Turkmenistan 307 - 335 61
United Republic of Tanzania 336 - 362 67
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 363 - 388 71
Zambia 389 - 414 75
Letter to Botswana 416 80
Decision 3 (66) on Suriname 417 81
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
Reports overdue by at least 10 years 425 85
Reports overdue by at least five years 426 85
C. Action taken by the Committee to ensure submission of reports by States parties 427 - 430 86
Decisions 431 - 434 87
Declaration on the prevention of genocide
General recommendation XXXI on the prevention of racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system
CONSIDERATION OF COPIES OF PETITIONS, COPIES OF REPORTS AND OTHER INFORMATION RELATING TO TRUST AND NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES TO WHICH GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTION 1514 (XV) APPLIES, IN CONFORMITY WITH ARTICLE 15 OF THE CONVENTION 461 - 464 109
THIRD DECADE TO COMBAT RACISM AND RACIAL DISCRIMINATION; FOLLOW-UP TO THE WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM, RACIAL DISCRIMINATION, XENOPHOBIA AND RELATED INTOLERANCE 466 - 467 111
CONTENTS (continued)
Chapter Paragraphs Page
Annexes
States parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (170) as at 19 August 2005 116
States parties that have made the declaration under article 14, paragraph 1 of the Convention (46), as at 19 August 2005 116
C. States parties that have accepted the amendments to the Convention adopted at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties (39), as at 19 August 2005 117
A. Sixty-sixth session (21 February-11 March 2005) 118
B. Sixty-seventh session (2-19 August 2005) 118
A. Sixty-sixth session 119
No.
31/2003 (L.R. v.
Slovakia) 119
No.
32/2003 (Sefic v.
Denmark) 134
No.
33/2003 (Quereshi v.
Denmark (No. 2)) 142
B. Sixty-seventh session 154
No.
30/2003 (The Jewish community of Oslo et al.
v.
Norway) 154
CONTENTS (continued)
Annexes (cont'd)
Letter of transmittal
19 August 2005
Sir,
It is with pleasure that I transmit the annual report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which has now been ratified by 170 States, constitutes the normative basis upon which international efforts to eliminate racial discrimination should be built.
During the past year, the Committee continued with a significant workload in terms of the examination of States parties' reports (discussed in chapter III) in addition to other related activities.
The Committee also examined the situation of several States parties under its early warning and urgent procedures (see chapter II) and under its follow-up procedure (see chapter IV).
In order to continue its consideration of subjects of general interest, the Committee held a thematic discussion on the prevention of genocide at its sixty-sixth session, which was attended by your Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, and adopted a declaration on this issue (see chapter VIII).
At its sixty-seventh session, the Committee followed up on the declaration and adopted a decision identifying indicators of systematic and massive patterns of racial discrimination (see chapter II).
The Committee also adopted during the same session its thirty-first general recommendation which concerns the prevention of racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system.
It also discussed the issue of multiculturalism in a general debate at both its sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh sessions.
As important as the Committee's contributions have been to date, there is obviously some room for improvement.
At present, only 46 States parties (see annex I) have made the optional declaration recognizing the Committee's competence to receive communications under article 14 of the Convention and, as a consequence, the individual communications procedure is underutilized, as indeed is also the inter-State complaints procedure.
Furthermore, only 39 States parties have so far ratified the amendments to article 8 of the Convention adopted at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties (see annex I), despite repeated calls from the General Assembly to do so.
These amendments provide, inter alia, for the financing of the Committee from the regular budget of the United Nations.
The Committee appeals to States parties that have not yet done so to consider making the declaration under article 14 and ratifying the amendments to article 8 of the Convention.
The Committee remains committed to a continual process of reflection on and improvement of its working methods, with the aim of maximizing its effectiveness.
In this connection, the Committee adopted terms of reference for the mandate of the coordinator on
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan Secretary-General of the United Nations New York
follow-up to its conclusions and recommendations (see chapter XIII).
Furthermore, at its sixty-seventh session, it adopted a procedure for following up its Opinions adopted pursuant to article 14, paragraph 7, of the Convention (see chapter VI).
During the same session, the Committee also discussed the reform of the treaty body system (see chapter XIV).
At the present time, perhaps more than ever, there is a pressing need for the United Nations human rights bodies to ensure that their activities contribute to the harmonious and equitable coexistence of peoples and nations.
In this sense, I wish to assure you once again, on behalf of all the members of the Committee, of our determination to continue working for the promotion of the implementation of the Convention and to support all activities that contribute to combating racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia throughout the world.
I have no doubt that the dedication and professionalism of the members of the Committee, as well as the pluralistic and multidisciplinary nature of their contributions, will ensure that the work of the Committee contributes significantly to the implementation of both the Convention and the follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in the years ahead.
Please accept, Sir, the assurances of my highest consideration.
(Signed): Mario Yutzis Chairman Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
States parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
As at 19 August 2005, the closing date of the sixty-seventh session of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, there were 170 States parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which was adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 2106A (XX) of 21 December 1965 and opened for signature and ratification in New York on 7 March 1966.
The Convention entered into force on 4 January 1969 in accordance with the provisions of its article 19.
By the closing date of the sixty-seventh session, 46 of the 170 States parties to the Convention had made the declaration envisaged in article 14, paragraph 1, of the Convention.
Article 14 of the Convention entered into force on 3 December 1982, following the deposit with the Secretary-General of the tenth declaration recognizing the competence of the Committee to receive and consider communications from individuals or groups of individuals who claim to be victims of a violation by the State party concerned of any of the rights set forth in the Convention.
Lists of States parties to the Convention and of those which have made the declaration under article 14 are contained in annex I to the present report, as is a list of the 39 States parties that have accepted the amendments to the Convention adopted at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties, as at 19 August 2005.
Sessions and agendas
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination held two regular sessions in 2005.
The sixty-sixth (1672nd to 1701st meetings) and sixty-seventh (1702nd to 1732nd meetings) sessions were held at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 21 February to 11 March 2005 and from 2 to 19 August 2005 respectively.
The agendas of the sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh sessions, as adopted by the Committee, are reproduced in annex II.
C. Membership and attendance
The list of members of the Committee for 2005-2006 is as follows: All members of the Committee attended the sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh sessions.
Officers of the Committee At its 1613th meeting (sixty-fourth session), on 23 February 2004, the Committee elected the Chairperson, Vice-Chairpersons and Rapporteur as listed below in accordance with article 10, paragraph 2, of the Convention, for the terms indicated in brackets.
Chairperson: Mr. Mario Yutzis (2004-2006)
Vice-Chairpersons: Ms. Patricia Nozipho January-Bardill (2004-2006) Mr. Raghavan Vasudevan Pillai (2004-2006) Mr. Alexander Linos Sicilianos (2004-2006)
Rapporteur: Mr. Patrick Thornberry (2004-2006)
E. Cooperation with the International Labour Organization, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Law Commission, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the right of everyone to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health and the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights In accordance with Committee decision 2 (VI) of 21 August 1972 concerning cooperation with the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), both organizations were invited to attend the sessions of the Committee.
Consistent with the Committee's recent practice, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was also invited to attend.
Reports of the ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations submitted to the International Labour Conference were made available to the members of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, in accordance with arrangements for cooperation between the two committees.
The Committee took note with appreciation of the reports of the Committee of Experts, in particular of those sections which dealt with the application of the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111) and the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169), as well as other information in the reports relevant to its activities.
UNHCR submits comments to the members of the Committee on all States parties whose reports are being examined when UNHCR is active in the country concerned.
These comments make reference to the human rights of refugees, asylum-seekers, returnees (former refugees), stateless persons and other categories of persons of concern to UNHCR.
UNHCR representatives attend the sessions of the Committee and report back on any issues of concern raised by Committee members.
At the country level, although there is no systematic follow-up to the implementation of the Committee's concluding observations and recommendations in the 130 UNHCR field operations, these are regularly included in activities designed to mainstream human rights in their programmes.
Mr. Paul Hunt, Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the right of everyone to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, addressed the Committee at its 1698th meeting (sixty-sixth session), on 9 March 2005, and a fruitful discussion ensued on ways to enhance cooperation with the Committee.
In a letter dated 29 July 2005 addressed to the Committee, Ms. Antoanella-Iulia Motoc, Chairperson of the sessional working group on the administration of justice of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, requested the views of the Committee regarding the usefulness of an in-depth study on the implementation in practice of the right to an effective remedy.
The Chairperson conveyed the view that such a study would be very helpful to the work of the Committee, in particular if, among other issues, it addressed the question of remedies in relation to the rights of indigenous peoples, including their rights to land.
In the course of their brief dialogue with members of the Sub-Commission on 3 August 2005, Mr. de Gouttes and Mr. Sicilianos drew their attention, in particular, to the forthcoming discussion by the Committee of draft general recommendation XXXI on the prevention of racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system (see chapter IX).
Other matters The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights addressed the Committee at its 1678th meeting (sixty-sixth session), on 24 February 2005.
Recalling that racial discrimination persisted in the functioning of the penal system and in the application of the law in some States, as well as in the actions and attitudes of institutions and individuals responsible for law enforcement, the High Commissioner welcomed the draft general recommendation on the prevention of racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the system of justice that was to be discussed by the Committee during its sixty-sixth session.
The High Commissioner also welcomed the forthcoming thematic discussion on the prevention of genocide.
She underlined that close cooperation between the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and the Committee, as well as with other treaty bodies and the special procedures of the Commission on Human Rights, was essential to help the Special Adviser better understand complex situations, and thus be in a position to suggest appropriate action.
Furthermore, the High Commissioner stressed that every State party should be able to show and explain to the Committee the preventive strategies it had in place, and the institutions it had established to provide special protection to those at risk.
Ms. María-Francisca Ize-Charrin, Officer-in-Charge of the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, addressed the Committee at its 1702nd meeting (sixty-seventh session), on 2 August 2005.
She stressed that the Office followed with particular interest the activities of the Committee under article 14 of the Convention and hoped that the impact of its jurisprudence at the regional and national levels would increase.
She welcomed the forthcoming discussion of the Committee on the establishment of a procedure for following up on Opinions adopted under article 14 of the Convention.
Ms. Ize-Charrin informed the Committee that the Office had been actively engaged in strengthening the implementation of recommendations of treaty bodies through various training projects, including a subregional workshop in Cairo on follow-up to concluding observations of the Committee and of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women due to take place from 5 to 8 December 2005.
Ms. Ize-Charrin then referred to the Plan of Action adopted by the High Commissioner for Human Rights and emphasized in particular the proposals relating to a unified standing treaty body.
She stressed that the High Commissioner would be very grateful to have the initial reactions of the Committee to these proposals (see chapter XIII for a report of the discussion of the Committee on this issue).
Adoption of the report At its 1732nd meeting, held on 19 August 2005, the Committee adopted its annual report to the General Assembly.
Note
PREVENTION OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION, INCLUDING EARLY WARNING AND URGENT PROCEDURES The Committee, at its 979th meeting, on 17 March 1993, adopted a working paper to guide it in its future work concerning possible measures to prevent, as well as more effectively respond to, violations of the Convention.
The Committee noted in its working paper that efforts to prevent serious violations of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination would include early warning measures and urgent procedures.
The following decisions were adopted by the Committee under the early warning and urgent procedures at its sixty-sixth session:
Decision 1 (66) on the New Zealand Foreshore and Seabed Act 2004
The Committee has reviewed, under its early warning and urgent action procedure, the compatibility of the New Zealand Foreshore and Seabed Act 2004 with the provisions of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, in the light of information received both from the Government of New Zealand and a number of Maori non-governmental organizations and taking into account its general recommendation XXIII (1997) on indigenous peoples.
The Committee appreciates having had the opportunity to engage in a constructive dialogue with the State party at its 1680th meeting, on 25 February 2005, and also appreciates the State party's written and oral responses to its requests for information related to the legislation, including those submitted on 17 February and 9 March 2005.
The Committee remains concerned about the political atmosphere that developed in New Zealand following the Court of Appeal's decision in the Ngati Apa case, which provided the backdrop to the drafting and enactment of the legislation.
Recalling the State party's obligations under article 2, paragraph 1 (d), and article 4 of the Convention, it hopes that all actors in New Zealand will refrain from exploiting racial tensions for their own political advantage.
While noting the explanation offered by the State party, the Committee is concerned at the apparent haste with which the legislation was enacted and that insufficient consideration may have been given to alternative responses to the Ngati Apa decision, which might have accommodated Maori rights within a framework more acceptable to both the Maori and all other New Zealanders.
In this regard, the Committee regrets that the processes of consultation did not appreciably narrow the differences between the various parties on this issue.
The Committee notes the scale of opposition to the legislation among the group most directly affected by its provisions, the Maori, and their very strong perception that the legislation discriminates against them.
Bearing in mind the complexity of the issues involved, the legislation appears to the Committee, on balance, to contain discriminatory aspects against the Maori, in particular in its extinguishment of the possibility of establishing Maori customary titles over the foreshore and seabed and its failure to provide a guaranteed right of redress, notwithstanding the State party's obligations under articles 5 and 6 of the Convention.
The Committee acknowledges with appreciation the State party's tradition of negotiation with the Maori on all matters concerning them, and urges the State party, in a spirit of goodwill and in accordance with the ideals of the Waitangi Treaty, to resume dialogue with the Maori community with regard to the legislation, in order to seek ways of mitigating its discriminatory effects, including through legislative amendment, where necessary.
The Committee requests the State party to monitor closely the implementation of the Foreshore and Seabed Act, its impact on the Maori population and the developing state of race relations in New Zealand, and to take steps to minimize any negative effects, especially by way of a flexible application of the legislation and by broadening the scope of redress available to the Maori.
The Committee has noted with satisfaction the State party's intention to submit its fifteenth periodic report by the end of 2005, and requests the State party to include full information on the state of implementation of the Foreshore and Seabed Act in the report.
1700th meeting 11 March 2005
Decision 2 (66) on Darfur
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
Taking into consideration its regular practices as well as its obligation to inform, under its early warning and urgent action procedure, of any warning signals that a situation may deteriorate still further,
Referring to its decision 1 (65) of 18 August 2004 on the same subject,
Recalling its declaration on the prevention of genocide of 11 March 2005,
Recommends to the Secretary-General, and through him, to the Security Council, the deployment, without further delay, of a sufficiently enlarged African Union force in Darfur with a Security Council mandate to protect the civilian population, including those in camps, displaced persons and refugees returning to their homes in Darfur, against war crimes, crimes against humanity and the risk of genocide.
1701st meeting 11 March 2005 The following decision was adopted by the Committee under the early warning and urgent procedures at its sixty-seventh session:
Decision 1 (67) on Suriname
The Committee recalls that in its decision 3 (66) of 9 March 2005, it expressed concern about the fact that a revised version of the draft Mining Act, which was approved by the Council of Ministers of Suriname at the end of 2004, may not be in conformity with the Committee's recommendations adopted in March 2004 following the consideration of the first to tenth periodic reports of Suriname.
The Committee deeply regrets that it has not received any comment under the follow-up procedure from the State party on the above assessment of the draft law, as requested in decision 3 (66).
The Committee expresses deep concern about information alleging that Suriname is actively disregarding the Committee's recommendations by authorizing additional resource exploitation and associated infrastructure projects that pose substantial threats of irreparable harm to indigenous and tribal peoples, without any formal notification to the affected communities and without seeking their prior agreement or informed consent.
Drawing once again the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXIII (1997) on the rights of indigenous peoples, the Committee urges the State party to ensure that the revised draft Mining Act complies with the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, as well as with the Committee's 2004 recommendations.
In particular, the Committee urges the State party to:
(a) Ensure legal acknowledgement of the rights of indigenous and tribal peoples to possess, develop, control and use their communal lands and to participate in the exploitation, management and conservation of the associated natural resources;
(b) Strive to reach agreements with the peoples concerned, as far as possible, before awarding any concessions;
(c) Ensure that indigenous and tribal peoples are granted the right of appeal to the courts, or any independent body specially created for that purpose, in order to uphold their traditional rights and their right to be consulted before concessions are granted and to be fairly compensated for any damage.
The Committee recommends once again that a framework law on the rights of indigenous and tribal peoples be elaborated and that the State party take advantage of the technical assistance available under the advisory services and technical assistance programme of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for that purpose.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it extend an invitation to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people.
The Committee urges the Secretary-General to draw the attention of the competent United Nations bodies to the particularly alarming situation in relation to the rights of indigenous peoples in Suriname and to request them to take all appropriate measures in this regard.
Following the adoption of a declaration on the prevention of genocide at its sixty-sixth session (see chapter VIII), the Committee adopted the following decision at its sixty-seventh session:
Decision on follow-up to the declaration on the prevention of genocide: indicators of patterns of systematic and massive racial discrimination
At its sixty-sixth session, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) adopted a declaration on the prevention of genocide for the consideration of the States parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Secretary-General and his Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, as well as the Security Council.
In this declaration, the Committee committed itself to: Developing a special set of indicators related to genocide; and Strengthening and refining its early warning and urgent action as well as follow-up procedures in all situations where indicators suggest the increased possibility of violent conflict and genocide.
Taking into account that systematic discrimination, disregard or exclusion are often among the root causes of conflict, the present decision intends to strengthen the capacity of the Committee to detect and prevent at the earliest possible stage developments in racial discrimination that may lead to violent conflict and genocide.
Indicators
The following key indicators may serve as a tool for the Committee, when examining the situation in a State party under one of its procedures, to assess the existence of factors known to be important components of situations leading to conflict and genocide.
If one or more of the following indicators are present, this should be clearly stated in the concluding observations or decision, and the Committee shall recommend that the State party report, within a fixed deadline, to the Committee under the follow-up procedure on what it intends to do to ameliorate the situation.
In the following list of indicators, the word “group” shall cover racial, ethnic and religious groups:
Lack of a legislative framework and institutions to prevent racial discrimination and provide recourse to victims of discrimination.
Systematic official denial of the existence of particular distinct groups.
The systematic exclusion - in law or in fact - of groups from positions of power, employment in State institutions and key professions such as teaching, the judiciary and the police.
Compulsory identification against the will of members of particular groups, including the use of identity cards indicating ethnicity.
Grossly biased versions of historical events in school textbooks and other educational materials as well as celebration of historical events that exacerbate tensions between groups and peoples.
Policies of forced removal of children belonging to ethnic minorities with the purpose of complete assimilation.
Policies of segregation, direct and indirect, for example separate schools and housing areas.
Systematic and widespread use and acceptance of speech or propaganda promoting hatred and/or inciting violence against minority groups, particularly in the media.
Grave statements by political leaders/prominent people that express support for affirmation of superiority of a race or an ethnic group, dehumanize and demonize minorities, or condone or justify violence against a minority.
Violence or severe restrictions targeting minority groups perceived to have traditionally maintained a prominent position, for example as business elites or in political life and State institutions.
Serious patterns of individual attacks on members of minorities by private citizens which appear to be principally motivated by the victims' membership of that group.
Development and organization of militia groups and/or extreme political groups based on a racist platform.
Significant flows of refugees and internally displaced persons, especially when those concerned belong to specific ethnic or religious groups.
Significant disparities in socio-economic indicators evidencing a pattern of serious racial discrimination.
Policies aimed at the prevention of delivery of essential services or assistance, including obstruction of aid delivery or access to food, water, sanitation or essential medical supplies in certain regions or targeting specific groups.
As these indicators may be present in States not moving towards violence or genocide, the assessment of their significance for the purpose of predicting genocide or violence against identifiable racial, ethnic or religious groups should be supplemented by consideration of the following subset of general indicators:
Prior history of genocide or violence against a group.
Policy or practice of impunity.
Existence of proactive communities abroad fostering extremism and/or providing arms.
Presence of external mitigating factors such as the United Nations or other recognized invited third parties.
Follow-up and early warning and urgent action procedures
When receiving information between sessions of CERD about grave incidents of racial discrimination covered by one or more of the relevant indicators, the Chairperson of the working group on early warning/urgent action, in consultation with its members and with the follow-up coordinator and the Chairperson of the Committee, may take the following action:
Request further urgent information from the State party.
Forward the information to the Secretary-General and his Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
Prepare a decision to be submitted for adoption by the Committee at its next session.
Adopt a decision at the session in the light of the most recent developments and action taken by other international organizations.
Notes
consideration of reports, comments and information submitted by states parties under article 9 of the convention
AUSTRALIA The Committee considered the thirteenth and fourteenth periodic reports of Australia, due in 2000 and 2002 respectively, submitted as one document (CERD/C/428/Add.2), at its 1685th and 1686th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1685 and 1686), held on 1 and 2 March 2005.
At its 1699th meeting (CERD/C/SR.1699), held on 10 March 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by the State party, which mainly focuses on issues raised in the Committee's previous concluding observations, as well as the additional oral information provided by the delegation.
Positive aspects The Committee notes with satisfaction that serious acts of racial hatred or incitement to racial hatred are criminal offences in most Australian States and Territories.
It particularly welcomes, in this regard, legislative developments in Victoria and Queensland.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that significant progress has been achieved in the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights by the indigenous peoples.
It welcomes the commitment of all Australian Governments to work together on this issue through the Council of Australian Governments, as well as the adoption of a national strategy on indigenous family violence.
The Committee notes with great interest the diversionary and preventative programmes aimed at reducing the number of indigenous juveniles entering the criminal justice system, as well as the development of culturally sensitive procedures and practices among the police and the judiciary.
The Committee welcomes the abrogation of mandatory sentencing provisions in the Northern Territory.
The Committee welcomes the adoption of a Charter of Public Service in a Culturally Diverse Society to ensure that government services are provided in a way that is sensitive to the language and cultural needs of all Australians.
The Committee welcomes the numerous human rights education programmes developed by the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC).
C. Concerns and recommendations The Committee, while noting the explanations provided by the delegation, reiterates its concern about the absence of any entrenched guarantee against racial discrimination that would override the law of the Commonwealth (Convention, art.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it work towards the inclusion of an entrenched guarantee against racial discrimination in its domestic law.
The Committee notes that the Australian Human Rights Commission Legislation Bill 2003 reforming the HREOC has lapsed in Parliament, but that the State party remains committed to pursuing the reform of the Commission.
It notes the concerns expressed by the HREOC that some aspects of the reform could significantly undermine its integrity, independence and efficiency (art.
The Committee notes the importance given by the State party to the HREOC in monitoring Australia's compliance with the provisions of the Convention and recommends that it take fully into account the comments expressed by the HREOC on the proposed reform, and that the integrity, independence and efficiency of the Commission be fully preserved and respected.
The Committee is concerned about the abolition of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC), the main policymaking body in Aboriginal affairs consisting of elected indigenous representatives.
It is concerned that the establishment of a board of appointed experts to advise the Government on indigenous peoples' issues, as well as the transfer of most programmes previously provided by the ATSIC and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Service to government departments, will reduce the participation of indigenous peoples in decision-making and thus alter the State party's capacity to address the full range of issues relating to indigenous peoples (arts.
2 and 5).
The Committee recommends that the State party take decisions directly relating to the rights and interests of indigenous peoples with their informed consent, as stated in its general recommendation XXIII.
The Committee recommends that the State party reconsider the withdrawal of existing guarantees for the effective representative participation of indigenous peoples in the conduct of public affairs as well as in decision- and policymaking relating to their rights and interests.
The Committee notes that Australia has not withdrawn its reservation to article 4 (a) of the Convention.
It notes with concern that the Commonwealth, the State of Tasmania and the Northern Territory have no legislation criminalizing serious acts of racial hatred or incitement to racial hatred.
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the State party make efforts to adopt appropriate legislation with a view to giving full effect to the provisions of, and to withdrawing its reservation to, article 4 (a) of the Convention.
The Committee wishes to receive information on complaints, prosecutions and sentences regarding serious acts of racial hatred or incitement to racial hatred in States and Territories the legislation of which specifies such offences.
The Committee notes with concern reports that prejudice against Arabs and Muslims in Australia has increased and that the enforcement of counter-terrorism legislation may have an indirect discriminatory effect against Arab and Muslim Australians (arts.
4 and 5).
The Committee welcomes the national consultations on eliminating prejudice against Arab and Muslim Australians and wishes to receive more detailed information on the results of such consultations.
It recommends that the State party increase its efforts to eliminate such prejudice and ensure that enforcement of counter-terrorism legislation does not disproportionately impact on specific ethnic groups and people of other national origins.
The Committee is concerned at reports of biased treatment of asylum-seekers by the media (art. 4).
The Committee recommends that the State party take resolute action to counter any tendency to target, stigmatize, stereotype or profile non-citizens, including asylum-seekers, on the basis of race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin, especially by the media and the society at large.
In this regard, it draws the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXX on non-citizens.
The Committee notes with concern that it has proved difficult for complainants, under the Racial Discrimination Act, to establish racial discrimination in the absence of direct evidence, and that no cases of racial discrimination, as distinct from racial hatred, have been successfully litigated in the Federal courts since 2001 (arts.
4 and 6).
The Committee, having taken note of the explanations provided by the delegation, invites the State party to envisage regulating the burden of proof in civil proceedings involving racial discrimination so that once an alleged victim has established a prima facie case that he or she has been a victim of such discrimination, it shall be for the respondent to provide evidence of an objective and reasonable justification for differential treatment.
The Committee notes with concern the persistence of diverging perceptions between governmental authorities and indigenous peoples and others on the compatibility of the 1998 amendments to the Native Title Act with the Convention.
The Committee reiterates its view that the Mabo case and the 1993 Native Title Act constituted a significant development in the recognition of indigenous peoples' rights, but that the 1998 amendments roll back some of the protections previously offered to indigenous peoples and provide legal certainty for Government and third parties at the expense of indigenous title.
The Committee stresses in this regard that the use by the State party of a margin of appreciation in order to strike a balance between existing interests is limited by its obligations under the Convention (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party refrain from adopting measures that withdraw existing guarantees of indigenous rights and that it make every effort to seek the informed consent of indigenous peoples before adopting decisions relating to their rights to land.
It further recommends that the State party reopen discussions with indigenous peoples with a view to discussing possible amendments to the Native Title Act and finding solutions acceptable to all.
The Committee is concerned about information according to which proof of continuous observance and acknowledgement of the laws and customs of indigenous peoples since the British acquisition of sovereignty over Australia is required to establish elements in the statutory definition of native title under the Native Title Act.
The high standard of proof required is reported to have the consequence that many indigenous peoples are unable to obtain recognition of their relationship with their traditional lands (art.
The Committee wishes to receive more information on this issue, including on the number of claims that have been rejected because of the requirement of this high standard of proof.
It recommends that the State party review the requirement of such a high standard of proof, bearing in mind the nature of the relationship of indigenous peoples to their land.
The Committee notes that 51 determinations of native title have been made since 1998 and that 37 of them have confirmed the existence of native title.
It also acknowledges the provisions introduced by the 1998 amendments to the Native Title Act regarding indigenous land-use agreements, as well as the creation of the Indigenous Land Fund in 1995 to purchase land for indigenous Australians unable to benefit from recognition of native title (art. 5).
The Committee wishes to receive more detailed information, including statistical data, on the extent to which such arrangements respond to indigenous claims over land.
Information on achievements at State and Territory levels may also be provided.
While noting the improvement in the enjoyment by the indigenous peoples of their economic, social and cultural rights, the Committee is concerned over the wide gap that still exists between the indigenous peoples and others, in particular in the areas of employment, housing, health, education and income (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party intensify its efforts to achieve equality in the enjoyment of rights and allocate adequate resources to programmes aimed at the eradication of disparities.
It recommends in particular that decisive steps be taken to ensure that a sufficient number of health professionals provide services to indigenous peoples, and that the State party set up benchmarks for monitoring progress in key areas of indigenous disadvantage.
The Committee, having taken note of the explanations provided by the State party, reiterates its concern about provisions for mandatory sentencing in the Criminal Code of Western Australia.
The Committee is concerned at reports of the disparate impact of this law on indigenous groups, and reminds the State party that the Convention prohibits direct as well as indirect discrimination (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party take appropriate measures to achieve abrogation of such legislation, following the example of the Northern Territory.
The Committee further stresses the role and responsibility of the Federal Government in this regard under the Convention.
The Committee remains concerned about the striking overrepresentation of indigenous peoples in prisons as well as the percentage of indigenous deaths in custody.
It has also been reported that indigenous women constitute the fastest-growing prison population (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party increase its efforts to remedy this situation.
It wishes to receive more information about the implementation of the recommendations of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Deaths in Custody.
The Committee notes with concern reports of alleged discrimination in the grant of visas against persons from Asian countries and Muslims, and further notes the assurances given by the delegation that no such discrimination occurs (art.
The Committee would like to receive more information on this issue, including statistical data.
The Committee reiterates that States parties should ensure that immigration policies do not have the effect of discriminating against persons on the basis of race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin.
The Committee expresses concern about the mandatory detention of illegal migrants, including asylum-seekers, in particular when such detention affects women, children, unaccompanied minors, and those who are considered stateless.
It is concerned that many persons have been in such administrative detention for over three years (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party review the mandatory, automatic and indeterminate character of the detention of illegal migrants.
It wishes to receive statistical data, disaggregated by nationality and length of detention, relating to persons held under such detention, including in offshore detention centres.
The Committee is concerned at reports according to which temporary protection visas granted to refugees who arrive without a valid visa do not make them eligible for many public services, do not imply any right to family reunion, and make their situation precarious.
It is further reported that migrants are denied access to social security for a two-year period upon entry into Australia (art.
The Committee wishes to receive statistical data, disaggregated by nationality, relating to temporary protection visas.
It recommends that the State party review its policies, taking into consideration the fact that, under the Convention, differential treatment based on citizenship or immigration status would constitute discrimination if the criteria for such differentiation, judged in the light of the objectives and purposes of the Convention, are not applied pursuant to a legitimate aim, and are not proportional to the achievement of that aim.
The Committee, while acknowledging the efforts undertaken by the State party to achieve reconciliation and having taken note of the 1999 Motion of Reconciliation, is concerned about reports that the State party has rejected most of the recommendations adopted by the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation in 2000 (art.
The Committee encourages the State party to increase its efforts with a view to ensuring that a meaningful reconciliation is achieved and accepted by the indigenous peoples and the population at large.
It reiterates its recommendation that the State party consider the need to address appropriately the harm inflicted by the forced removal of indigenous children.
The Committee recommends that the State party take into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7 of the Convention, and that it include in its next periodic report information on action plans or other measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level.
The Committee recommends that the State party's reports be made readily available to the public from the time they are submitted and that the observations of the Committee on these reports be similarly publicized.
It suggests that consultations of non-governmental organizations and indigenous peoples be organized during the compilation of the next periodic report.
The State party should within one year provide information on the way it has followed up on the Committee's recommendations contained in paragraphs 30, 31, 36 and 37 (paragraph 1 of rule 65 of the rules of procedure).
The Committee recommends that the State party submit its fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth periodic reports in a single report, due on 30 October 2008.
AZERBAIJAN The Committee considered the third and fourth periodic reports of Azerbaijan, submitted in one document (CERD/C/440/Add.1), at its 1691st and 1692nd meetings (CERD/C/SR.1691 and 1692), held on 4 and 7 March 2005.
At its 1700th meeting (CERD/C/SR.1700), held on 11 March 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by the State party and the additional oral information provided by the delegation.
The Committee has been encouraged by the attendance of the high-ranking delegation and expresses its appreciation for the opportunity to continue its dialogue with the State party.
However, it regrets that the report as a whole does not contain sufficient information on the practical implementation of the Convention.
Positive aspects The Committee notes with satisfaction the enactment of new legislation containing anti-discrimination provisions, including the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The Committee welcomes the adoption, in June 2002, of the Constitutional Law on the Implementation of Human Rights and Freedoms in the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The Committee welcomes the establishment of the Office of the Human Rights Commissioner of the Republic of Azerbaijan, pursuant to the Constitutional Act on the Ombudsman, adopted in December 2001.
The Committee welcomes the State party's ratification of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities in 2000, the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms in 2002 and the European Social Charter in 2004.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the State party has commenced the implementation of the refugee status determination procedure, in the framework of cooperation with UNHCR.
The Committee welcomes the adoption of the National Poverty Reduction Strategy for 2003-2005, which targets internally displaced persons as a vulnerable group.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the State party has made the optional declaration recognizing the Committee's competence to receive communications under article 14 of the Convention in 2001.
C. Concerns and recommendations The Committee notes the position of the State party that, despite the negative effects of the conflict in the Nagorny-Karabakh region, persons of Armenian origin do not experience discrimination in Azerbaijan.
However, the Committee is concerned that, according to reports, incidents of racial discrimination against Armenians occur, and that a majority of the Armenians residing in Azerbaijan prefer to conceal their ethnic identity in order to avoid being discriminated against (Convention, art.
The Committee encourages the State party to continue to monitor all tendencies that give rise to racist and xenophobic behaviour and to combat the negative consequences of such tendencies.
In particular, the Committee recommends to the State party that it conduct studies with a view to effectively assessing and evaluating occurrences of racial discrimination, in particular against ethnic Armenians.
While welcoming the information provided by the delegation on counter-trafficking measures taken by the State party, including the adoption, in 2004, of the National Plan of Action to combat trafficking in human beings and the establishment within the police service of a department to assist victims of trafficking, the Committee is concerned that human trafficking, including of foreign women, men and children, remains a serious problem in the State party, which is a country of origin and a transit point (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party include detailed information in its next periodic report on human trafficking and continue to undertake necessary legislative and policy measures to prevent and combat trafficking.
The Committee urges the State party to provide support and assistance to victims, wherever possible in their own language.
The Committee also recommends to the State party that it continue to make determined efforts to prosecute the perpetrators, and underlines the paramount importance of prompt and impartial investigations.
The Committee expresses its concern that asylum-seekers, refugees, stateless persons, displaced persons and long-term residents residing in Azerbaijan experience discrimination in the areas of employment, education, housing and health (art.
The Committee urges the State party to continue taking necessary measures in accordance with article 5 of the Convention to ensure equal opportunities for full enjoyment of their economic, social and cultural rights by asylum-seekers, refugees, stateless persons, displaced persons and long-term residents of Azerbaijan.
The Committee requests the State party to include, in its next periodic report, information on measures taken in this regard, and draws the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXX on discrimination against non-citizens.
The Committee observes that, while the State party generally endeavours to comply with the standards of the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, some asylum-seekers are excluded by the refugee determination procedure of the State party.
The Committee is concerned that persons who are not formally recognized as refugees may still require subsidiary forms of protection, given that they are unable to return to their countries for compelling reasons such as existing situations of armed conflict.
The Committee also expresses concern about information on cases of refoulement of refugees (art.
5 (b)).
The Committee requests the State party to ensure that its asylum procedures do not discriminate in purpose or effect between asylum-seekers on the basis of race, colour or ethnic or national origin, in line with section VI of its general recommendation XXX.
The Committee recommends that the State party consider adopting subsidiary forms of protection guaranteeing the right to remain for persons who are not formally recognized as refugees but who may still require protection, and to continue its cooperation with UNHCR.
The Committee further recommends that the State party, when proceeding with the return of asylum-seekers to their countries, respect the principle of non-refoulement.
While welcoming the information provided on minority groups, the Committee regrets the insufficiency of information on the participation of these groups in the elaboration of cultural and educational policies.
It is also concerned at the lack of programmes to support minority languages, and that those languages are not used in the educational system to an extent commensurate to the proportion of the different ethnic communities represented in the State party's population (art.
The Committee invites the State party to facilitate the participation of ethnic minorities in the elaboration of cultural and educational policies.
The Committee also recommends to the State party that it take the necessary measures to create favourable conditions that will enable persons belonging to minorities to develop their culture, language, religion, traditions and customs, and to learn or to have instruction in their mother tongue.
The Committee invites the State party to include in its next periodic report detailed information on this issue.
The Committee notes with concern the State party's explanation that despite the legislative provisions providing for the right to effective protection and remedies, no cases invoking the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code concerning racial discrimination have been brought before the courts (art.
The Committee requests the State party to include in its next periodic report statistical information on prosecutions launched, and penalties imposed, in cases of offences that relate to racial discrimination and where the relevant provisions of the existing domestic legislation have been applied.
The Committee reminds the State party that the mere absence of complaints and legal action by victims of racial discrimination may be largely an indication of the absence of relevant specific legislation, a lack of awareness of the availability of legal remedies, or insufficient will by the authorities to prosecute.
It is therefore essential to provide for the relevant provisions in national legislation and to inform the public of the availability of all legal remedies in the field of racial discrimination.
The Committee regrets the lack of information on measures taken by the State party to enhance better understanding, respect and tolerance among different ethnic groups living in Azerbaijan, in particular, on programmes adopted, if any, to ensure intercultural education (art. 7).
The Committee recommends that the State party adopt measures to promote intercultural understanding and education between ethnic groups, and provide more detailed information on this issue in its next periodic report.
The Committee, while noting the information provided by the delegation, remains of the view that measures taken to educate the public, law enforcement officials, members of political parties and media professionals on the provisions of the Convention could be strengthened (art. 7).
The Committee encourages the State party to expand and strengthen existing efforts regarding human rights education.
Furthermore, particular attention should be paid to general recommendation XIII, according to which law enforcement officials should receive specific training to ensure that, in the performance of their duties, they respect and protect the human rights of all persons without distinction as to race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin.
The Committee notes the lack of sufficient information on efforts taken by the State party to involve non-governmental organizations in the preparation of the periodic report and is concerned about the ability of civil society organizations, including organizations working to combat racial discrimination, to operate freely.
The Committee underlines the importance of the role of civil society in the full implementation of the Convention and recommends to the State party that it promote the free functioning of civil society organizations that contribute to promoting human rights and combating racial discrimination.
Furthermore, the Committee encourages the State party to consult with civil society groups working in the area of combating racial discrimination in the elaboration of its next periodic report.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party ratify the amendments to article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention, adopted on 15 January 1992 at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111.
In this connection, the Committee refers to General Assembly resolution 57/194, in which the Assembly strongly urged States parties to accelerate their domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment.
A similar appeal was reiterated by the General Assembly in resolution 58/160.
The Committee recommends that the State party continue to take into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7 of the Convention.
It further recommends that it include in its next periodic report information on measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level, in particular the preparation and implementation of the national plan of action.
The Committee recommends that the State party's reports be made readily available to the public from the time they are submitted and that the observations of the Committee on these reports be similarly publicized.
The State party should within one year provide information on its response to the Committee's recommendations contained in paragraphs 58 and 61 (paragraph 1 of rule 65 of the rules of procedure).
The Committee recommends that the State party submit its fifth periodic report jointly with its sixth periodic report on 15 September 2007, and that it address in this report all points raised in the present concluding observations.
BAHRAIN The Committee considered the sixth and seventh periodic reports of Bahrain, submitted in one document (CERD/C/443/Add.1), at its 1689th and 1690th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1689 and 1690), held on 3 and 4 March 2005.
At its 1700th meeting (CERD/C/SR.1700), held on 11 March 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the reports submitted by the State party and expresses its appreciation for the constructive responses provided to the questions asked during the consideration of the report.
The Committee is encouraged by the attendance of a large and high-ranking delegation.
The Committee appreciates the fact that the report, which generally complies with the Committee's guidelines, is the result of cooperation between various ministerial departments.
It regrets, however, that it does not contain sufficient information on the practical application of the Convention.
Positive aspects The Committee welcomes the meaningful political, legal and economic reforms on which the State party has embarked, and notes in particular the adoption of the National Action Charter in 2001, the promulgation of the amended Constitution and the creation of the Constitutional Court in 2002, as well as the establishment of a new bicameral parliament with an elected chamber of deputies.
The Committee appreciates the establishment of trade unions in 2002 for the first time in Bahrain as well as of cultural associations composed of foreigners.
The Committee welcomes the organization of several training programmes addressed to the judiciary and law enforcement officials on the promotion and protection of human rights in the field of racial discrimination.
The Committee also welcomes the accession to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women in 2002.
The Committee also notes with appreciation the increasing frequency of the State party's submission of reports to, and substantive communications with, the Committee and other treaty bodies regarding its implementation of the human rights conventions to which it has acceded.
C. Concerns and recommendations The Committee expresses its concern over the representations made by the State party that there is no racial discrimination in Bahrain.
The Committee, considering that no country is free from racial discrimination, reminds the States party that it is required under the Convention to take legislative, judicial, administrative and other measures to give effect to its provisions, even in the apparent absence of racial discrimination.
The Committee regrets that the State party has not provided specific data on the ethnic composition of the population, and recalls that such information is necessary to assess the practical implementation of the Convention.
The Committee draws the attention of the State party to its general recommendations IV and VIII as well as to paragraph 8 of its reporting guidelines, and reiterates its recommendation that population data, disaggregated by race, descent, ethnicity, language and religion, as well as the socio-economic status of each group, be provided by the State party in its next periodic report.
The Committee notes that the Basic Law and royal decrees, regulations and codes adopted by the State party merely state the general principle of non-discrimination, which is not a sufficient response to the requirements of the Convention.
The Committee recommends that the State party incorporate in its domestic law a definition of racial discrimination that includes the elements set forth in article 1 of the Convention.
The Committee takes note of the abolition of the Human Rights Committee which was designed to provide advice to the Head of State and to the executive authorities on a wide range of human rights issues, including those matters relating specifically to the Convention.
Furthermore, the Committee regrets that there is no national human rights institution in Bahrain.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it consider the establishment of a national human rights institution, in accordance with the Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles, General Assembly resolution 48/134, annex).
The Committee is concerned over the lack of integrationist multiracial organizations and movements in the State party and in particular over the banning of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights.
In the light of article 2 (e) of the Convention, the Committee requests that the State party permit such organizations and movements and create an enabling environment for such organizations, and encourages it to maintain dialogue with all civil society organizations, including those critical of its policies.
The Committee remains concerned at the situation of migrant workers, in particular regarding their enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights.
In light of article 5 (e) (i) and of general recommendation XXX on non-citizens, the Committee urges the State party to take all necessary measures to extend full protection from racial discrimination to all migrant workers and remove obstacles that prevent the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights by these workers, notably in the areas of education, housing, employment and health.
In addition, the State party should provide information in its next periodic report on any bilateral agreements it has entered into with the countries of origin of a significant or substantial number of migrant workers in Bahrain.
The Committee is concerned about allegations of substantial prejudice against women migrant domestic workers, in particular those coming from Asia, especially as regards their working conditions, and about the fact that these women do not benefit from the protection of the Labour Code.
In light of its general recommendation XXX and of its general recommendation XXV on gender-related dimensions of racial discrimination, the Committee requests the State party to take effective measures to prevent and redress the serious problems commonly faced by female domestic workers, including debt bondage, passport retention, illegal confinement, rape and physical assault, and to report on measures taken for the protection of their rights.
The Committee notes with concern the reportedly disparate treatment of and discrimination faced by members of some groups, in particular the Shia, that may be distinguishable by virtue of their tribal or national origin, descent, culture or language; the Committee is especially concerned about apparently disparate opportunities that are afforded to such groups.
The Committee recommends that the State party ensure that everyone, without distinction as to race, colour, or national or ethnic origin, enjoys the rights to work and to health and social security, adequate housing and education in accordance with article 5 (e) (i), (iii), (iv) and (v) of the Convention.
The Committee, noting the information provided regarding the acquisition of nationality, is concerned that a Bahraini woman is unable to transmit her nationality to her child when she is married to a foreign national, and that a foreign man is unable to acquire Bahraini nationality in the same manner as a foreign woman.
The Committee requests the State party to consider the possibility of modifying these provisions in order to conform to article 5 (d) (iii) of the Convention.
In this connection, it draws the attention of the State party to general recommendation XXV and to general recommendation XXX, which requests States parties to ensure that particular groups of non-citizens are not discriminated against with regard to access to citizenship or naturalization.
The Committee regrets that no statistics were provided on cases where the relevant provisions of domestic legislation concerning racial discrimination were applied.
The Committee recommends that the State party consider whether the lack of formal complaints may be the result of the victims' lack of awareness of their rights, lack of confidence in the police and judicial authorities, or the authorities' lack of attention, sensitivity, or commitment to cases of racial discrimination.
The Committee requests that the State party include in its next periodic report statistical information on complaints lodged, prosecutions initiated and the outcome of cases involving racial or ethnic discrimination, as well as specific examples of such cases.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, recognizing the close connection to articles 2, 4, 5 and 6 of the Convention.
The Committee notes that the State party has not made the optional declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention and urges it to consider doing so.
The Committee recommends that the State party take into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7 of the Convention, and that it include in its next periodic report information on further action plans or other measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level.
The Committee recommends that the State party continue consulting and consider expanding its dialogue with organizations of civil society working in the area of combating racial discrimination, in connection with the preparation of the next periodic report.
The Committee recommends that the State party's reports be made available to the public from the time they are submitted and that the observations and recommendation of the Committee on these reports be similarly publicized.
The State party should within one year provide information on the way it has followed up on the Committee's recommendations contained in paragraphs 82, 83, 85 and 86 (paragraph 1 of rule 65 of the rules of procedure).
The Committee recommends that the State party submit its eighth and ninth periodic reports in a single report, due on 26 April 2007.
FRanCE The Committee considered the fifteenth and sixteenth periodic reports of France, due on 27 August 2000 and 2002 respectively, submitted as one document (CERD/C/430/Add.4), at its 1675th and 1676th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1675 and 1676), held on 22 and 23 February 2005.
At its 1698th meeting (CERD/C/SR.1698), held on 10 March 2005, it adopted the following conclusions and recommendations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by the State party in accordance with the guidelines for the presentation of reports, as well as the additional information provided by the high-level delegation orally and in writing.
Positive aspects The Committee takes note with satisfaction of the many legislative measures designed to strengthen efforts to combat racial discrimination, in particular the Act of 16 November 2001 concerning measures to combat discrimination, the Social Modernization Act of 17 January 2002, the Act of 9 March 2004 on the adaptation of the system of justice to developments in the area of crime, and the Act of 30 December 2004 setting up the High Authority against Discrimination and for Equality.
The Committee welcomes the measures taken to prevent the spread of racist messages on the Internet, in particular the adoption of the Act of 21 June 2004.
The Committee welcomes the fact that, under the Act of 10 December 2003, persecution of asylum-seekers need no longer come from the State.
The Committee also welcomes the fact that, since the adoption of its ruling dated 1 June 2002, the Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation has allowed the practice of discrimination testing as a form of evidence in the area of racial discrimination, and encourages the State party to promote more frequent recourse to it.
The Committee welcomes the measures designed to rationalize the institutional framework for efforts to combat discrimination.
The Committee welcomes the role played by the National Consultative Commission on Human Rights in efforts to combat racial discrimination, and encourages the State party to take the Commission's views on the matter more into account.
The Committee also takes note of the expanded report of the Court of Audit on the reception of immigrants and the integration of population groups of immigrant origin (November 2004).
C. Concerns and recommendations While it takes note of the establishment of an Observatory for Immigration and Integration Statistics in July 2004, the Committee shares the view expressed by the Court of Audit in the above-mentioned report that efforts to combat discrimination have suffered and still suffer from inadequate statistical coverage.
The Committee recalls its general recommendation XXIV concerning article 1 of the Convention, as well as its general recommendation XXX on discrimination against non-citizens, and invites the State party to harmonize and refine its statistical tools to enable it to draw up and implement a comprehensive and effective policy to combat racial discrimination.
While noting the reactivation of the inter-ministerial committee on integration since April 2003 and the recent establishment of the High Authority against Discrimination and for Equality, the Committee is concerned at the proliferation of machinery and the risk of watering down the State party's efforts to combat racial discrimination and xenophobia.
The Committee encourages the State party to ensure greater coordination of the activities of the competent authorities in this area; to specify the role and resources of the High Council on Integration; to clearly define the functions of the High Authority, in particular vis-à-vis the Ombudsman and the National Consultative Commission on Human Rights, and to provide this new body with all necessary resources to enable it to perform its task effectively.
While taking note of the Act of 1 August 2003 on general principles and planning for cities and urban renewal, the Committee remains concerned at the unfavourable situation faced by immigrants and population groups of immigrant origin in the field of housing.
The Committee calls on the State party to strengthen its policy for the integration of immigrants and population groups of immigrant origin, especially in the field of housing, and draws its attention to the Committee's general recommendation XIX on article 3 of the Convention and general recommendation XXX on discrimination against non-citizens.
The Committee invites the State party to follow the recommendations in this area as set out in the report of the Court of Audit, referred to in paragraph 9 above.
The Committee is also concerned at the unfavourable situation faced by immigrants and population groups of immigrant origin in the field of employment and education, despite the State party's substantial efforts in this area.
The Committee encourages the State party to follow the recommendations set out in the Court of Audit's report on employment and education for immigrants and population groups of immigrant origin.
The Committee draws the State party's attention to its general recommendation XXV on gender-related dimensions of racial discrimination, and also invites it to bear more specifically in mind, in all measures which are adopted or planned, the situation of women, who sometimes fall victim to twofold discrimination.
Despite the State party's efforts, the Committee remains concerned at the situation of non-citizens and asylum-seekers in holding centres and areas and delays in processing applications from refugees for family reunification.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it should strengthen the supervision of police personnel responsible for the reception and day-to-day monitoring of holding centres for non-citizens and asylum-seekers; improve the conditions in which such persons are held; operationalize the national committee to monitor holding centres and premises and holding areas; and process applications from refugees for family reunification as speedily as possible.
The Committee remains concerned at the fact that only French may be used in applications for asylum.
In order to allow asylum-seekers to exercise their rights fully, the Committee invites the State party to lay down that asylum-seekers may be assisted by translators/interpreters whenever necessary, and/or to agree that applications for asylum may be written in the most common foreign languages.
While it appreciates the State party's oral and written responses to questions relating to the situation of travellers, the Committee remains concerned at delays in the effective application of the Act of 5 July 2000 on the reception and housing of travellers and the persistent difficulties travellers encounter in such fields as education, employment and access to the social security and health system.
The Committee reminds the State party of its general recommendation XXVII on discrimination against Roma and recommends that it should step up its efforts to provide travellers with more parking areas equipped with the necessary facilities and infrastructures and located in clean environments, intensify its efforts in the field of education and combat the phenomena of exclusion of travellers more effectively, including in the fields of employment and access to health services.
The Committee shares the concerns expressed by the delegation relating to the increase in racist, anti-Semitic and xenophobic acts.
The Committee encourages the State party to apply more effectively the existing provisions designed to combat such acts; to grant adequate compensation to victims; to create greater awareness on the part of law enforcement personnel; and to step up its efforts in the field of education and training of teachers in tolerance and cultural diversity.
The Committee takes note of the information supplied by the State party on the implementation of the Act of 15 March 2004 governing the wearing of symbols or clothing denoting religious affiliation in State primary and secondary schools, in pursuance of the principle of secularism.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it should continue to monitor the implementation of the Act of 15 March 2004 closely, to ensure that it has no discriminatory effects and that the procedures followed in its implementation always place emphasis on dialogue, to prevent it from denying any pupil the right to education and to ensure that everyone can always exercise that right.
While the Committee views as encouraging the efforts being made by the State party to create awareness among members of the security forces and other public officials of efforts to combat discrimination, it is concerned at allegations of persistent discriminatory behaviour towards the members of certain ethnic groups on the part of such personnel.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it should take the necessary preventive measures to halt racist incidents involving members of the security forces.
It should also ensure that impartial investigations are carried out into all these complaints, and that any punishments imposed are proportionate to the gravity of the acts committed.
The Committee considers, as it has done in previous conclusions relating to the State party, that the prohibition of attempts to justify crimes against humanity, and of their denial, should not be limited to acts committed during the Second World War.
The Committee encourages the State party to criminalize attempts to deny war crimes and crimes against humanity as defined in the Statute of the International Criminal Court, and not only those committed during the Second World War.
While the Committee notes the State party's efforts to transpose into domestic law European Council directive 2000/43/CE of 29 June 2000, implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of their racial or ethnic origin, it is concerned at the fact that the concept of indirect discrimination is applied only in matters of employment and housing.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it should take all necessary legislative steps to ensure the general application of the concept of indirect discrimination.
The Committee is concerned that for some local population groups in its overseas communities, the fact that they do not have a full command of French constitutes an obstacle to their enjoyment of their rights, particularly the right to access to justice.
In order to enable all those under the jurisdiction of the State party in its overseas communities to exercise their rights fully, the Committee recommends to the State party that it should take all appropriate steps to ensure that local population groups in overseas communities who do not have a command of French benefit from the services of translators/interpreters, especially in their contacts with the system of justice.
The Committee notes shortcomings in the teaching of the languages of certain ethnic groups - particularly Arabic, Amazigh or Kurdish - in the education system.
The Committee encourages the State party to promote the teaching of the languages of these groups in the education system, as proposed by the Stasi Commission in its report.
While the Committee takes note of the measures taken to settle the question of foreign veterans' pensions, it remains concerned at the continued differential treatment of such persons as compared with veterans who are French nationals.
The Committee encourages the State party to find a definitive solution to the question of foreign veterans' pensions by applying the principle of equal treatment.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it should widely distribute information on available domestic remedies against acts of racial discrimination, the legal means available for obtaining compensation in the event of discrimination, and the procedure governing individual complaints under article 14 of the Convention, which France has accepted.
The Committee encourages the State party to consult with civil society working in the area of combating racial discrimination in the elaboration of its next periodic report.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it should make its periodic reports readily available to the public from the time they are submitted, and similarly publish the Committee's present conclusions.
While recognizing the work already accomplished in this field, the Committee recommends to the State party that it should take into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the provisions of the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7, and include in its next periodic report information on action plans or other measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level.
Pursuant to article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention, and article 65 of the Committee's rules of procedure, as amended, the Committee requests the State party to inform it of its implementation of the recommendations contained in paragraphs 107, 108 and 110 above, within one year of the adoption of the present conclusions.
The Committee recommends that the seventeenth to nineteenth periodic reports of the State party, due on 27 August 2008, should be submitted as one report and constitute an updating of the issues raised during the consideration of the present reports and of all the points raised in the present concluding observations.
IRELAND The Committee considered the initial and second periodic reports of Ireland, submitted in one document (CERD/C/460/Add.1), at its 1687th and 1688th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1687 and 1688), held on 2 and 3 March 2005.
At its 1699th meeting (CERD/C/SR.1699), held on 10 March 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by the State party, which is in conformity with the reporting guidelines and which was drafted following consultation with organizations of civil society, as well as the comprehensive additional oral and written information provided by the high-ranking delegation.
The Committee was encouraged by the attendance of a large and well-qualified delegation and expresses its appreciation for the opportunity thus afforded to enter into a constructive dialogue with the State party.
Positive aspects The Committee commends the State party for the recent adoption of the first National Action Plan against Racism, and the extensive consultations with civil society organizations during the drafting of this plan.
The Committee also welcomes the information provided by the delegation concerning the forthcoming inclusion of representatives of civil society organizations in the High-Level Strategic Monitoring Group for the implementation of the National Action Plan.
The Committee welcomes this initiative as a positive reflection of the State party's commitment to developing an ongoing and constructive relationship with civil society.
The Committee notes with appreciation the establishment of several independent institutions with competence in the field of human rights and racial discrimination, namely the Irish Human Rights Commission, the Equality Authority and the National Consultative Committee on Racism and Interculturalism, as well as judicial bodies with specific jurisdiction on equality and non-discrimination, such as the Equality Tribunal.
The Committee welcomes the enactment of a comprehensive legislative framework on anti-discrimination, which includes the Employment Equality Act 1998, the Equal Status Act 2000 and the Equality Act 2004, and notes with satisfaction that legislation to implement Council Directive 2000/43/EC of 29 June 2000, which prohibits discrimination on the grounds of racial or ethnic origin in employment, education, social protection and access to goods and services, is currently before Parliament.
The Committee, recalling the importance of gathering accurate and up-to-date data on the ethnic composition of the population, welcomes the decision by the State party to include a question on ethnicity in the next census in 2006, and encourages the State party to include in the next periodic report detailed information on the population, including non-citizens.
The Committee notes with appreciation that the State party has ratified the amendment to article 8 of the Convention, and has made the declaration under article 14 recognizing the competence of the Committee to receive and consider individual communications.
As regards the latter, the Committee hopes that adequate measures will be taken within the State party to give it adequate publicity among the general public.
The Committee also notes with satisfaction the specific initiatives taken so far with regard to the Traveller community, including the National Strategy for Traveller Accommodation and the Traveller Health Strategy.
C. Concerns and recommendations The Committee regrets that the State party has not yet incorporated the Convention into the domestic legal order, particularly in light of the fact that the State party has incorporated other international instruments into domestic law (Convention, art.
The Committee invites the State party to envisage incorporating the Convention into its domestic legal order.
The Committee notes that the State party made a declaration on article 4 of the Convention.
The Committee believes that no compelling reasons exist impeding the withdrawal of this declaration (art.
Recalling its general recommendation XV, the Committee recommends to the State party that it reconsider its position and encourages it to withdraw the declaration made on article 4 of the Convention.
While noting the continuous efforts undertaken by the State party to combat racial discrimination and related intolerance, the Committee remains concerned that racist and xenophobic incidents and discriminatory attitudes towards ethnic minorities are still encountered in the country (art.
The Committee encourages the State party to continue to combat prejudice and xenophobic stereotyping, especially in the media, and fight prejudice and discriminatory attitudes.
In this context, the Committee recommends that the State party introduce in its criminal law a provision that makes committing an offence with a racist motivation or aim an aggravating circumstance allowing for a more severe punishment.
While noting the existence, in the area of the application of the Convention, of a diversified NGO community in Ireland and welcoming in particular the establishment by the State party of several independent institutions and judicial bodies in the field of human rights and non-discrimination, as referred to in paragraph 4 above, the Committee wishes to underscore the importance of providing adequate resources to these institutions, in order to enable them to efficiently and effectively exercise their duties and functions (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party provide the newly established institutions in the field of human rights and non-discrimination with adequate funding and resources to enable them to exercise the full range of their statutory functions, and also support the NGO community.
The Committee is concerned at the possible implications of the policy of dispersal of and direct provision for asylum-seekers (art.
The Committee encourages the State party to take all necessary steps with a view to avoiding negative consequences for individual asylum-seekers and to adopt measures promoting their full participation in society.
The Committee is concerned about reported instances of exploitation of foreign workers by some employers and of violations of labour regulations prohibiting discrimination (art.
The Committee, recalling its general recommendation XXX on discrimination against non-citizens, encourages the State party to ensure full practical implementation of legislation prohibiting discrimination in employment and in the labour market.
In this context, the State party could also consider reviewing the legislation governing work permits and envisage issuing work permits directly to employees.
The Committee regrets the absence of special detention facilities for asylum-seekers whose request for asylum has been rejected and for undocumented migrants awaiting deportation (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party provide additional information in its next report on the conditions of detention of asylum-seekers and undocumented migrants awaiting deportation.
The Committee notes the reported occurrence of discriminatory treatment against foreign nationals entering Ireland during security checks at airports (art.
The Committee encourages the State party to review its security procedures and practices at entry points with a view to ensuring that they are carried out in a non-discriminatory manner.
While welcoming the efforts of the State party with regard to the human rights training of the national police force, the establishment of a Garda Racial and Intercultural Office and the appointment of Garda Ethnic Liaison Officers, the Committee expresses concern about allegations of discriminatory behaviour by the police towards members of minority groups and regrets that data on complaints of racial discrimination against the police have not been provided in the report (arts.
5 (b) and 6).
The Committee invites the State party to include in its next periodic report data on the number of complaints against members of the police concerning discriminatory treatment as well as on the decisions adopted.
It further recommends that the State party intensify its sensitization efforts among law enforcement officials, including the setting up of an effective monitoring mechanism to carry out investigations into allegations of racially motivated police misconduct.
The Committee, noting that almost all primary schools are run by Catholic groups and that non-denominational or multidenominational schools represent less than 1 per cent of the total number of primary education facilities, is concerned that existing laws and practice would favour Catholic pupils in the admission to Catholic schools in case of shortage of places, particularly in the light of the limited alternatives available (art.
5 (d) (vii) and 5 (e) (v)).
The Committee, recognizing the “intersectionality” of racial and religious discrimination, encourages the State party to promote the establishment of non-denominational or multidenominational schools and to amend the existing legislative framework so that no discrimination may take place as far as the admission of pupils (of all religions) to schools is concerned.
The Committee is concerned that the non-discrimination requirement stipulated in the 2000 Equal Status Act only covers government functions falling within the definition of a “service” as defined by the Act itself (art.
5 (f)).
In order to ensure comprehensive protection against discrimination by public authorities, the Committee urges the State party to consider expanding the scope of the Equal Status Act so as to cover the whole range of government functions and activities, including controlling duties.
Recalling its general recommendation VIII on the principle of self-identification, the Committee expresses concern at the State party's position with regard to the recognition of Travellers as an ethnic group.
The Committee is of the view that the recognition of Travellers as an ethnic group has important implications under the Convention (arts.
1 and 5).
Welcoming the open position of the State party in this respect, the Committee encourages the State party to work more concretely towards recognizing the Traveller community as an ethnic group.
While noting the efforts made so far by the State party with regard to the situation of members of the Traveller community in the field of health, housing, employment and education, the Committee remains concerned about the effectiveness of policies and measures in these areas (art.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it intensify its efforts to fully implement the recommendations of the Task Force on the Traveller community, and that all necessary measures be taken urgently to improve access by Travellers to all levels of education, their employment rates as well as their access to health services and to accommodation suitable to their lifestyle.
The Committee notes that members of the Traveller community are not adequately represented in the State party's political institutions and do not effectively participate in the conduct of public affairs (art.
5 (c)).
The Committee invites the State party to consider adopting affirmative action programmes to improve the political representation of Travellers, particularly at the level of Dáil Eireann (Lower House of Parliament) and/or Seanad Eireann (Upper House of Parliament (Senate)).
The Committee is particularly concerned about the situation faced by women belonging to vulnerable groups and at the instances of multiple discrimination they may be subject to (art. 5).
The Committee, recalling its general recommendation XXV, encourages the State party to take measures with regard to the special needs of women belonging to minority and other vulnerable groups, in particular female Travellers, migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers.
The Committee remains concerned that a fairly short time limit has been introduced in respect of the judicial review of administrative decisions on immigration issues (art.
The Committee hopes that all issues pertaining to the appeal procedure will be adequately resolved within the framework of the proposed Immigration and Residence Bill.
The Committee wishes to encourage the State party to ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families and the ILO Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97) to ensure better protection for migrants and migrant workers.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it continue consulting with organizations of civil society working in the area of combating racial discrimination during the preparation of the next periodic report.
The Committee recommends that the State party's reports be made readily available to the public from the time they are submitted and that the observations of the Committee on these reports be similarly publicized.
The Committee recommends that the State party submit its third and fourth periodic reports, due on 28 January 2008, jointly and that it address therein all points raised in the present concluding observations.
LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC The Committee considered the sixth to fifteenth periodic reports of the Lao People's Democratic Republic, due for submission from 1985 to 2003 and submitted as one document (CERD/C/451/Add.1), at its 1673rd and 1674th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1673 and 1674), held on 21 and 22 February 2005.
At its 1696th meeting, held on 9 March 2005, the Committee adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by the Lao People's Democratic Republic.
It commends the efforts made by the State party to comply with the Committee's reporting guidelines, while noting that the report does not contain enough information on the practical implementation of the Convention.
The Committee welcomes the fact that the State party was represented by a high-ranking delegation and commends the efforts it made to respond to the questions asked.
It likewise welcomes the resumption of a constructive dialogue with the State party and the fact that the State party has expressed its desire to pursue a dialogue with the Committee on a regular basis.
Positive aspects The Committee commends the efforts of the State party to reduce poverty, particularly in rural areas and among ethnic groups.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the State party adopted penal measures in 2004 to combat trafficking in persons.
The Committee is pleased to learn that the Convention has been translated into Lao.
The Committee welcomes the programme of cooperation undertaken by the State party and the United Nations Development Programme relating to the ratification and implementation of international human rights instruments.
It invites the State party to use this framework to ensure follow-up to the present concluding observations and recommendations and to seek additional technical assistance from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The Committee welcomes the signing by the State party in 2000 of the two International Covenants on Human Rights and encourages it to ratify both instruments as soon as possible.
C. Subjects of concern and recommendations The Committee, noting that it received the report after a delay of 19 years, invites the State party to respect the timetable for the submission of its future reports.
The Committee notes with concern that no clear definition of racial discrimination exists in domestic legislation.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it adopt a definition of racial discrimination that includes the elements contained in article 1 of the Convention.
The Committee notes with concern that the Convention is not incorporated in domestic legislation and that the question of its rank in the internal legal order has not been settled (art. 2).
The Committee invites the State party to take the necessary steps to ensure the effective application of the Convention in domestic law.
The Committee regrets that there is no national human rights institution in the Lao People's Democratic Republic (art.
The Committee invites the State party to consider the establishment of such an institution, in accordance with the Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles) (General Assembly resolution 48/134).
The Committee is concerned at the situation with respect to independent non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working in the area of human rights and the prevention of discrimination (art.
The Committee invites the State party to pave the way for the emergence of independent national NGOs.
The Committee notes the absence of legislative provisions criminalizing acts of violence and incitement to violence on racial grounds.
The Committee invites the State party to adopt legislation to fully implement the provisions of article 4 of the Convention.
The Committee takes note of the statement by the Sate party that racial discrimination does not exist in its territory and understands the State party to mean by that statement that it does not engage in systematic discrimination.
The Committee recalls its customary reservations regarding a general declaration of this nature, since, in its opinion, no State party is free from racial discrimination in its territory.
The Committee notes that, as the State party has acknowledged, poverty strikes the ethnic groups in the remotest areas hardest (arts. 2 and 5).
The Committee recalls that the Convention prohibits not only intentional and systematic acts of racial discrimination but also discrimination that is not the direct result of a deliberate effort by the Government to prevent part of its population from enjoying its rights.
In the Committee's view, the low level of economic, social and cultural development of certain ethnic groups as compared with the rest of the population might be an indication of de facto discrimination.
It therefore recommends to the State party that it conduct studies with a view to assessing and evaluating in concrete terms the extent to which racial discrimination exists in the country and to ascertain its principal causes.
Statistics broken down by ethnic group on political participation and the standard of living of the population might be included in the next periodic report.
The Committee takes note of the delegation's explanations regarding the reluctance of the authorities to classify ethnic groups in the Lao People's Democratic Republic as minorities or indigenous peoples (arts.
1, 2 and 5).
The Committee recommends to the State party that it recognize the rights of persons belonging to minorities and indigenous peoples as set out in international law, regardless of the name given to such groups in domestic law.
It invites the State party to take into consideration the way in which the groups concerned perceive and define themselves.
The Committee recalls that the principle of non-discrimination requires that the specific characteristics of ethnic, cultural and religious groups be taken into consideration.
The Committee notes that the State party has adopted a policy of resettling members of ethnic groups from the mountains and highland plateaux to the plains (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party describe in its next periodic report the scope of the resettlement policies being implemented, the ethnic groups concerned, and the impact of these policies on the lifestyles of these groups and on their enjoyment of their economic, social and cultural rights.
It recommends to the State party that it study all possible alternatives with a view to avoiding displacement; that it ensure that the persons concerned are made fully aware of the reasons for and modalities of their displacement and of the measures taken for compensation and resettlement; that it endeavour to obtain the free and informed consent of the persons and groups concerned; and that it make remedies available to them.
The State party should pay particular attention to the close cultural ties that bind certain indigenous or tribal peoples to their land and take into consideration the Committee's general recommendation XXIII of 1997 in this regard.
The preparation of a legislative framework setting out the rights of the persons and groups concerned, together with information and consultation procedures, would be particularly useful.
The Committee notes with concern that, according to certain reports, a major obstacle to the education and vocational training of persons belonging to ethnic groups is the fact that education is provided only in Lao.
Language barriers are also apparently responsible for the many problems encountered in obtaining access to social services (art.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it take all possible measures to ensure that persons belonging to ethnic groups receive education and vocational training in their mother tongue and that it increase its efforts to ensure that they learn Lao.
The Committee is disturbed by reports of the infringement of the freedom of religion of members of religious minorities, in particular Christians, who are also often members of ethnic minorities.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it ensure that all persons enjoy their right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, without discrimination, in accordance with article 5, subparagraph (d), of the Convention.
The Committee remains concerned at persistent allegations of conflict between the Government and members of the Hmong minority who have taken refuge in the jungle or mountainous areas of the Lao People's Democratic Republic since 1975.
According to various corroborating reports, this group is living in difficult humanitarian conditions (art.
The Committee calls on the State party to take all measures, if necessary with the support of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations and the international community, to find a political and humanitarian solution to this crisis as quickly as possible and to create the necessary conditions for the initiation of a dialogue with this group.
The Committee strongly encourages the State party to authorize United Nations agencies to provide emergency humanitarian assistance to this group.
The Committee is concerned at reports that serious acts of violence have been perpetrated against members of the Hmong minority, in particular allegations that soldiers brutalized and killed a group of five Hmong children on 19 May 2004 (art.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it provide more precise information about the bodies responsible for investigating these allegations.
It also strongly recommends that the State party allow United Nations bodies for the protection and promotion of human rights to visit the areas in which members of the Hmong minority have taken refuge.
The Committee notes the statement by the State party that there have been no complaints or judicial decisions relating to racial discrimination (art.
The Committee calls upon the State party to investigate this situation in order to determine whether it is due to the absence of legal remedies for combating racial discrimination, an incomplete understanding by victims of their rights, the fear of reprisals, a lack of confidence in the police and justice officials, or a lack of attention or awareness on the part of these authorities in matters involving racial discrimination.
The Committee notes with concern that the State party claims that it is unable to introduce human rights education programmes in schools.
It is also concerned at reports that law enforcement officials continue to have minimal awareness of human rights issues as set out in the law, the Constitution and international instruments (art.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it introduce, if necessary with the assistance of the international community, education programmes in schools on human rights and combating racial discrimination, and that it increase its efforts to provide training to law enforcement officials.
The Committee recommends to the State party, when applying the provisions of the Convention in its legal order, and particularly the provisions of articles 2 to 7, that it take into account the relevant passages of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, and that it include in its next periodic report information about plans of action and other measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Plan of Action at the national level.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party ratify the amendment to article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention, adopted on 15 January 1992 at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111.
In this connection, the Committee cites General Assembly resolution 57/194 of 18 December 2002, in which the Assembly strongly urged States parties to accelerate their domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment.
A similar appeal was made by the Assembly in its resolution 58/160 of 22 December 2003.
The Committee notes that the State party has not made the optional declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention, and recommends that it consider the possibility of doing so.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it make its periodic reports available to the public and that the conclusions of the Committee be publicized in the same way.
In conformity with rule 65 of the Committee's rules of procedure, the State party should provide information within one year on follow-up to the Committee's recommendations in paragraphs 162, 173 and 174.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it submit its sixteenth and seventeenth periodic reports in a single report due on 24 March 2007.
Luxembourg The Committee considered the tenth, eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth periodic reports of Luxembourg, due between 1997 and 2003 and submitted in a single document (CERD/C/446/Add.1), at its 1678th and 1679th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1678 and 1679) on 23 and 24 February 2005.
It adopted the concluding observations below at its 1697th meeting, held on 9 March 2005.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the periodic report of Luxembourg, which is in conformity with the reporting guidelines of the Committee.
It applauds the efforts made by the delegation to provide thorough and highly constructive answers to the questions raised.
It appreciates the opportunity thus provided to resume a dialogue with the State party.
Noting that the report was more than seven years overdue when submitted, the Committee invites the State party to respect the intervals it has suggested for the submission of its future reports.
Positive aspects The Committee notes with appreciation the information provided by the delegation on the execution of a national plan of action on the follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance.
The Committee welcomes the Act of 19 July 1997, which supplements the Criminal Code by making racism a more serious offence and criminalizing revisionism and other acts based on discrimination.
The Committee notes with satisfaction the current incorporation into Luxembourg law of Council Directive 2000/43/CE of 19 June 2000, implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin and establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation.
The Committee commends the entry into force of the Act of 24 July 2001 amending the Luxembourg Nationality Act of 22 February 1968 by easing the conditions for obtaining Luxembourg nationality.
The Committee welcomes the entry into force of the Act of 8 June 2004 on freedom of expression in the media, which calls for a code of ethics to govern the pursuit of journalistic activities.
The Committee notes with satisfaction the signing of Protocol No. 12 on non-discrimination to the European Convention on Human Rights.
The Committee commends the establishment of an Advisory Commission on Human Rights, a Complaints Office within the Permanent Special Commission against Racial Discrimination, advisory commissions for foreigners in the communes, and the appointment of an ombudsman.
The Committee also notes with satisfaction school curricula that promote interculturalism, a certain number of mother-tongue classes for immigrant children and the introduction of intercultural mediators in schools.
C. Concerns and recommendations The Committee notes that the statistical data provided by the State party are incomplete.
It draws attention to the fact that it needs these data for an assessment of the implementation of the Convention and for monitoring measures taken for the benefit of minorities and vulnerable groups.
Recalling its general recommendations XXIV and XXX, the Committee requests the State party to include in its next periodic report updated statistical information, in particular on the Roma communities, and on vulnerable groups such as non-nationals, refugees, asylum-seekers and clandestine workers.
While noting the State party's efforts to tighten up its laws and strengthen its institutions combating racial discrimination, the Committee notes that racist and xenophobic incidents, in particular against Arabs and Muslims, and discriminatory attitudes towards ethnic minorities are still encountered.
The Committee encourages the State party to continue to combat prejudice and xenophobic stereotypes, in the media especially, and fight prejudice and discriminatory attitudes.
It recommends that the authorities adopt a strategy for making the public at large better aware of the existence and purpose of the institutions established to combat racial discrimination.
The Committee is concerned at the fact that racist and xenophobic propaganda is to be found on Internet sites.
The Committee encourages the State party to combat this contemporary form of racial discrimination, which is covered by the principles of the Convention.
It would like to be informed of action taken by the State party to this end in its next periodic report.
It also suggests that the State party ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime and its Additional Protocol concerning the criminalization of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems.
The Committee notes with satisfaction the efforts made by the State party to combat offences motivated by racial hatred.
It also welcomes the bill reversing the burden of proof in civil cases in favour of victims of racial discrimination.
However, it notes that prosecutions in this area have been few in number.
The Committee encourages the State party to ensure that prosecutors and magistrates do prosecute racist offences under the relevant criminal laws, and apply the requisite criminal penalties.
It also suggests that racist motives should be defined as a general aggravating circumstance for offences, and that derogations to the ban on discrimination such as those currently allowed under article 457-5 of the Criminal Code should be limited.
It requests the State party to provide, in its next periodic report, updated statistics on acts of racial discrimination and judicial action taken in response.
While noting the action taken in response to the requirements of article 4 of the Convention, the Committee observes that the State party still upholds its interpretation of that article, viz.
that criminal acts committed by members or supporters of a racist organization may be prohibited or punished by law, but not the existence of, or participation in, racist organizations.
The Committee draws the State party's attention to its general recommendation XV, according to which all provisions of article 4 of the Convention are of a mandatory character, including declaring illegal and prohibiting any organization promoting or inciting discrimination, as well as recognizing participation in such an organization as an offence punishable by law.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the State party reconsider its position.
While recognizing the steps taken by the State party to combat racial discrimination, the Committee notes that certain vulnerable groups, such as non-nationals, refugees and asylum-seekers, are not afforded sufficient protection.
In the light of its general recommendation XXX, the Committee proposes action specifically to guarantee the equal enjoyment of the right to adequate housing for citizens and non-citizens, especially by avoiding segregation in housing and ensuring that housing agencies refrain from engaging in discriminatory practices.
The Committee is concerned that a number of non-nationals are illegally employed in Luxembourg, and are thus exposed to abuse by their employers.
In the light of its general recommendation XXX, the Committee encourages the State party to take practical steps to prevent and redress the serious problems faced by non-citizen workers, ensuring that any employers who recruit illegal workers are punished.
The Committee is concerned at allegations of discriminatory or vexatious conduct towards non-nationals on the part of officials working in various national or local authorities.
While aware of the information provided by the State party about human rights training for State employees, the Committee encourages the State party to include within the training a specific focus on the problems of racism and discrimination, and to ensure that all officials who come into contact with minority groups receive training of this type.
The Committee invites the State party to consider the possibility of ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness.
The Committee recommends that the State party's reports be made readily available to the public and that the observations of the Committee on these reports be similarly publicized.
The Committee recommends that the State party submit its fourteenth and fifteenth periodic reports in a single document due on 31 May 2007.
BARBADOS The Committee considered the eighth to sixteenth periodic reports of Barbados, submitted in one document (CERD/C/452/Add.5), at its 1709th and 1710th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1709 and CERD/C/SR.1710), held on 5 and 8 August 2005.
At its 1727th meeting (CERD/C/SR.1727), held on 18 August 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by the State party which fully complies with the reporting guidelines and expresses its satisfaction that dialogue has been re-established with the State party.
It also welcomes the supplementary information provided by the State party in writing as well as in its oral presentation.
The report and the presentation enabled the Committee to engage in a rich discussion with the State party of the social and historical context of racial issues in Barbados.
Noting that the report was more than 12 years overdue when submitted, the Committee invites the State party to respect the timetable it has suggested for the submission of its future reports.
Positive aspects The Committee notes with satisfaction the establishment of the Committee for National Reconciliation tasked with developing, coordinating and implementing a programme for the process of national reconciliation.
The Committee appreciates the relevant statistical information on the composition of the population provided by the State party.
The Committee welcomes the draft National Plan on Justice, Peace and Security as an important step in providing victims of violent crime with the right to claim compensation.
The Committee welcomes the organization of several training programmes conducted at the Regional Police Training Department on the promotion and protection of human rights in the field of racial discrimination.
The Committee also notes with satisfaction the pilot education programme which has included African Heritage Studies, Citizenry, Family life and conversational foreign languages in several primary and secondary schools.
The Committee notes with satisfaction the country's high ranking in the United Nations Development Programme Human Development Report.
C. Concerns and recommendations While welcoming the recommendation of the Constitutional Review Commission that gender be included in the Constitution as a ground for non-discrimination and the establishment of a Constitution Committee which has begun redrafting the Constitution with the intention of, inter alia, including a definition of racial discrimination which would protect individuals against discriminatory actions by private persons and entities, the Committee is concerned about the lack of a legal definition of racial discrimination in line with article 1 of the Convention in its domestic legislation.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it adopt a definition of racial discrimination that includes the elements contained in article 1 of the Convention.
While taking note of the establishment of the office of Ombudsman, the Committee regrets the absence of a national human rights institution set up in accordance with the Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles, General Assembly resolution 48/134, annex).
The Committee recommends that the State party consider the establishment of a national human rights institution, in accordance with the Paris Principles.
The Committee is concerned over the lack of social movements that promote integrationist multiracial values in the State party and in particular that the report was not made more widely available to civil society before it was submitted.
In the light of article 2 (e) of the Convention, the Committee requests that the State party create an enabling environment for integrationist multiracial organizations, and encourages the State party to maintain dialogue with civil society organizations.
The Committee expresses concern at the “invisible crypto-racism” mentioned in the report which arises as a result of the separation of black and white communities and which is rooted in social relations at the interpersonal level.
The Committee reminds the State party of its general recommendation XIX according to which de facto racial segregation can arise without any initiative or direct involvement by the public authorities.
The Committee thus encourages the State party to monitor all trends which can give rise to such segregation, to work for the eradication of any negative consequences that ensue and to describe any such action in its next periodic report.
The Committee notes with concern that, due to its general character, paragraph 1 of the reservation by the State party affects the application of a number of provisions of the Convention, in particular articles 2, 4, 5 and 6.
Furthermore, paragraph 2 of the reservation restricts the interpretation of a key provision for the effective application of the Convention, namely article 4.
The Committee recommends that the State party consider withdrawing its reservation and enact legislation to give full effect to article 4 of the Convention, as well as to provide for effective remedies according to article 6.
The Committee is concerned at the absence of any complaints of racial discrimination before the High Court since 1994 and at the fact that no complaint was ever submitted before the Police Complaints Authority.
The Committee recommends that the State party consider whether the lack of formal complaints may be the result of the victims' lack of awareness of their rights, lack of confidence in the police and judicial authorities, or the authorities' lack of attention, sensitivity, or commitment to cases of racial discrimination.
The Committee requests that the State party include in its next periodic report statistical information on complaints lodged, prosecutions initiated and the outcome of cases involving racial or ethnic discrimination, as well as specific examples of such cases.
While taking note of the State party's observation that education in Barbados is “socially guaranteed”, the Committee expresses concern that the right to education as well as other economic and social rights are not adequately protected in domestic law.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it ensure equal enjoyment of economic and social rights including the right to education contained in article 5 (e) of the Convention.
The Committee expresses concern at the closure of the Centre for Multiethnic Studies at the Barbados campus of the University of the West Indies which was tasked to research race and ethnicity in the Caribbean.
The Committee encourages the State party to consider reopening the Centre.
The Committee requests the State party to further clarify the situation regarding Amerindians in Barbados.
The Committee notes that the State party has not made the optional declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention and urges the State party to consider doing so.
The Committee recommends that the State party continue taking into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7 of the Convention, and that it include in its next periodic report information on further action plans or other measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party ratify the amendments to article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention, adopted on 15 January 1992 at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111.
In this connection, the Committee refers to General Assembly resolution 59/176 of 20 December 2004, in which the Assembly strongly urged States parties to accelerate their domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.
The Committee recommends that the State party's reports be made readily available to the public from the time they are submitted and that the observations of the Committee on these reports be similarly publicized.
It further suggests introducing effective measures, including public awareness-raising campaigns about the Convention.
Pursuant to article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention, and article 65 of the Committee's rules of procedure, as amended, the Committee requests the State party to inform it of its implementation of the recommendations contained in paragraphs 213 and 217 above, within one year of the adoption of the present conclusions.
The Committee recommends that the State party submit its seventeenth periodic report jointly with its eighteenth periodic report on 8 December 2007, and that it address all points raised in the present concluding observations.
GEORGIA The Committee considered the second to third periodic reports of Georgia, which were due on 2 July 2002 and 2004 respectively, submitted as one document (CERD/C/461/Add.1), at its 1705th and 1706th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1705 and 1706), held on 3 and 4 August 2005.
At its 1721st meeting, held on 15 August 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by the State party and the additional information provided by the delegation.
The Committee also appreciates the presence of a high-ranking delegation and the constructive and frank dialogue with the State party.
The Committee expresses its satisfaction with the quality of the report, its conformity with the reporting guidelines of the Committee and notes as very positive the fact that the State party submitted the report in a timely manner.
Factors and difficulties impeding the implementation of the Convention The Committee acknowledges that Georgia has been confronted with ethnic and political conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia since independence.
Due to the lack of governmental authority, the State party has difficulty in exercising its jurisdiction with regard to the protection of human rights and the implementation of the Convention in those regions.
In addition, the conflicts in South Ossetia and Abkhazia have resulted in discrimination against people of different ethnic origins, including a large number of internally displaced persons and refugees.
Several recommendations have been issued by the Security Council to facilitate the free movement of refugees and internally displaced persons.
C. Positive aspects The Committee acknowledges that the State party is a multi-ethnic country, with numerous and varied communities, and appreciates the efforts made by the State party to provide information relating to the ethnic composition of the population as well as other statistical data related to minorities.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the State party is continuing to make important progress in the area of legislative reform and that some of its previous recommendations were taken into consideration during this process.
The Committee also notes with satisfaction that the State party has made the declaration under article 14 of the Convention recognizing the competence of the Committee to receive and consider communications and expects that the public at large will be appropriately informed of this fact.
The Committee also expresses its satisfaction at recent measures taken by the State party to strengthen the participation of ethnic minorities in its political institutions.
Concerns and recommendations While noting the adoption of a detailed “plan of action to strengthen protection of the rights and freedoms of various population groups of Georgia for the period 2003-2005”, the Committee regrets that the draft legislation to protect minorities has not yet been adopted (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party provide detailed information on the implementation and results of the “plan of action to strengthen protection of the rights and freedoms of various population groups of Georgia for the period 2003-2005” and encourages the State party to adopt specific legislation to protect minorities.
While taking note of the introduction of section 1 of article 142 of the Criminal Code regarding acts of racial discrimination, the Committee is concerned over the insufficiency of specific penal provisions implementing article 4 (a) and (b) of the Convention in the domestic legislation of the State party (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party adopt legislation, in the light of its general recommendation XV, to ensure a full and adequate implementation of article 4 (a) and (b) of the Convention in its domestic legislation, in particular declaring an offence punishable by law the dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred and any assistance to racist activities, including financing, as well as declaring illegal organizations and propaganda activities which promote and incite racial discrimination and recognizing, as an offence punishable by law, participation in such organizations or activities.
While welcoming the information provided on the situation on several minorities of the State party, the Committee regrets the lack of detailed information on the situation of some vulnerable minority groups, in particular the Roma, and their enjoyment of all human rights (art. 5).
The Committee recommends that the State party include detailed information in its next periodic report on the situation of all minority groups, including the most vulnerable ones and in particular the Roma, and in this connection, draws the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXVII on discrimination against Roma.
The Committee notes the absence of legislation regarding the status of languages, the lack of sufficient knowledge of the Georgian language by minority groups and of effective measures to remedy this situation as well as to increase the use of ethnic minority languages in the public administration (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party adopt legislation on the status of languages as well as effective measures to improve the knowledge of the Georgian language amongst minority groups and to increase the use of ethnic minority languages in the public administration.
The Committee notes that the representation of the different ethnic communities of the population of the State party in State institutions and in the public administration is disproportionately low, which leads to their reduced participation in public life (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party include further information in its next periodic report regarding the ethnic composition of State institutions and of the public administration and adopt practical measures to ensure that ethnic minorities are represented in the public administration and in those institutions, and to enhance their participation in public life, including the elaboration of cultural and educational policies relating to them.
While acknowledging the commitment of the State party to repatriate and integrate Meskhetians who were expelled from Georgia in 1944 as well as the recent establishment of a State Commission on the Repatriation of Meskhetians, the Committee notes with concern that no specific measures have yet been taken to address this issue (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party include detailed information in its next periodic report on the situation of Meskhetians and take the appropriate measures to facilitate their return and their acquisition of Georgian citizenship, including the adoption of the necessary framework legislation to this effect, which has been under drafting since 1999.
The Committee regrets the lack of information in the State party report on the fundamental rights of non-citizens temporarily or permanently residing in Georgia, regarding the effective enjoyment, without discrimination, of the rights mentioned in article 5 of the Convention (art.
Drawing the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXX on discrimination against non-citizens, the Committee recommends that the State party ensure the effective enjoyment, without discrimination, of the rights mentioned in article 5 of the Convention, in particular their access to justice and right to health.
While noting the new legal measures adopted regarding refugees, the Committee remains concerned that some refugees and asylum-seekers of particular ethnicities have been forcibly returned to countries where there are substantial grounds for believing that they may suffer serious human rights violations (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party provide detailed information on the situation of refugees and asylum-seekers, on the legal protection provided to them including their rights to legal assistance and judicial appeal against deportation orders, and on the legal basis for deportation.
The Committee also urges the State party to ensure, in accordance with article 5 (b) of the Convention, that no refugees are forcibly returned to a country where there are substantial grounds for believing that they may suffer serious human rights violations.
The Committee encourages the State party to ratify the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness.
Religious questions are of relevance to the Committee when they are linked with issues of ethnicity and racial discrimination.
In this connection, and while acknowledging the effort made by the State party to fight ethno-religious violence, the Committee remains concerned about the situation of ethno-religious minorities, such as the Yezidi-Kurds (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party include detailed information in its next periodic report on the situation of ethno-religious minorities, and that it adopt the bill on freedom of conscience and religion designed to protect those minorities against discrimination and, in particular, against acts of violence.
Poverty is a human rights issue and a factor which impedes the full enjoyment by all, including vulnerable minority groups, of those rights.
The Committee is concerned about the extreme poverty in which part of the population of the State party lives and its effects on the most vulnerable minority groups for the enjoyment of their human rights and regrets that the State party's programme to reduce poverty and stimulate economic growth has not yet been adopted (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party include information in its next periodic report on its economic situation, in particular regarding minorities, and adopt all the necessary measures to reduce poverty, especially regarding the most vulnerable minority groups, and stimulate economic growth, including the adoption of a national plan to this effect.
The Committee is concerned by allegations of arbitrary arrests and detention, excessive use of force by law enforcement officials, and ill-treatment in police custody of members of minority groups and non-citizens, and about the lack of investigation of those cases (arts.
5 and 6).
The Committee recommends that the State party take appropriate measures to eradicate all forms of ill-treatment by law enforcement officials and ensure prompt, thorough, independent and impartial investigations into all allegations of ill-treatment, especially of members of ethnic groups and non-citizens; perpetrators should be prosecuted and punished, and victims granted compensation.
While noting the existence of an Ombudsman, the Committee regrets the insufficiency of detailed information regarding the independence, competencies and effectiveness of this institution (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party provide in its next periodic report detailed information on the independence, competencies and effective results of the activities of the Ombudsman.
Furthermore, the Committee encourages the State party to strengthen this institution and provide it with adequate resources so as to allow it to function as an independent national human rights institution, in accordance with the Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles) (General Assembly resolution 48/134).
While noting with appreciation that the Convention may be invoked directly before the national courts, the Committee notes the lack of information on complaints of racial discrimination, the absence of court cases regarding racial discrimination in the State party and the need for further dissemination of the Convention amongst State authorities (arts.
6 and 7).
The Committee recommends that the State party ensure that the lack of court cases on racial discrimination is not the result of victims' lack of awareness of their rights or limited financial means, individuals' lack of confidence in the police and judicial authorities, or the authorities' lack of attention or sensitivity to cases of racial discrimination.
The Committee urges that the State party ensure that appropriate provisions are available in national legislation regarding effective protection and remedies against violation of the Convention and disseminate to the public information on the legal remedies available against those violations as widely as possible.
Further, the Committee also recommends that the State party take measures to sensitize police and judicial officers about the Convention.
The Committee recommends that the State party take into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7 of the Convention.
It further recommends that it include in its next periodic report information on measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level.
The Committee requests that the State party's report and the present concluding observations be widely disseminated throughout the State party in the appropriate languages, and that the next periodic report be brought to the attention of non-governmental organizations operating in the country before being submitted to the Committee.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party ratify the amendments to article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention, adopted on 15 January 1992 at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111.
In this connection, the Committee refers to General Assembly resolution 59/176 of 20 December 2004, in which the Assembly strongly urged States parties to accelerate their domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment.
Pursuant to article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention, and article 65 of the Committee's rules of procedure, as amended, the Committee requests the State party to inform it of its implementation of the recommendations contained in paragraphs 238, 244 and 245 above, within one year of the adoption of the present conclusions.
The Committee recommends that the State party submit its fourth periodic report jointly with its fifth periodic report on 2 July 2008, and that it address all points raised in the present concluding observations.
ICELAND The Committee considered the seventeenth and eighteenth periodic reports of Iceland, due between 2002 and 2004 and submitted in a single document (CERD/C/476/Add.5), at its 1715th and 1716th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1715 and 1716) on 10 and 11 August 2005.
It adopted the concluding observations below at its 1725th meeting (CERD/C/SR.1725), held on 17 August 2005.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report of Iceland, which is in conformity with the Committee's reporting guidelines, as well as the comprehensive written and oral replies of the delegation to the questions raised by the Committee.
It also welcomes the State party's timeliness and regularity in submitting its periodic reports.
It appreciates the opportunity thus provided to engage in a continuous and constructive dialogue with the State party.
Positive aspects The Committee welcomes the State party's ratification of a number of human rights treaties since the consideration of its fifteenth and sixteenth periodic reports in 2001, including both Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child as well as regional instruments relevant to the Committee's mandate.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that recent legislative changes enhance the legal status of foreign nationals, such as the Act on the Employment Rights of Foreign Nationals in 2002, the amendment in 2002 of the Municipal Elections Act extending the right to vote in municipal elections and eligibility for municipal office to foreign nationals, as well as the application for the first time of this amendment in the municipal elections of 2002, when some 1,000 foreign nationals availed themselves of their right to vote.
The Committee welcomes the current establishment of the Committee for Refugees and Asylum-Seekers and the Icelandic Immigration Council, to be composed of representatives of relevant ministries and one immigrant representative and responsible for making recommendations on immigration policy to the Government and for coordinating the provision of services and information to immigrants.
The Committee notes with appreciation that the Supreme Court of Iceland, in a judgement dated April 2002, confirmed the conviction of an individual under article 233 (a) of the General Penal Code for having publicly assaulted a group of people on account of their nationality, colour and race.
The Committee welcomes the establishment in 2001 of an office of the Reykjavik police functioning as a link between the police and persons of foreign origin which, inter alia, refers complaints made by foreigners to the competent authorities.
C. Concerns and recommendations The Committee notes that the Convention has not been incorporated into the State party's domestic legal order.
The Committee encourages the State party to consider incorporating the substantive provisions of the Convention into its domestic law, with a view to ensuring comprehensive protection against racial discrimination.
While recognizing that there are no serious social conflicts within Icelandic society, the Committee nevertheless considers that the State party should adopt a more proactive approach in preventing racial discrimination or related intolerance (art. 2).
The Committee recalls that the notion of prevention is inherent in many provisions of the Convention and encourages the State party to take direct measures to prevent racial discrimination in all spheres of life and, to that effect, consider the possibility of adopting comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation providing, inter alia, for effective remedies against racial discrimination in civil and administrative proceedings.
The Committee notes that direct funding for the Icelandic Human Rights Centre has been cut in the national budget for 2005 and that funds previously earmarked for the Centre have been reallocated to human rights projects in general (art. 2, para. 1 (e)).
The Committee invites the State party to maintain its level of cooperation with non-governmental organizations combating racial discrimination, including helping to ensure the adequate funding and independence of such organizations, bearing in mind that, according to article 2, paragraph 1 (e), of the Convention, each State party undertakes to encourage, where appropriate, integrationist multiracial organizations and movements.
While noting that members of the border police receive training on international human rights standards and refugee law, the Committee is concerned about reports that asylum requests are not always properly handled by border guards (art. 5).
The Committee encourages the State party to intensify its efforts to provide systematic training to border guards, with a view to increasing their knowledge about all relevant aspects of refugee protection, as well as about the situation in the countries of origin of asylum-seekers.
While noting that the purpose of the requirement that a foreign “spouse or partner in cohabitation or registered partnership of a person lawfully staying in Iceland” must be 24 years of age or older to obtain a permit to stay as a family member is to prevent forced or sham marriages, the Committee is nevertheless concerned that this requirement may have discriminatory effects, bearing in mind that the minimum age of marriage under the Icelandic Marriage Act No.
31/1993 is 18 years (art. 5 (d) (iv)).
The Committee recommends that the State party reconsider this age requirement and explore alternative means of preventing forced or sham marriages.
While noting that the issuance of temporary work permits to employers of foreign workers rather than to the employees themselves serves to better oversee the situation of the labour market, and that copies of such permits indicating the expiry date are handed out to the employees, who may change jobs during the period covered by the permit, the Committee is concerned that this situation may lead to breaches of the labour rights of temporary foreign workers (art. 5, para. (e) (i)).
Recalling its general recommendation XXX (2004) on discrimination against non-citizens, the Committee recommends to the State party that it strengthen legal safeguards to prevent such breaches and to ensure that foreign workers are protected against discrimination, in particular in relation to working conditions and work requirements.
The Committee is concerned at reported cases where access to public places such as bars, discotheques, etc. has been denied on racist grounds, and notes the absence of court judgements under article 180 of the General Penal Code prohibiting such discriminatory acts (art. 5 (f)).
The Committee recalls the right of all individuals to access public places without discrimination and recommends that the State party regulate the burden of proof in civil proceedings involving denial of access to public places based on race, colour, descent, and national or ethnic origin so that once an individual has established a prima facie case that he or she has been a victim of such denial, it shall be for the respondent to provide evidence of an objective and reasonable justification for the differential treatment.
The Committee notes with concern that applicants whose asylum applications have been rejected or who are being expelled by the Directorate of Immigration can only appeal that decision to the Minister of Justice as the supervisory authority, whose decision is subject only to a limited court review on procedure rather than substance (art. 6).
The Committee recommends that the State party consider introducing a full review by an independent judicial body of decisions of the Directorate of Immigration and/or the Minister of Justice concerning the rejection of asylum applications or expulsion of asylum-seekers.
The Committee notes the absence in Iceland of a national human rights institution that conforms to the Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles) (General Assembly resolution 48/134).
The Committee invites the State party to consider the establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles.
The Committee encourages the State party to consider ratifying the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and to complete the ratification process of the Additional Protocol to the Convention on cybercrime, concerning the criminalization of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems.
The Committee recommends that the State party take into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7 of the Convention, and that it include in its next periodic report information on action plans or other measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level.
The Committee recommends that the State party continue to publicize its periodic reports to the Committee, as well as the concluding observations of the Committee on these reports.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it submit its nineteenth and twentieth periodic reports in a single report, due on 4 January 2008.
NIGERIA The Committee considered the fourteenth to eighteenth periodic reports of Nigeria, submitted in one document (CERD/C/476/Add.3), at its 1720th and 1722nd meetings (CERD/C/SR.1720 and 1722), held on 15 and 16 August 2005.
At its 1728th meeting (CERD/C/SR.1728), held on 19 August 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by the State party and the additional written information provided.
The Committee welcomes the attendance of a delegation and the opportunity it has afforded to resume dialogue with the State party.
The Committee regrets, however, that the report does not fully conform to the Committee's reporting guidelines and lacks sufficient information on the practical implementation of the Convention.
Noting that the report was more than eight years overdue when submitted, the Committee invites the State party to respect the deadline set for the submission of its future reports.
Positive aspects The Committee notes with satisfaction the State party's ratification, in 2002, of the International Labour Organization Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111).
The Committee welcomes the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission of Nigeria, pursuant to the Human Rights Commission Act, adopted in 1995.
The Committee welcomes the adoption, in 2004, of the National Plan of Action on the promotion and protection of human rights.
The Committee welcomes the establishment of the National Inter-religious Council and of the Institute for Peace and Conflict to promote inter-ethnic, intercommunal and interreligious harmony.
It also welcomes the creation of the National Revenue Allocation System, which aims to improve the distribution of resources among different States.
The Committee welcomes the establishment of human rights desks in police stations to deal with complaints relating to human rights violations committed by members of the police force.
The Committee notes with appreciation the provision of mobile schools for children of nomadic communities.
C. Concerns and recommendations While noting the concerns of the State party that identification of its population by ethnicity or religion may lead to national disunity, the Committee is concerned that the State party has submitted no precise figures on the ethnic composition of the population, and points out that such information is necessary to assess how the Convention is applied in practice.
The Committee invites the State party to complete the next census as soon as possible and to include indicators disaggregated by ethnicity, religion and gender on the basis of voluntary self-identification, which will make it possible to determine the situation of groups falling within the definition of article 1 of the Convention.
In this connection, the Committee draws the attention of the State party to its general recommendation IV (1973) on reporting by States, as well as to paragraph 8 of its reporting guidelines.
The Committee is concerned about the absence of a legal definition of racial discrimination in Nigeria's domestic law (Convention, art. 1).
The Committee invites the State party to request its National Assembly Joint Committee, set up to review the Constitution, to consider adopting a definition of discrimination that includes the elements contained in article 1 of the Convention.
The Committee regrets the paucity of information in the State party's report on the rights of non-citizens temporarily or permanently residing in Nigeria, including refugees, stateless persons, displaced persons and migrant workers.
Furthermore, the Committee notes that the guarantees against racial discrimination contained in section 42 of the Constitution do not extend to non-citizens (arts.
1 and 2).
In the context of the current constitutional review and the drafting of an Anti-Discrimination Bill by the Parliament, the Committee invites the State party to consider extending the scope of its domestic legislation so as to protect non-citizens from racial discrimination.
The Committee requests the State party to provide an update of developments in this regard and to include further information on the enjoyment of rights by non-citizens residing in Nigeria, in particular refugees, stateless persons, displaced persons and migrant workers, in its next periodic report.
In this regard, the Committee draws the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXX (2004) on non-citizens.
The Committee notes with concern that the main principles of the Convention have not been incorporated in domestic law, in order that it can be directly invoked in the Nigerian courts (art. 2).
The Committee invites the State party to take all necessary steps to incorporate the substantive provisions of the Convention in its domestic law, with a view to ensuring comprehensive protection against racial discrimination.
The Committee is seriously concerned that despite attempts to foster national unity, prejudices and feelings of hostility among some ethnic groups persist in Nigeria, including active discrimination by people who consider themselves to be the original inhabitants of their region against settlers from other states.
The Committee is particularly concerned at the persistence of inter-ethnic, intercommunal and interreligious violence in the country stemming from these hostile sentiments as well as at disputes over commercial interests and resource control, which have claimed thousands of lives and led to the displacement of a significant proportion of the population (art. 2).
The Committee encourages the State party to continue monitoring all initiatives and tendencies that may give rise to racist and xenophobic behaviour, and to combat the negative consequences of such tendencies.
The Committee recommends that the State party carefully monitor the negative impact of its efforts to promote national unity through regional and state action and, in particular, the effects on relations between and among ethno-religious groups.
The Committee recommends that the State party endeavour, by encouraging genuine dialogue, to improve relations between different ethnic and religious communities with a view to promoting tolerance and overcoming prejudices and negative stereotypes.
It invites the State party to conduct studies with a view to effectively assessing and evaluating occurrences of racial discrimination.
While noting that the 1958 Osu Abolition Law legally abolished work- and descent-based discrimination, the Committee remains concerned about persistent allegations that members of the Osu and other similar communities are still subjected to social exclusion, segregation and mistreatment, as well as discrimination in employment and marriage (arts.
2, 3 and 5).
The Committee draws the State party's attention to its general recommendation XXIX (2002) concerning racial discrimination based on descent, and suggests that a detailed response on this issue should be included in the State party's next report.
It strongly recommends that the State party develop, in cooperation with non-governmental organizations and religious leaders, effective programmes to prevent, prohibit and eliminate private and public practices that constitute segregation of any kind, including a wide-ranging information and public-awareness campaign to put an end to these practices.
The Committee expresses deep concern about numerous reports of ill-treatment, use of excessive force and extrajudicial killings as well as arbitrary arrests and detentions by law enforcement officials in attempts to quell incidents of intercommunal, inter-ethnic and interreligious violence.
The Committee is particularly disturbed at reports of serious acts of violence targeting members of particular ethnic groups in reprisal for attacks on security forces, including the October 2001 incident in Benue State.
While the Committee takes note of the establishment of numerous bodies to investigate these incidents, including panels of enquiry, it is concerned that most of the investigations have failed to produce prosecutions and sentences commensurate with the gravity of the crimes committed, leading to the appearance of impunity (arts. 2, 4 and 5).
The Committee recommends that the State party intensify its action to halt this phenomenon and requests that it submit detailed information about the number of persons who died and their ethnic affiliations, the prosecution of persons in relation to these events, and the sentences, if any, that were pronounced.
The Committee urges the State party to make public the results of all investigations previously announced in response to these events and to sanction those responsible.
The Committee expresses concern about the absence of an explicit penal provision in the State party's legislation prohibiting organizations and propaganda activities that advocate racial hatred, as required by article 4 (b) of the Convention (art. 4).
In the light of its general recommendation XXX (2004), the Committee recommends that the State party introduce in its criminal law a provision to the effect that committing an offence with racist motivation or aim constitutes an aggravating circumstance.
The Committee would also appreciate more detailed information on the procedure applicable to and the authorities competent to deal with cases of organizations reported to be racist.
The Committee is concerned about the persistence of discrimination against persons belonging to various ethnic groups in the fields of employment, housing and education, including discriminatory practices by people who consider themselves to be the original inhabitants of their region against settlers from other states.
While noting the efforts taken by the State party to improve the representation of different ethnic groups in the public service, most notably by the Federal Character Commission, the Committee remains concerned about the reports of continuing practices of patronage and traditional linkages based on ethnic origin, leading to the marginalization of certain ethnic groups in Government, legislative bodies and the judiciary (arts. 2 and 5).
The Committee recommends that the State party continue to promote equal opportunities for all persons without discrimination in order to ensure their full enjoyment of their rights, in accordance with article 2, paragraph 2, and article 5 of the Convention.
In this connection, the Committee urges the State party to strengthen its Affirmative Action Plans in favour of underrepresented or marginalized groups, including women, in its employment policies with regard to the public service, and to submit in its next periodic report more detailed information on achievements under these programmes.
The Committee is deeply concerned about the adverse effects on the environment of ethnic communities through large-scale exploitation of natural resources in the Delta Region and other River States, in particular, the Ogoni areas.
It is concerned at the State party's failure to engage in meaningful consultation with the concerned communities, and about the deleterious effects of the oil production activities on the local infrastructure, economy, health and education.
In this regard, the Committee also notes with concern that the Land Use Act of 1978 and the Petroleum Decree of 1969 are contrary to the provisions of the Convention.
Furthermore, the Committee is alarmed at the reports of assaults, use of excessive force, summary executions and other abuses against members of local communities by law enforcement officers as well as by security personnel employed by petroleum corporations (arts. 2 and 5).
In the light of general recommendation XXIII (1997) on the rights of indigenous peoples, the Committee urges the State party to take urgent measures to combat “environmental racism” and degradation.
In particular, it recommends that the State party repeal the Land Use Act of 1978 and the Petroleum Decree of 1969 and the adoption of a legislative framework which clearly sets forth the broad principles governing the exploitation of the land, including the obligation to abide by strict environmental standards as well as fair and equitable revenue distribution.
The Committee reiterates that along with the right to exploit natural resources there are specific, concomitant obligations towards the local population, including effective and meaningful consultation.
It further urges the State party to conduct full and impartial investigations of cases of alleged human rights violations by law enforcement officials and by private security personnel, institute proceedings against perpetrators and provide adequate redress to victims and/or their families.
In the light of the “intersectionality” of ethnic and religious discrimination, the Committee remains concerned that members of ethnic communities of the Muslim faith, in particular, Muslim women, can be subjected to harsher sentences than other Nigerians.
While noting the explanations provided by the delegation that all persons have the freedom to make their own choice with regard to the application of statutory, customary or religious law, the Committee notes that concerned persons may not necessarily be in a position to exercise individual choice in the matter (art. 5 (a)).
The Committee reminds the State party that all persons shall have the right to equal treatment before the courts and all other organs administering justice, and draws the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXV (2000) on gender-related dimensions of racial discrimination.
The Committee notes with concern that the provision regarding the acquisition of nationality as laid down in section 26 (2) (a) of the Constitution does not appear to comply fully with article 5 (d) (iii) of the Convention, since it stipulates that a foreign man is unable to acquire Nigerian nationality in the same manner as a foreign woman (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party consider reviewing section 26 (2) (a) of its Constitution, so as to bring it into line with the provisions of the Convention, and update the Committee on this matter in the next periodic report.
In this connection, it draws the attention of the State party to general recommendation XXV (2000) and to general recommendation XXX (2004), which requests States parties to ensure that particular groups of non-citizens are not discriminated against with regard to access to citizenship or naturalization.
While welcoming the extensive counter-trafficking measures taken by the State party, including the establishment in 2003 of the National Agency for Prohibition of Trafficking in Persons and the adoption in 2003 of the Anti-Human Trafficking Law, the Committee remains concerned that human trafficking, including trafficking of foreign women, men and children, remains a serious problem in the State party (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party include information in its next periodic report on human trafficking and continue to undertake necessary legislative and policy measures to prevent and combat trafficking.
The Committee urges the State party to provide support and assistance to victims, wherever possible in their own language.
While underlining the paramount importance of prompt and impartial investigations, the Committee recommends to the State party that it continue to make determined efforts to prosecute the perpetrators.
The Committee regrets that no statistics were provided on cases where the relevant provisions of domestic legislation concerning racial discrimination were applied.
The Committee reminds the State party that the mere absence of complaints and legal action by victims of racial discrimination may be an indication of the absence of relevant specific legislation, a lack of awareness of the availability of legal remedies, or insufficient will by the authorities to prosecute (art. 6).
The Committee recommends that the State party provide for the relevant provisions in national legislation and inform the public of the availability of all legal remedies in the field of racial discrimination.
The Committee further requests that the State party include in its next periodic report statistical information on prosecutions launched, and penalties imposed, in cases of offences that relate to racial discrimination and where the relevant provisions of the existing domestic legislation have been applied.
The Committee, while taking note of information on measures taken by the State party to enhance better understanding, respect and tolerance between different ethnic groups living in Nigeria, is of the view that the measures taken to promote intercultural understanding and education between ethnic groups are unsatisfactory (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party strengthen measures to promote understanding, tolerance and friendship between ethnic groups, including comprehensive public education campaigns and intercultural education in school curricula.
The Committee requests the State party to provide more detailed information on this issue in its next periodic report.
The Committee, while noting the information provided by the delegation, reiterates its previous concern that measures taken to educate the public, law enforcement officials, members of political parties and media professionals on the provisions of the Convention remain insufficient (art.
The Committee encourages the State party to expand and strengthen existing efforts regarding human rights education.
Furthermore, particular attention should be paid to general recommendation XIII (1993), according to which law enforcement officials should receive specific training to ensure that, in the performance of their duties, they respect and protect human dignity and maintain and uphold the human rights of all persons without distinction as to race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin.
The Committee invites the State party to consider ratifying:
(a) The International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families; and
(b) The International Labour Organization Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169).
The Committee notes that the State party has not made the optional declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party consider the possibility of making the declaration.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party ratify the amendments to article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention, adopted on 15 January 1992 at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111.
In this connection, the Committee refers to General Assembly resolution 59/176 of 20 December 2004, in which the Assembly strongly urged States parties to accelerate their domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment.
The Committee recommends that the State party take into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7 of the Convention.
It further recommends that it include in its next periodic report information on measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level, in particular the preparation and implementation of the national plan of action.
The Committee recommends that the State party's reports be made readily available to the public from the time they are submitted and that the observations of the Committee on these reports be similarly publicized.
Pursuant to article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention and article 65 of the Committee's rules of procedure, as amended, the Committee requests the State party to inform it of its implementation of the recommendations contained in paragraphs 289, 291 and 294 above, within one year of the adoption of the present conclusions.
The Committee recommends that the State party submit its nineteenth periodic report jointly with its twentieth periodic report on 4 January 2008, and that it address all points raised in the present concluding observations.
TURKMENISTAN The Committee considered the initial to fifth periodic reports of Turkmenistan, submitted in one document (CERD/C/441/Add.1), at its 1717th and 1718th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1717 and 1718), held on 11 and 12 August 2005.
At its 1725th and 1727th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1725 and 1727), held on 17 and 18 August 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by Turkmenistan and the opportunity thus offered to open a dialogue with the State party.
It regrets, however, that the report, which lacks detailed information on the practical implementation of the Convention, does not fully comply with the reporting guidelines.
The Committee notes with deep concern the major contradictions between, on the one hand, consistent information from both intergovernmental and non-governmental sources relating to the existence of grave violations of the Convention in Turkmenistan, and, on the other hand, the sometimes categorical denials by the State party.
The Committee stresses that the consideration of reports is designed to institute a constructive and sincere dialogue, and encourages the State party to increase its efforts to that end.
Noting that the report was about nine years overdue when submitted, the Committee invites the State party to respect the deadlines set for the submission of its future reports.
Positive aspects The Committee appreciates the attendance of a high-level delegation and the efforts it made to respond to the numerous questions posed by Committee members.
It notes the delegation's assurances relating to the willingness of the State party to pursue the dialogue with the Committee.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the State party has ratified most of the United Nations core human rights treaties since independence.
The Committee appreciates the passing of a regulation in March 2005, on the implementation of refugee status determination, as well as the generous hosting of more than 10,000 refugees from Tajikistan on a prima facie basis.
The Committee welcomes the amendment of 2 November 2004 of the Criminal Code rescinding article 223/1, which stipulated criminal penalties for unregistered activities of public associations, including non-governmental organizations.
C. Concerns and recommendations The Committee notes with concern the lack of consistent data relating to the ethnic composition of the population.
It notes that the proportion of national and ethnic minorities in Turkmenistan seems to have significantly diminished between 1995 and 2005, but finds it difficult to interpret these figures, which may have resulted, at the same time, from an assimilation policy conducted by the State party, the emigration of many members of minority groups, and the alleged distortion of statistics by the State party so as to diminish the importance of minorities on its territory.
The Committee requests the State party to provide consistent information on the ethnic composition of its population.
The Committee notes that under article 6 of the Constitution, the State party recognizes the primacy of generally recognized norms of international law, but is concerned that the status of the Convention in domestic law remains unclear.
It is further concerned about the existing gap between law and practice in Turkmenistan (art.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it fully ensure the rule of law, which is indispensable to the implementation of the Convention, and that it provide more detailed information on the status of the Convention in domestic law.
The Committee is deeply concerned about reported instances of hate speech against national and ethnic minorities, including statements attributed to high-ranking government officials and public figures supporting an approach to Turkmen ethnic purity, which is reported to have a significant detrimental impact on the population given the severe restrictions on freedoms of opinion and expression impeding opposition to such discourses.
The Committee is further concerned that such speech is inconsistent with the fundamental principle of racial and ethnic equality underlying the Convention (art.
The Committee urges the State party to abide by its obligation under article 4 (c) of the Convention not to permit public authorities or public institutions, national or local, to promote or incite racial discrimination.
The Committee wishes to receive more detailed information on the practical implementation of article 4 of the Convention in its entirety.
The Committee is deeply concerned by consistent information relating to the policy of “Turkmenization” conducted by the State party, and implemented through various measures in the field of employment, education and political life (arts.
2 and 5).
The Committee recalls that policies of forced assimilation amount to racial discrimination and constitute grave violations of the Convention.
It urges the State party to respect and protect the existence and cultural identity of all national and ethnic minorities within its territory.
The Committee wishes to receive detailed information on the measures adopted to that end, including those aimed at addressing the situation of the Baluchi minority, the existence of which as a distinct cultural community is reported to be at risk.
The Committee is concerned that, according to some information, and in the light of paragraph 2 (e) of General Assembly resolution 59/206 of 22 December 2004, national and ethnic minorities face severe restrictions on their participation in the labour force, in particular in public sector employment.
It is particularly disturbed about reports relating to the removal of many non-ethnic Turkmen from State employment and to “third generation tests” imposed on persons wishing to access higher education and public sector employment (arts.
2 and 5).
The Committee invites the State party to verify whether “third generation tests” exist and to ensure the right to work without discrimination based on national or ethnic origin.
The State party is requested to provide reliable statistical data on the effective participation of members of national minorities in the labour force, in particular in public sector employment.
The Committee notes with deep concern information that the State party has internally forcibly displaced populations, targeting in particular ethnic Uzbeks, to inhospitable parts of Turkmenistan.
It is further concerned about reported restrictions on freedom of movement imposed through internal travel documents and special permits to travel to internal border regions, which have a particular impact on persons belonging to national and ethnic minorities (arts.
2 and 5).
The Committee requests the State party not to forcibly displace populations and to re-examine its policy in this regard.
The State party is requested to provide information to the Committee about the number of individuals who have been resettled under the terms of the 18 November 2002 Presidential Decree and relevant provisions of the Criminal Code, their ethnic origin, the dates and reasons for their resettlement, and their place of residence prior to and following resettlement.
The Committee further recommends to the State party that it lift restrictions on freedom of movement having a disproportionate impact on members of national minorities.
The Committee is concerned about information that persons belonging to national and ethnic minorities are impeded from exercising their right to enjoy their own culture.
In particular, it is concerned about the reported closure of minority cultural institutions and of numerous schools teaching in minority languages, in particular Uzbek, Russian, Kazakh and Armenian languages, and the reduced possibilities for the use of minority languages in the media (arts.
2 and 5).
The Committee recommends that the State party fully respect the cultural rights of persons belonging to national and ethnic minorities.
In particular, the State party should consider reopening Uzbek, Russian, Kazakh, Armenian and other minority language schools.
The Committee suggests that the State party reconsider the requirement that students belonging to national or ethnic minorities wear Turkmen national dress, and to provide more information on this issue.
The State party should ensure that members of national and ethnic minorities are not discriminated against in their access to the media and have the possibility of creating and using their own media in their own language.
The Committee notes that, in 2003, the bilateral agreement between the Russian Federation and Turkmenistan on dual citizenship was repealed by the State party.
It notes with concern that persons who chose Russian citizenship were allegedly required to leave the country rapidly (arts. 2 and 5).
The Committee, stressing that deprivation of citizenship on the basis of national or ethnic origin is a breach of the obligation to ensure non-discriminatory enjoyment of the right to nationality, urges the State party to refrain from adopting any policy that directly or indirectly leads to such deprivation.
The Committee draws the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXX on non-citizens and wishes to receive more detailed information on the number of affected persons and the practical consequences for them.
The Committee, while stressing the complex relationship between ethnicity and religion in Turkmenistan, notes with concern information that members of religious groups do not fully enjoy their rights to freedom of religion and that some religious confessions remain unregistered.
It notes, however, the relaxation of registration rules in 2004.
The Committee recalls the State party's obligation to ensure that all persons enjoy their right to freedom of religion, without any discrimination based on national or ethnic origin, in accordance with article 5 (d) of the Convention.
The State party should accordingly respect the right of members of registered and unregistered religions to freely exercise their freedom of religion, and register religious groups who wish to be registered.
Detailed information on religions actually registered in Turkmenistan should be provided to the Committee.
The Committee appreciates the announcement made by the State party that it will grant citizenship to about 16,000 refugees who have been residing in Turkmenistan for some years, and permanent resident status to 3,000 other refugees (art.
The Committee encourages the State party to continue the naturalization process without discrimination based on ethnic origin.
It recommends, in particular, that the same treatment be granted to refugees of Turkmen, Uzbek, or other ethnic origin such as those coming from Afghanistan.
The Committee wishes to receive detailed data on the outcome of this process, disaggregated by ethnic origin.
The Committee is deeply concerned by information that the State party has adopted measures drastically limiting access to foreign culture and art, foreign media and the Internet.
While taking note of the abolition of the exit visa in 2004, it also remains concerned about the reported impediments imposed on Turkmen students wishing to study abroad (art.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it respect the freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art or other media, in order to foster common understanding and tolerance amongst nations and ethnic groups.
The Committee also recommends that the State party allow students to study abroad and that it provide detailed information on the actual regulations and practices relating to the recognition of foreign degrees.
The Committee notes that the “Ruhnama” reportedly dominates the school curriculum in Turkmenistan.
The Committee is concerned about the content of this text, and would appreciate receiving a copy (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party ensure that school curricula foster understanding, tolerance, and friendship among nations and ethnic groups.
The Committee notes that, since independence, no case of racial discrimination has been referred to the courts.
According to some information, members of national and ethnic minorities who suffer racial discrimination do not complain to courts because they fear reprisals and lack confidence in the police and the judicial authorities, and because of the authorities' lack of impartiality and of sensitivity to cases of racial discrimination (art.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it inform victims of their rights, including remedies available to them, facilitate their access to justice, guarantee their right to just and adequate reparation, and publicize the relevant laws.
The State party should ensure that its competent authorities proceed to a prompt and impartial investigation on complaints of racial discrimination, or whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that racial discrimination has been committed on its territory.
Judges and lawyers, as well as law enforcement personnel, should be trained accordingly.
The Committee, while noting the delegation's statement that in 1996, the State party established a Human Rights Institute, notes that this institution does not seem to qualify as an independent National Human Rights Institution under the Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles) (General Assembly resolution 48/134) (art.
The Committee invites the State party to consider establishing such an independent national human rights institution, with the mandate, in particular, to monitor compliance with the obligations of the Government of Turkmenistan under the Convention.
The Committee recommends that the State party take into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7 of the Convention, and that it include in its next periodic report information on action plans or other measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level.
The Committee notes that the State party has not made the optional declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention, and recommends that it consider the possibility of doing so.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party ratify the amendments to article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention, adopted on 15 January 1992 at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111.
In this connection, the Committee refers to General Assembly resolution 59/176 of 20 December 2004, in which the Assembly strongly urged States parties to accelerate their domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment.
The Committee recommends that the State party's reports be made readily available to the public from the time they are submitted and that the observations of the Committee on these reports be similarly publicized, in Turkmen and in the main minority languages, in particular Russian.
The Committee invites the State party to take advantage of the technical assistance available under the advisory services and technical assistance programme of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for the purpose of reviewing its laws and policies in a way that addresses the Committee's concerns set out above.
In view of the situation in Turkmenistan, the Committee strongly recommends to the State party that it extend an invitation to the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance to visit its territory.
Pursuant to article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention, and article 65 of the Committee's rules of procedure, as amended, the Committee requests the State party to inform it of its implementation of the recommendations contained in paragraphs 317, 319, 320, 321 and 326 above, within one year of the adoption of the present conclusions.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it submit its sixth and seventh periodic reports in a single report, due on 29 October 2007.
UNITED REPUBLIC OF Tanzania The Committee considered the eighth to sixteenth periodic reports of the United Republic of Tanzania, submitted in one document (CERD/C/452/Add.7), at its 1713th and 1714th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1713 and 1714), held on 9 and 10 August 2005.
At its 1725th meeting (CERD/C/SR.1725), held on 17 August 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by the State party as well as the additional oral information provided by the delegation.
However, the Committee regrets that the report does not contain sufficient information on the measures taken to give effect to the provisions of the Convention.
The Committee appreciates the presence of a high-ranking delegation and the constructive and frank dialogue with the State party's delegation and expresses its appreciation for the opportunity to resume its dialogue with the State party.
Noting that the periodic report was presented after a 17-year delay, the Committee invites the State party to respect the deadline set for the submission of its next reports.
Positive aspects The Committee acknowledges with appreciation that, despite a decline in the number of refugees, Tanzania continues to host more than 600,000 refugees, the largest number in Africa.
The Committee notes that Tanzania is a multi-ethnic State, with more than 120 ethnic and minority groups, and acknowledges its efforts to build a State where all groups live in harmony.
The Committee welcomes the establishment of the Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance with, inter alia, competence to conduct inquiries into complaints of human rights violations and to disseminate information on human rights.
The Committee acknowledges the role of ward tribunals in administering justice at the grass-roots level, speeding up the delivery of justice and enhancing its access to the population.
C. Concerns and recommendations While acknowledging the reasons presented by the State party for not gathering disaggregated data on the ethnic groups that make up its population, the Committee understands that, as a result of the lack of statistical information on the composition of its population, an adequate picture of the full complexity of the Tanzanian society cannot be obtained (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party endeavour to include in its next periodic report at least an approximate evaluation of the ethnic and linguistic composition of its population as well as of the number of non-citizens and, in this connection, draws the attention of the State party to paragraph 8 of its reporting guidelines, as well as to its general recommendation XXIV (1999).
While noting that article 13 of the Constitution prohibits racial discrimination and that article 9 of the Constitution ensures that State organs must ensure equality, the Committee is concerned about the absence of specific legislation on racial discrimination in the State party (arts.
1 and 2).
The Committee recommends that the State party adopt specific legislation on racial discrimination implementing the provisions of the Convention, including a legal definition of racial discrimination in line with article 1 of the Convention.
Bearing in mind that the State party has a dualist legal system, the Committee remains concerned about the fact that the Convention has not been incorporated in domestic law and that the position as to its direct applicability in the State party is unclear (art.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party envisage incorporating the Convention into its domestic legal order.
While noting the provisions of section 63 (b) (1) of the Penal Code, the Committee is concerned about the insufficiency of specific penal provisions implementing article 4 of the Convention in the domestic legislation of the State party (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party adopt legislation, in the light of its general recommendation XXV (1993), to ensure the full and adequate implementation of article 4 of the Convention in its domestic legal system.
While welcoming the fact that female genital mutilation has been a criminal offence in the State party since 1998, the Committee is concerned that it is still a persistent practice in some ethnic communities (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party include detailed information in its next periodic report on the practice of female genital mutilation.
The Committee further recommends that the State party reinforce the measures adopted to eradicate this persistent practice, in particular through sensitization programmes directed at promoting changes in attitudes towards this practice, in consultation with traditional communities.
The Committee notes with concern the lack of information from the State party regarding the expropriation of the ancestral territories of certain ethnic groups, and their forced displacement and resettlement (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party provide detailed information on the expropriation of the land of certain ethnic groups, on compensation granted and on their situation following their displacement.
The Committee regrets the lack of information on the numbers of non-citizens in the State party and on their situation as far as the enjoyment of their rights is concerned (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party include detailed information in its next periodic report on non-citizens and their situation, especially on immigrants and asylum-seekers, as well as on long-term foreign residents and the possibility of their acquiring citizenship, according to general recommendation XXX (2004).
The Committee also notes with concern the lack of information on certain vulnerable ethnic groups, notably nomadic and semi-nomadic populations, inter alia the Barbaig, Maasai and Hadzabe, on the difficulties they allegedly face due to their specific way of life and on special measures taken to guarantee the enjoyment of their human rights (arts.
5 and 2).
The Committee recommends that the State party provide detailed information on the situation of nomadic and semi-nomadic ethnic groups and on any special measures taken with a view to ensuring the enjoyment of their rights under the Convention, notably their freedom of movement and their right to participate in decisions which affect them.
The Committee is concerned that, according to information brought to its attention by reliable sources, some refugees have been forcibly returned to countries where there are substantial grounds for believing that they may suffer serious human rights violations (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party provide information on the situation of refugees, the legal basis for their deportation, and on the legal protection provided to them including their right to legal assistance and judicial appeal against deportation orders.
The Committee also urges the State party to ensure, in accordance with article 5 (b) of the Convention, that no refugees are forcibly returned to a country where there are substantial grounds for believing that they may suffer serious human rights violations.
The Committee is concerned about allegations of arbitrary arrests and detention, excessive use of force and ill-treatment of refugees, in particular women, by law enforcement officials, and about the lack of investigation of those cases (arts.
5 and 6).
The Committee recommends that the State party take appropriate measures to eradicate all forms of ill-treatment by law enforcement officials of refugees, in particular women, and ensure prompt, thorough, independent and impartial investigations into all allegations of ill-treatment of refugees.
The Committee further recommends that the persons responsible for the ill-treatment be prosecuted and punished, and victims granted compensation.
While noting that a reform of the legal sector has been undertaken and that the issue of access to justice is being considered, the Committee remains concerned about the difficulties of access to justice, especially for the poor and members of minority groups (arts.
5 and 6).
The Committee recommends that the State party take the necessary measures to establish mechanisms to improve the capacity and efficiency of the judicial system, so as to ensure access to justice to all without discrimination, and to establish mechanisms to provide legal aid to all members of vulnerable groups.
Religious questions are of relevance to the Committee when they are linked with ethnicity and racial discrimination.
In this connection, the Committee is concerned about the lack of information on the ethno-religious composition of the State party's population and about allegations of tensions between ethno-religious groups (arts.
5 and 7).
The Committee recommends that the State party include detailed information in its next periodic report on the situation of ethno-religious communities and the measures taken to promote tolerance between them.
The Committee regrets the insufficiency of detailed information regarding the independence, competencies and effectiveness of the Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance.
The Committee notes that, since the establishment of the Ombudsman in 1966, no complaints about racial discrimination have been brought to this institution (art.
The Committee recommends that in its next periodic report, the State party provide detailed information on the independence, competencies and effective results of the activities of the Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance and encourages the State party to strengthen this institution in line with the Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles) (General Assembly resolution 48/134) and provide it with adequate resources.
The Committee further recommends that the State party widely disseminate information on the existence of this institution, especially on its capacity to investigate violations of human rights.
The Committee notes the lack of information on complaints of racial discrimination and the absence of court cases regarding racial discrimination (arts.
6 and 7).
The Committee recalls that the absence of cases may be due to the victims' lack of information about the existing remedies, and therefore recommends that the State party ensure that appropriate provisions are available in national legislation regarding effective protection and remedies against violation of the Convention and that the public at large is appropriately informed about their rights and the legal remedies available against their violation.
The Committee further recommends that the State party provide information on future complaints and cases in its next periodic report.
The Committee recommends that the State party take into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7 of the Convention.
It further recommends that it include in its next periodic report information on measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level.
The Committee requests that the State party's report and the present concluding observations be widely disseminated throughout the State party, and that the next periodic report be brought to the attention of non-governmental organizations operating in the country before being submitted to the Committee.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party ratify the amendments to article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention, adopted on 15 January 1992 at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111, concerning the funding of its meetings by the United Nations regular budget.  In this connection, the Committee refers to General Assembly resolution 59/176 of 20 December 2004, in which the Assembly strongly urged States parties to accelerate their domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment.
Pursuant to article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention, and article 65 of the Committee's rules of procedure, as amended, the Committee requests the State party to inform it of its implementation of the recommendations contained in paragraphs 348, 352 and 353 above, within one year of the adoption of the present conclusions.
The Committee recommends that the State party submit its seventeenth periodic report jointly with its eighteenth periodic report on 26 November 2007, and that it address all points raised in the present concluding observations.
VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF) The Committee considered the fourteenth to eighteenth periodic reports of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which were due on 4 January 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002 and 2004, respectively, submitted as one document (CERD/C/476/Add.4), at its 1703rd and 1704th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1703 and 1704), held on 2 and 3 August 2005.
At its 1725th meeting (CERD/C/SR.1725), held on 17 August 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the periodic report of the State party and the fact that the State party was represented by a delegation composed of officials from various State agencies involved in matters relating to the implementation of the Convention.
It expresses its satisfaction with the quality of the renewed dialogue with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Committee thanks the delegation for its frank and detailed replies to the numerous questions asked.
While the Committee acknowledges the efforts made by the State party to comply with the Committee's guidelines for the preparation of reports, it notes that the report has not addressed some of the concerns and recommendations raised in previous concluding observations.
Positive aspects The Committee welcomes with satisfaction the rights and principles contained in the Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela of 1999, in particular the preamble, which establishes the multi-ethnic and multicultural nature of Venezuelan society, as well as article 21 and chapter VIII which guarantees the rights of indigenous peoples, such as the right to intercultural bilingual education, the right to traditional medicine and the right to participate in political life.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that federal and State legislation recently adopted by the State party follows the basic principles of the Constitution and builds on its guarantees of racial and ethnic non-discrimination.
The Committee takes note of the establishment of specialized institutions to combat racial discrimination such as the Presidential Commission to Combat All Forms of Racial Discrimination and Other Discrimination in the Venezuelan Educational System, the National Coordination Group for Indigenous Health, which answers to the Ministry of Health and Social Development, and the Department of Indigenous Education of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that indigenous peoples are represented in the National Assembly, which has at least three indigenous deputies with their respective alternates, elected by indigenous peoples in keeping with their traditions and customs.
The Committee notes with interest the existence of special courts to settle conflicts in accordance with the traditions and customs of indigenous peoples, as well as the post of Special Ombudsman on Indigenous Issues.
The Committee notes with satisfaction Presidential Decree No. 1795 of 27 May 2002 concerning protection of the languages of indigenous peoples.
It notes that indigenous peoples may make use of their languages in their dealings with the authorities or, where appropriate, have an official interpreter, and that the Constitution has been translated into the Wayuu language.
The Committee welcomes the fact that article 31 of the Constitution recognizes the right to address petitions to the international human rights treaty bodies, and that in 2003 the State party made the optional declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention thus responding to a request of the Committee, and hopes that the public is being appropriately informed about the possibilities and procedures under the mentioned article of the Convention.
The Committee welcomes the State party's ratification in 2002 of International Labour Organization Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) concerning indigenous and tribal peoples in independent countries.
The Committee notes with satisfaction that one of the objectives of the Radio and Television Social Responsibility Act of 2004 is to promote tolerance among peoples and ethnic groups.
The Committee notes with satisfaction progress in the interaction between the Government and non-governmental organizations representing Afro-descendants and, as one of the expressions of this interaction, the designation of 10 May as Afro-Venezuelan Day.
C. Concerns and recommendations The Committee notes with concern that the State party does not have disaggregated statistical data on the Afro-descendants.
The Committee recalls that such information is necessary for evaluating the implementation of the Convention and for monitoring policies that affect minorities.
The Committee recommends that the State party include in its next periodic report disaggregated statistical data on Afro-descendants, which would make it possible to evaluate their situation more accurately.
The Committee notes that the identity document issued to indigenous persons in accordance with the Regulations under the Organization Act on the Identification of Indigenous Persons includes the name of the ethnic group, the people and community to which such persons belong.
The Committee requests the State party to ensure that, in accordance with its general recommendation VIII, the identity document for indigenous persons be based upon self-identification by the individual concerned.
Taking note of article 369 of the draft criminal code, which punishes acts of racial discrimination, the Committee wishes to receive information on complaints of acts of racial discrimination and on the relevant legal action taken by the victims or on their behalf.
The Committee encourages the State party to adopt the draft criminal code as soon as possible and requests it to include in its next periodic report disaggregated statistical information on cases involving racial discrimination and on penalties imposed, in which the relevant provisions of domestic law have been applied.
Bearing in mind the State party's efforts, the Committee reiterates its concern at the persistence of profound structural social and economic inequalities which have an impact on the enjoyment of human rights, particularly economic and social rights, and affect Afro-descendants and indigenous peoples.
The Committee encourages the State party to step up its efforts to improve the economic and social rights situation of Afro-descendants and indigenous people, such as the right to housing, the right to health and sanitation services, the right to work and the right to adequate nutrition, in order to combat racial discrimination and eliminate structural inequalities.
The Committee notes with great concern that between 1995 and 2003, 61 persons, most of whom were indigenous or Afro-descendants, were murdered in land conflicts, presumably by private armed groups (sicarios), and that this problem has worsened since 2001.
The Committee requests the State party to take efficient and urgent measures to end this violence, which mainly affects indigenous peoples and Afro-descendants, including the establishment of an independent monitoring mechanism to investigate such incidents in order to ensure that they do not go unpunished.
The Committee notes with concern that, according to the report by the State party, the indigenous peoples of the upper Orinoco and the Casiquiare and Guainia-Río Negro basins have problems of various kinds.
More particularly, in the centres of illegal gold prospecting, there is evidence that indigenous children and adolescents are subjected to labour exploitation and the worst forms of child labour, including servitude and slavery, child prostitution, trafficking and sale.
The Committee recommends that the State party adopt urgent measures to tackle this situation, and that it submit information on the implementation of the measures taken.
While the Committee takes note of the State party's efforts to demarcate indigenous lands, such as the promulgation of the Indigenous Peoples Habitat and Lands, Demarcation and Protection Act, it is concerned that the effective ownership and use of indigenous lands and resources continue to be threatened and restricted by repeated aggression from individuals and private groups against indigenous peoples, in order to move them from their land.
In the light of general recommendation XXIII on the rights of indigenous peoples, the Committee recommends that the State party take measures to recognize and protect the rights of indigenous peoples to own, develop, control and use their lands, territories and resources.
In this regard, the Committee invites the State party to provide information on the settlement of cases of conflicting interests relating to indigenous lands and resources, particularly those in which indigenous groups have been displaced from their lands.
The Committee recommends that the State party take account of the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when incorporating the Convention, particularly articles 2 to 7, into its domestic law.
It also recommends that, in its next periodic report, the State party provide information on measures it has taken to give effect to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level, particularly the preparation and implementation of a national plan of action.
The State party has informed the Committee that it will increase its efforts with a view to ratifying the amendment to article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention, which was adopted on 15 January 1992 at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111.
In this connection, the Committee recalls General Assembly resolution 59/176, in which the Assembly strongly urged States parties to accelerate their domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment.
The Committee invites the State party to consider the possibility of ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families.
The Committee recommends that the reports of the State party be made public as soon as they are submitted to the Committee, and that the concluding observations of the Committee on these reports be widely publicized.
Pursuant to article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention, and article 65 of the Committee's rules of procedure, as amended, the Committee requests the State party to inform it of its implementation of the recommendations contained in paragraphs 376, 380 and 381 above, within one year of the adoption of the present conclusions.
The Committee recommends that the State party submit its nineteenth and twentieth reports in a single report, due on 4 January 2008.
ZAMBIA The Committee considered the twelfth to sixteenth periodic reports of Zambia, submitted in one document (CERD/C/452/Add.6/Rev.1), at its 1707th and 1708th meetings (CERD/C/SR.1707 and 1708), held on 4 and 5 August 2005.
At its 1721st and 1723rd meetings (CERD/C/SR.1721 and 1723), held on 15 and 16 August 2005, it adopted the following concluding observations.
Introduction The Committee welcomes the report submitted by the State party, the quality of which demonstrates Zambia's willingness to resume dialogue with the Committee.
It notes with satisfaction that the report complies with the reporting guidelines and contains relevant information on the factors and difficulties encountered in the implementation of the Convention.
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the delegation to respond to the numerous questions posed by its members, and encourages the State party to increase its efforts so as to ensure that substantial answers are provided to the Committee in the course of future dialogues.
Noting that the report was about nine years overdue when submitted, the Committee invites the State party to respect the deadlines set for the submission of its future reports.
Positive aspects The Committee notes with appreciation the establishment of several national institutions, in particular the Zambian Human Rights Commission and the Police Public Complaints Authority.
The Committee particularly welcomes the fact that the delegation agreed to the participation of the Zambian Human Rights Commission in the dialogue with the Committee, which further demonstrates the State party's readiness to enter into a frank and constructive dialogue with the Committee.
It also appreciates that the Zambian Human Rights Commission as well as civil society participated in the elaboration of the periodic report.
The Committee notes with satisfaction the State party's generous approach in hosting and providing protection to more than 271,000 refugees over many years.
The Committee welcomes the State party's efforts to enhance the access of refugees to the courts and in particular the establishment of mobile special courts and special police units to serve in refugee camps and settlements.
C. Concerns and recommendations The Committee, while welcoming the establishment of a Constitution Review Commission in 2003, reiterates its concern that article 23 of the Constitution, which allows for extended restrictions to the prohibition of discrimination with respect to non-citizens, matters of personal law and of customary law, is not in compliance with the Convention (art.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it facilitate the constitutional review process and amend article 23 (4) of the Constitution so as to ensure the full implementation of the prohibition of racial discrimination.
The Committee draws the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXX (2004) on non-citizens.
It also stresses that respect for customary law and practices should not be ensured through a general exception to the principle of non-discrimination, but should rather be implemented through positive recognition of cultural rights.
The Committee, while taking note of the delegation's statement that first steps have been undertaken by the Government to incorporate the Convention into domestic law, reiterates its concern that this has not been fully achieved (art.
The Committee invites the State party to proceed with the incorporation of the provisions of the Convention into domestic law, and requests that detailed information on actual plans to this end be provided.
The Committee is concerned in particular that, under article 11 of the Constitution, the right of everyone not to be discriminated against is applicable to a limited list of mainly civil and political rights, and that the Directive Principles of State Policy, also included in the Constitution, do not contain any non-discrimination clause with regard to economic, social and cultural rights.
It further regrets the lack of precise information regarding legislation prohibiting racial discrimination in the enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, and its implementation in practice (arts.
1, 2 and 5).
The Committee recommends to the State party that it guarantee the right of everyone not to be discriminated against in the enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social, and cultural rights.
More detailed information on the existing legislation and its practical implementation should be provided to the Committee in this regard.
The Committee notes the 1996 amendment to the Constitution, which requires that a presidential candidate be a second-generation Zambian.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it review this provision so as to ensure full compliance with article 5 (c) of the Convention.
The Committee notes with concern the decision of the State party to appeal the High Court judgement in the case Roy Clarke v.
Attorney-General, which quashed a deportation order concerning a British long-term resident on the basis that he would not have been punished for his journalistic activities if he were a Zambian citizen (art.
5 (d) (viii)).
The Committee recalls that under the Convention, differential treatment based on citizenship constitutes discrimination if the criteria for such differentiation are not applied pursuant to a legitimate aim, and are not proportional to the achievement of this aim.
It recommends to the State party that it respect the right to freedom of expression without any discrimination based on citizenship, and that it provide the Committee with detailed information on the results of the above-mentioned appeal.
The Committee notes the efforts made by the State party to address the demands in the sphere of education, health care and food in regions hosting a large population of refugees, in particular through the Zambia Initiative.
It remains concerned, however, about the fate of thousands of long-term refugees who are unable to return to their countries of origin, in particular Angolans, in a context where the 1970 Zambian Refugee Control Act does not encourage their local integration (art.
The Committee encourages the State party to review its current refugee policy with a view to enhancing prospects for local integration of long-term refugees.
To this end, the Committee recommends to the State party that it review the Refugee Control Act and consider withdrawing its reservation to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.
The Committee notes with concern that de facto racial discrimination by non-State actors poses daily challenges to the State party (arts.
4 and 5).
The Committee urges the State party to develop strategies to tackle this issue, in cooperation with the Zambian Human Rights Commission and other stakeholders.
The Committee reiterates its concern that the provisions of article 4 (b) of the Convention have not yet been fully incorporated in domestic law.
The Committee recommends that the State party recognize participation in organizations promoting and inciting racial discrimination as a punishable offence.
The Committee regrets the lack of statistical data on cases of racial discrimination lodged before relevant Zambian institutions (arts.
4 and 6).
The State party should include in its next periodic report statistical information on complaints of racial discrimination lodged before national courts and the Zambian Human Rights Commission, as well as on the outcome of these cases.
Information on specific cases should also be provided.
The Committee notes that complaints of racial discrimination have failed before institutions such as the Zambian Human Rights Commission and the Industrial Relations Court, because of the impossibility of proving racial discrimination (art.
The Committee recommends that complaints of racial discrimination be fully dealt with, including when they are coupled with complaints of violation of other rights, such as labour rights.
It also recommends that full attention be paid to the possible existence of indirect discrimination, which is prohibited under the Convention.
Further, it encourages the State party to envisage regulating the burden of proof in civil proceedings involving racial discrimination so that once a person has established a prima facie case that he or she has been a victim of such discrimination, it shall be for the respondent to provide evidence of an objective and reasonable justification for the differential treatment.
While welcoming the efforts pursued by the State party in the field of human rights education, the Committee remains concerned that most people living in Zambia are not aware of their rights and thus find it difficult to seek redress if their rights are violated.
The Committee further recalls that the fact that victims of racial discrimination rarely report on such matters to the appropriate authorities can also be the result of, inter alia, the limited resources available to victims, their lack of confidence in the police and the judicial authorities, or the authorities' lack of attention or sensitivity to cases of racial discrimination (art.
The State party should strengthen its efforts to raise the awareness of people on their rights, inform the victims of all remedies available to them, facilitate their access to justice, and train judges, lawyers, and law enforcement personnel accordingly.
The Committee notes with concern the difficulties encountered by the Zambian Human Rights Commission as described in the report, in particular inadequate staffing, inadequate means of transportation, centralization, and slow response from concerned State authorities to the Commission's requests for action.
It notes with interest, however, the State party's plan to decentralize the Commission's offices and the information that the new draft Constitution contains provisions enhancing the effectiveness of the Commission (art.
The Committee recommends that the State party increase its efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the Human Rights Commission, in particular through adequate budget allocations.
The Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles) (General Assembly resolution 48/134) should be taken into consideration in the elaboration of the constitutional reform relating to the Human Rights Commission.
The Committee wishes to receive detailed information about the follow-up by the State authorities to the Commission's recommendations, as well as on relationships established between the Commission and civil society.
The Committee recommends that the State party take into account the relevant parts of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action when implementing the Convention in the domestic legal order, in particular in respect of articles 2 to 7 of the Convention, and that it include in its next periodic report information on action plans or other measures taken to implement the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the national level.
The Committee notes that the State party has not made the optional declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention, and recommends that it consider the possibility of doing so.
The Committee strongly recommends that the State party ratify the amendments to article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention, adopted on 15 January 1992 at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111.
In this connection, the Committee refers to General Assembly resolution 59/176 of 20 December 2004, in which the Assembly strongly urged States parties to accelerate their domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment and to notify the Secretary-General expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment.
The Committee recommends that the State party's reports be made readily available to the public from the time they are submitted and that the observations of the Committee on these reports be similarly publicized.
Pursuant to article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention, and article 65 of the Committee's rules of procedure, as amended, the Committee requests the State party to inform it of its implementation of the recommendations contained in paragraphs 401, 402 and 407 above, within one year of the adoption of the present conclusions.
The Committee recommends to the State party that it submit its seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth periodic reports in a single report, due on 5 March 2009.
follow-up to the consideration of reports submitted by states parties under article 9 of the convention At its 1698th meeting held on 10 March 2005, the Committee adopted terms of reference for the work of the coordinator on follow-up (see the terms of reference in annex IV).
The Committee, at its 1699th meeting, on 10 March 2005, decided to send the following letter to the Permanent Representative of Botswana to the United Nations Office at Geneva:
Letter to Botswana
“10 March 2005
“Excellency,
“The Committee wishes to inform you that it considered, at its sixty-sixth session in March 2005 the preliminary responses provided by the Republic of Botswana in its letter dated 10 February 2005, regarding the implementation of paragraph 301 of the Committee's previous concluding observations on Botswana, adopted in August 2002 (see A/57/18).
“The Committee welcomes with appreciation the extensive and substantial information provided by the Republic of Botswana, as requested by the Committee in its letters dated 20 August and 23 September 2004.
It appreciates the willingness of the State party to pursue a dialogue with the Committee in a constructive manner.
“The Committee notes with a particular interest the useful information provided by the State party on the history of Botswana, and its implications regarding territories, tribes, and representation in the House of Chiefs.
While understanding that traditions and customs constitute an important heritage of Botswana, the Committee wishes to stress, however, that the State party should also take into consideration the obligations it has undertaken under the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
“The Committee reiterates its views that the Tribal Territories Act, the Chieftainship Act and sections 77 to 79 of the Constitution, as currently drafted, have a discriminatory effect, in particular against those ethnic groups which are subordinate to a dominant tribe on a Tribal Territory, and are not represented on an equal basis in the House of Chiefs.
It notes that the High Court of Botswana, in a decision adopted on 23 November 2001, declared that the Chieftainship Act was discriminatory and ordered that its section 2 be amended in order to give equal protection and treatment to all tribes under that Act.
“The Committee welcomes efforts made by the State party to ensure better representation in the House of Chiefs, and notes its willingness to enhance territorial representation rather than ethnic representation in this House.
“The Committee wishes to stress, however, that whatever system is chosen, it should not discriminate between groups, and should not lead to a situation where some groups are recognized while others are not, or where the interests of some groups are taken into consideration while interests of other groups are not.
In this regard, the Committee wishes to stress that the Convention prohibits direct as well as indirect discrimination, and draws the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXIV, according to which criteria for recognition of groups should be consistently applied.
It further notes that, according to some information, non-Tswana-speaking regions all rejected the proposed bill.
“The State party indicates that it is currently redrafting those aspects of section 2 of the Chieftainship Act which had been declared discriminatory by the High Court, and that the draft Bill on the House of Chiefs will be amended accordingly.
The Committee wishes to be kept closely informed about the ongoing reform process, and requests that copies of the new draft bills be transmitted to it as soon as they are available.
It would also like to receive more detailed information clarifying what the terms `dominant tribe' and `historical agreement of all concerned', by which a paramount chief rules over all tribal groupings living in Tribal Territories, actually mean.
“Please allow us, Excellency, to reiterate the wish of the Committee to pursue the constructive dialogue renewed with your Government in 2002, and to underline that the Committee's observations and request for further information is made with a view to ensuring the implementation of the Convention in cooperation with your Government.
“Yours sincerely,
“(Signed): Mario Yutzis Chairman Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
Morten Kjaerum Coordinator of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on follow-up” At its 1700th meeting, on 11 March 2005, the Committee adopted the following decision:
Decision 3 (66) on Suriname
At its sixty-fourth session, which took place from 23 February to 12 March 2004, the Committee considered the first to tenth periodic reports of Suriname and welcomed the opportunity to engage, for the first time, in a constructive dialogue with the State party.
In the concluding observations which it adopted following examination of these reports, the Committee recommended “legal acknowledgement by the State party of the rights of indigenous and tribal peoples to possess, develop, control and use their communal lands and to participate in the exploitation, management and conservation of the associated natural resources”, and that “the State party strive to reach agreements with the peoples concerned, as far as possible, before awarding any concessions”.
The Committee also adopted the following conclusion and recommendation:
“The Committee notes that, under the draft Mining Act, indigenous and tribal peoples will be required to accept mining activities on their lands following agreement on compensation with the concession holders, and that if agreement cannot be reached, the matter will be settled by the executive, and not the judiciary.
More generally, the Committee is concerned that indigenous and tribal peoples cannot as such seek recognition of their traditional rights before the courts because they are not recognized legally as juridical persons.
“The Committee recommends that indigenous and tribal peoples should be granted the right of appeal to the courts, or any independent body specially created for that purpose, in order to uphold their traditional rights and their right to be consulted before concessions are granted and to be fairly compensated for any damage.”
The revised version of the draft Mining Act, which was approved by Suriname's Council of Ministers at the end of 2004 and is likely to be scheduled for adoption by the National Assembly within the next few months, may not be in conformity with the Committee's recommendations.
The Committee therefore invites the State party to comment on the above assessment of the draft law, and recommends that such comments be submitted to it before 11 April 2005.
The Committee wishes to draw once again the attention of the State party to its general recommendation XXIII (1997) on the rights of indigenous peoples.
It also reiterates the conclusions and recommendations it adopted following the examination of the first to tenth periodic reports of Suriname.
It recommends to the State party that it ensure the compliance of the revised draft Mining Act with the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, as well as with recommendations formulated by the Committee.
The Committee wishes to pursue the constructive dialogue it has engaged in with Suriname in 2004, and stresses that its request for clarification is made with a view to ensuring the implementation of the Convention in cooperation with the State party.
9 March 2005 1696th meeting At its 1728th meeting, on 19 August 2005, the Committee decided to request the Chairman to send a letter to the Government of the United States of America, informing it that the Committee had considered on a preliminary basis the requests submitted by the Western Shoshone National Council and by the Western people of the Timbisha Shoshone Tribe, Winnemucca Indian Colony and Yomba Shoshone Tribe, asking the Committee to act under its early warning and urgent action procedure on the situation of the Western Shoshone indigenous people in the United States of America.
The Chairman, on behalf of the Committee, expressed appreciation for the frank and open preliminary discussion that took place on 8 August 2005 between representatives of the United States of America and the Committee's working group on early warning and urgent action procedures, together with the coordinator on follow-up and other Committee members.
The Chairman stated that the Committee had noted with interest the assurances given by the State party that its fourth and fifth periodic reports, which were due on 20 November 2003, were being prepared and that comprehensive information relating to the follow-up given to the Committee's 2001 concluding observations would be included in these periodic reports.
It was to be regretted, however, that the State party was not in a position to undertake to submit the reports by a specific date.
The Chairman also stressed that the Committee had noted with concern the allegation that the Western Shoshone indigenous people were being denied their traditional rights to land and that actions taken by the State party in relation to the status, use and occupation of these lands may cumulatively lead to irreparable harm to this community.
In light of the above information, the Chairman informed the Government of the United States of America that the Committee considered that the opening of a substantial dialogue on these issues would help to clarify the situation before the submission and examination of the fourth and fifth periodic reports of the State party.
In order to facilitate this dialogue, and in accordance with article 9 (1) of the Convention and article 65 of its rules of procedure, the Committee drew the attention of the Government to a list of questions regarding which it was requested to send responses by 31 December 2005, so that they could be examined at its sixty-eighth session, to be held from 20 February to 10 March 2006.
At the same meeting, the Committee also decided to request the Chairman to send a letter to the Government of Ukraine informing it that the Committee had considered on a preliminary basis the request submitted by the Research and Support of Indigenous Peoples of Crimea Foundation, asking the Committee to act under its early warning and urgent action procedures on the situation of the Tatars in Crimea.
After recalling the relevant provisions of its concluding observations adopted in 1998 and in 2001, and in accordance with article 9 (1) of the Convention and article 65 of its rules of procedure, the Chairman drew the attention of the State party to a list of questions to which it wished to receive a response at the latest by 31 December 2005, so that the matter could be discussed at its sixty-eighth session.
The Chairman also reiterated the wish of the Committee to pursue the constructive dialogue with the Government of Ukraine and to underline that this request for further information was made with a view to ensuring the implementation of the Convention in cooperation with the State party.
The Committee further reminded the State party that the seventeenth and eighteenth periodic reports of Ukraine, to be submitted in one document, were due on 6 April 2004.
The Committee therefore strongly encouraged the State party to submit its overdue periodic report as soon as possible.
Notes
Review of the implementation of the Convention IN STATES parties whose reports Are seriously overdue
Reports overdue by at least 10 years The following States parties are at least 10 years late in the submission of their reports:
Reports overdue by at least five years The following States parties are at least five years late in the submission of their reports:
C. Action taken by the Committee to ensure submission of reports by States parties At its sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh sessions, the Committee reviewed the question of delays and non-submission of reports by States parties in accordance with their obligations under article 9 of the Convention.
At its forty-second session, the Committee, having emphasized that the delays in reporting by States parties hampered it in monitoring implementation of the Convention, decided that it would continue to proceed with the review of the implementation of the provisions of the Convention by the States parties whose reports were overdue by five years or more.
In accordance with a decision taken at its thirty-ninth session, the Committee agreed that this review would be based upon the last reports submitted by the State party concerned and their consideration by the Committee.
At its forty-ninth session, the Committee further decided that States parties whose initial reports were overdue by five years or more would also be scheduled for a review of implementation of the provisions of the Convention.
The Committee agreed that in the absence of an initial report, the Committee would consider all information submitted by the State party to other organs of the United Nations or, in the absence of such material, reports and information prepared by organs of the United Nations.
In practice the Committee also considers relevant information from other sources, including from non-governmental organizations, whether it is an initial or periodic report that is seriously overdue.
Following its sixty-fifth session, the Committee decided to schedule at its sixty-sixth session a review of the implementation of the Convention in the following States parties whose periodic reports were seriously overdue: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ethiopia, El Salvador, Nicaragua and Papua New Guinea.
El Salvador was withdrawn from the list prior to the sixty-sixth session following the submission of a report.
In the cases of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ethiopia and Nicaragua, the reviews were postponed at the request of the States parties, which indicated their intention to submit the requested reports shortly.
At its 1695th meeting, the Committee reviewed the implementation of the Convention in Papua New Guinea (see paragraph 431).
Following its sixty-sixth session, the Committee decided to schedule at its sixty-seventh session a review of the implementation of the Convention in the following States parties whose initial and periodic reports were seriously overdue: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Malawi, Mozambique, Seychelles and Saint Lucia.
Bosnia and Herzegovina was withdrawn from the list prior to the sixty-seventh session following the submission of a report.
In the case of Mozambique, the review was postponed at the request of the State party, which indicated its intention to submit the report by 31 December 2005.
The Committee reviewed the implementation of the Convention in Malawi at its 1712th meeting, and in Seychelles and Saint Lucia at its 1719th meeting (see paragraphs 432-434).
Decisions At its 1695th meeting, held on 8 March 2005, the Committee decided to request the Chairman to send a letter to the Permanent Representative of Papua New Guinea to the United Nations.
In his letter of 11 March 2005, the Chairman informed the Permanent Representative that the Committee had reviewed the situation of Papua New Guinea in the absence of a report.
Furthermore, he reiterated the strong appeal made in 2003 to resume the dialogue interrupted since 1984, and to that end submit a report in accordance with article 9 of the Convention.
The Committee regretted that, despite its repeated requests, Papua New Guinea had not yet fulfilled its obligations under article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention.
In order to stimulate the Committee's future discussion on the implementation of the Convention at its sixty-eighth session, the Chairman attached to his letter a list of questions elaborated by the Committee with a request for a response by 30 November 2005.
The Committee once again drew the State party's attention to the possibility of availing itself of the technical assistance offered under the advisory services and technical assistance programme of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
At its 1712th meeting, held on 9 August 2005, the Committee decided to request the Chairman to send a letter to the Permanent Representative of Malawi to the United Nations.
In his letter of 19 August 2005, the Chairman informed the State party that it had reviewed the implementation of the Convention in Malawi in the absence of a report and deeply regretted the fact that Malawi was seriously overdue in the submission of its initial to fifth periodic reports to the Committee, due respectively from 1997 to 2005.
In order to assist in the initiation of a dialogue on the measures adopted by Malawi to implement the Convention, the Committee decided to send a list of questions to the State party and requested written responses to this list by 31 January 2006.
In the absence of any response from Malawi by that date, the Committee would proceed with the adoption of concluding observations on Malawi under its review procedure.
At its 1719th meeting, held on 12 August 2005, the Committee decided to request the Chairman to send a letter to the Permanent Representative of Seychelles to the United Nations.
In his letter of 19 August 2005, the Chairman informed the State party that it had reviewed the implementation of the Convention in Seychelles in the absence of a report.
The Chairman regretted the interruption of a dialogue between the Committee and Seychelles since 1988.
In order to assist in the resumption of a dialogue, the Committee decided to send a list of questions to the State party and requested written responses to this list by 31 January 2006.
In the absence of any response from Seychelles by that date, the Committee would proceed with the adoption of concluding observations under its review procedure.
The Committee drew the State party's attention to the possibility of availing itself of the technical assistance offered under the advisory services and technical assistance programme of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
At the same meeting, the Committee also decided to request the Chairman to send a letter to the Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia to the United Nations.
In his letter of 19 August 2005, the Chairman informed the State party that it had reviewed once again the implementation of the Convention in Saint Lucia in the absence of a report.
He recalled that the Committee had already examined the situation in Saint Lucia without a report at its sixty-fourth session, held in March 2004, and decided at its sixty-fifth session, held in August 2004, to proceed with the publication of its provisional concluding observations in its annual report to the General Assembly.
The Chairman deeply regretted the fact that Saint Lucia was seriously overdue in the submission of its initial to seventh periodic reports to the Committee, due respectively from 1991 to 2003, to be submitted in one combined document, and had still not given any indication regarding the state of preparation of this report.
The Chairman requested that the Government of Saint Lucia indicate to the Committee whether it wished to avail itself of the advisory services available under the technical cooperation programme of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, with a view to assisting it in the drafting of the overdue report.
In order to assist in the resumption of a dialogue, the Committee decided to send a list of questions to the State party and requested written responses to this list by 31 January 2006.
In the absence of any response by that date, the Committee would proceed with the adoption of concluding observations under its review procedure.
Note
Vi.
CONSIDERATION OF COMMUNICATIONS UNDER ARTICLE 14 OF THE CONVENTION Under article 14 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, individuals or groups of individuals who claim that any of their rights enumerated in the Convention have been violated by a State party and who have exhausted all available domestic remedies may submit written communications to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination for consideration.
A list of 46 States parties which have recognized the competence of the Committee to consider such communications can be found in annex I.
In the period under review, one more State has made the declaration under article 14: Georgia.
Consideration of communications under article 14 of the Convention takes place in closed meetings (rule 88 of the Committee's rules of procedure).
All documents pertaining to the work of the Committee under article 14 (submissions from the parties and other working documents of the Committee) are confidential.
At its sixty-sixth session, the Committee declared communication No.
30/23 admissible.
It also adopted Opinions on communications No.
31/2003 (L.R. v.
Slovakia), No.
32/2003 (Sefic v.
Denmark) and No.
33/2003 (Quereshi v.
Denmark (No. 2)).
These Opinions are reproduced in full in annex III, section A.
In case No.
31/2003 (L.R. v.
Slovakia), the petitioners, 27 Slovak Roma, complained about a discriminatory denial of the right to housing, contrary to articles 2 and 5 of the Convention, coupled with denial of the right to an effective remedy guaranteed by article 6.
A municipal council had drawn up and approved a plan to develop low-cost housing, principally benefiting local Roma.
The decision gave rise to a petition by local inhabitants, referring disparagingly to the Roma beneficiaries of the plan, which sought cancellation of the municipal decision.
At a subsequent meeting, the council, citing the petition, annulled its original decision without any substitution of an alternative.
Criminal and constitutional complaints up to the level of the Constitutional Court were unsuccessful.
At the admissibility stage, the Committee affirmed that acts of municipal councils were sufficient to invoke the State party's international responsibility and, further, that domestic remedies had been properly pursued.
On the merits, the Committee considered that the circumstances disclosed a case of indirect discrimination against Roma in the form of the second council resolution.
The Committee went on to hold that the necessary preliminary policymaking step represented by the first resolution was an important and practical component necessary for the realization of the right to housing.
That stage was thus covered by the protections of the Convention, even though the resolution did not itself confer a directly enforceable right to housing.
As a result, the petitioners were victims of racial discrimination in breach of articles 2 and 5 (e), of the Convention.
The failure of the State party's courts to remedy that discrimination represented a separate violation of article 6.
By way of remedy, the Committee indicated that the petitioners should be returned to the situation they were in when the first resolution was adopted.
In case No.
32/2003 (Sefic v.
Denmark), the petitioner, a Bosnian citizen residing in Denmark, sought to buy third-party liability insurance from a local insurance company.
He was advised that he was not eligible for an insurance contract, as he did not speak Danish.
He complained to the authorities, arguing that the language requirement was not objectively motivated but discriminatory within the meaning of section 1 (1) of the Danish Anti-Discrimination Act.
In its opinion, the Committee noted that the author's claim and the evidence produced by him concerning the reasons behind the insurance company's policy had been fully considered by the competent authorities, including the public prosecutor, who had concluded that the language requirement was not based on the complainant's race or ethnic origin, but designed to facilitate communication with customers.
The Committee concluded that the reasons for the language requirement adduced by the insurance company, in particular the fact that it was a relatively small company and primarily operating through telephone contacts with customers, were reasonable and objective grounds for the requirement.
Consequently, the facts did not disclose a violation of the Convention.
In the case of Quereshi v.
Denmark (No. 2) (No.
33/2003), the petitioner brought a follow-up petition to a petition earlier declared admissible.
The petitioner, a Member of Parliament, observed a party political broadcast on public television in which a series of party members made offensive remarks.
The first communication, which sought to attribute responsibility for the remarks to a member of the party's executive board, was found not to disclose a violation of the Convention, given that criminal proceedings were pending against the individual speakers.
The current petition sought to challenge the decision not to prosecute one of those speakers.
After declaring the communication admissible, in part on the basis that further domestic remedies would be unduly prolonged given the nature of the case, the Committee found no violation of the Convention.
It recalled that a number of the speakers had been convicted of criminal offences, so that the State party's system of criminal law could not be considered generally ineffective.
In relation to the particular speaker, the Committee concluded that his statements did not single out a group of persons on the basis of the criteria set out in article 1, and he thus did not engage in an act of racial discrimination that would in turn attract the requirements of the Convention for the State party.
During its sixty-sixth session, the Committee declared admissible complaint No.
30/2003, submitted on behalf of members of the Jewish communities of Oslo and Trondheim and various individuals regarding racist comments made by a member of the right-wing “Bootboys” in a speech commemorating a Nazi leader.
The speech led to the speaker's prosecution and eventual acquittal by the Supreme Court of Norway, on freedom of speech grounds.
The State party had objected to the admissibility of the complaint, on the basis that none of the groups or individuals concerned were “victims” of the remarks in question; they were not present when the speech was made, and none of them had been singled out.
It also argued that the authors had not exhausted domestic remedies, as, although the speaker could not be retried, none of the authors had ever complained about the speech to the authorities.
However, the Committee found that “victim” status could pertain to all members of a particular group of potential victims and that, although none of them had complained to the authorities, the authors had had no possibility of altering the course of the criminal proceedings against the speaker.
On 15 August 2005, the Committee considered the merits of the complaint.
While it acknowledged that the Supreme Court had thoroughly analysed the facts of the case, it remained the Committee's responsibility to ensure the coherence of the interpretation of the provisions of article 4 of the Convention in the light of its general recommendation XV.
As to whether the incriminated statements fell within any of the categories of impugned speech set out in article 4, the Committee considered that the statements contained ideas based on racial superiority or hatred; the deference shown to the principles of former Nazi leaders had to be taken as incitement to racial discrimination, if not violence.
On the issue of whether the incriminated statements were protected by the “due regard” clause in article 4, the Committee considered that to give the right to freedom of speech a more limited role in the context of article 4 did not deprive the “due regard” clause of significant meaning, especially taking into account that all international instruments protecting freedom of speech provide for the possibility of limiting, under certain conditions, the exercise of this right.
As the incriminated statements were of an exceptionally offensive character, they were not protected by the “due regard” clause, and there had been a violation of article 4 and consequently article 6 of the Convention.
Finally, the Committee considered that, as argued by the State party, its competence to receive and consider communications under article 14 of the Convention is not limited to complaints alleging a violation of one or more of the rights set forth in article 5 (paragraph 10.6 of the Opinion).
The Committee's Opinion is reproduced in annex III, section B, to the present report.
Follow-up to Opinions adopted by the Committee under article 14 of the Convention In the past, the Committee has only informally monitored whether, how or the extent to which States parties have implemented its recommendations in Opinions in which the Committee found violations of the Convention.
In the light of the positive experience that other treaty bodies have made with follow-up procedures, the Committee discussed the establishment of a procedure for following up on its Opinions adopted under article 14 of the Convention during the sixty-sixth session.
It requested the Secretariat to prepare a background and options paper on this issue (see CERD/C/67/FU/1, available for consultation on the OHCHR website).
During its sixty-seventh session, the Committee considered an options paper prepared by the Secretariat about the justifications for, and possible modalities of, a procedure for following up the Committee's Opinions adopted pursuant to article 14, paragraph 7, of the Convention.
There was consensus that the establishment of a follow-up procedure was both legally possible and appropriate, with a view to securing State party action on the Committee's suggestions and recommendations.
On 8 August 2005, therefore, the Committee decided to establish such a procedure.
On 15 August, it adopted two new paragraphs spelling out the modalities of the follow-up procedure, added to rule 95 of the Committee's rules of procedure.
These two new paragraphs are reproduced in annex IV to the present report.
On 9 June 2005, the Government of Slovakia presented its follow-up observations on the Committee's Opinion in case No.
31/2003 (L.R. v.
Slovakia), adopted during the sixty-sixth session.
The Government stated that the Opinion had been translated and distributed to relevant government offices and State authorities, including municipalities and the National Centre for Human Rights; in particular, the Opinion had been transmitted to the town of Dobšiná and the Roznava District Prosecutor, pointing out that the Slovak Republic had the obligation to provide the petitioners with an effective remedy, and that measures should be taken to return the petitioners to the situation they were in when the Municipal Council of Dobšiná adopted the first resolution.
On 26 April 2005 the Council, taking into consideration the Committee's Opinion, decided to cancel both resolutions and reached an agreement that it would become engaged in proposals related to low-cost housing in the concerned area.
In that context, the Council would pay serious attention to the housing problems of the Roma community with a view to the practical realization of their right to housing.
Regarding the alleged discriminatory petition of the inhabitants of Dobšiná, legal proceedings had been initiated against the five-member “petition committee”, under section 198a of the Penal Code (inciting to ethnic or racial hatred).
The State party also indicated that the preparation of the National Action Plan for the Prevention of All Forms of Discrimination, Racism, Xenophobia, Anti-Semitism and Other Expressions of Intolerance for the period 2006-2008 was under way.
In that context, the Foreign Ministry had proposed the inclusion in the Plan of activities aiming at disseminating the work of CERD, its competence under article 14 and its jurisprudence.
THEMATIC DISCUSSIONS AND GENERAL DEBATES In examining the periodic reports of States parties, the Committee has found that some forms of discrimination within the terms of article 1 of the Convention are common to several States and can usefully be examined from a more general perspective.
In August 2000, the Committee organized a thematic debate on the issue of discrimination against Roma and, in August 2002, it held a discussion on descent-based discrimination.
At its sixty-fourth session held in March 2004, the Committee held a third thematic discussion on non-citizens and racial discrimination.
These three thematic debates led to the adoption of general recommendation XXVII on discrimination against Roma, general recommendation XXIX on descent-based discrimination and general recommendation XXX on discrimination against non-citizens.
At its sixty-fifth session, the Committee decided to hold at its next session a fourth thematic discussion on the prevention of genocide, with a view, inter alia, to identifying indicators of a developing genocidal process.
In this connection, it requested the views of States parties concerning the prevention of genocide.
This fourth thematic discussion to be organized by the Committee was held at its 1684th meeting (sixty-fifth session), on 1 March 2005 (see CERD/C/SR.1684); it was preceded by a meeting with concerned NGOs, Governments, and other United Nations human rights mechanisms and entities held on 28 February 2005 (see CERD/C/SR.1683).
The Committee was able to draw upon extensive information from its own activities, including under its early warning and urgent action procedures.
In addition, a number of States replied to the invitation extended by the Committee to submit written information.
The Committee also had relevant information from other United Nations human rights mechanisms and from other United Nations agencies and bodies.
During the informal meeting, NGOs raised many issues of concern.
In response to the invitation addressed to them, some government representatives, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and a representative of OHCHR addressed the gathering.
Based on the information submitted and collected for the thematic discussion, the Committee, following extensive debate, adopted at its 1701st meeting, a declaration on the prevention of genocide (for the text, see chapter VIII), which had been prepared in an informal drafting group chaired by Mr. Shahi.
At its sixty-seventh session, the Committee issued a decision on follow-up to its declaration on the prevention of genocide in which it identified indicators of massive and systematic patterns of racial discrimination (see chapter II).
At its sixty-fifth session, the Committee decided to hold general debates at its future sessions on various issues of interest.
Following the decision taken at its sixty-fifth session, the Committee held a general debate on the question of multiculturalism on 8 March 2005 at its 1694th meeting (see CERD/C/SR.1694) on the basis of a working paper prepared by Mr. Lindgren Alves.
It decided to continue this debate at its sixty-seventh session on the basis, inter alia, of a working paper prepared by the Secretariat, including a compilation of its past concluding observations referring to issues relevant to the debate.
This debate took place at its 1724th meeting (see CERD/C/SR.1724), on 17 August 2005.
Several members expressed their views and suggested working towards the adoption of a new general recommendation on multiculturalism.
DECLARATIONS The Committee adopted the following declaration at its sixty-sixth session:
Declaration on the prevention of genocide
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
Recalling that 133 States Members of the United Nations have adhered to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, assuming the obligation to prevent and punish genocide, including war crimes and crimes against humanity,
Condemning the genocides that have been perpetrated since the founding of the United Nations in which tens of millions men, women and children have been killed,
Noting that genocide is often facilitated and supported by discriminatory laws and practices or lack of effective enforcement of the principle of equality of persons irrespective of race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin,
Recalling that, for more than a decade, the Committee, acting under its prevention of discrimination early warning and urgent action procedures, has brought to the attention of the Security Council, through the Secretary-General, a number of country situations where systematic violations of human rights and persistent patterns of racial discrimination could escalate into violent conflict and genocide,
Noting that the first international conference on the prevention and punishment of genocide since the adoption of the Convention, held in Stockholm in January 2004, called for a strategy for genocide prevention that must include provisions for the worst case when prevention fails and atrocities occur, and for military action as an extreme measure to stop genocide in extreme cases,
Endorsing the Secretary-General's Action Plan to Prevent Genocide, including, inter alia, swift and military action in extreme cases, presented to the Commission on Human Rights on 7 April 2004 - the tenth anniversary of the Rwanda genocide - recalling that the international community had failed to prevent the genocides in Rwanda and Srebrenica because of lack of will,
Noting that the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change found that the international community has a further responsibility to act, inter alia with force if necessary as a last resort, in collective response to threats of genocide and other massive violations of human rights when a State fails to protect its citizens,
Having held a timely and constructive thematic discussion at its sixty-sixth session on the prevention of genocide, with the participation of States parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, other United Nations organizations and international non-governmental organizations,
Taking note that economic globalization frequently has negative effects on disadvantaged communities and in particular on indigenous communities,
Acting under its prevention of discrimination early warning and urgent procedures adopted at its 979th meeting in 1993, whereby the Committee makes recommendations, through the Secretary-General, to the Security Council for action to prevent situations of persistent patterns of racial discrimination and other systematic violations of human rights that could lead to violent conflict and genocide,
Responding to the Secretary-General's exhortation at the Stockholm Conference that there can be no more important issue and no more binding obligation than the prevention of genocide,
Adopts this declaration on the prevention of genocide for the consideration of the States parties, the Special Adviser, the Secretary-General, as well as of the Security Council,
The Committee:
Welcomes the appointment of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide with the mandate to sound early warning and make appropriate recommendations for prevention to the Security Council through the Secretary-General, to enable the international community to take timely action to prevent genocide from occurring;
Finds it imperative to stimulate stronger ties and interaction between the local and global levels in, inter alia, developing national strategies for the prevention of genocide linked to national action plans for the elimination of racial discrimination developed in close collaboration with civil society, national human rights institutions and other non-State actors, as well as involving international bodies such as the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
Declares its determination to provide the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide with timely and relevant information on laws, policies and practices that may indicate systematic or systemic discrimination based on race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin which may potentially result in violent conflict and genocide.
To facilitate and focus this exchange, the Committee intends to develop a special set of indicators related to genocide, including the cultural and historic roots of genocide and the importance of recognizing the multicultural dimension of most societies, as suggested by the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
Expresses its resolve to strengthen and refine its anti-racial discrimination early warning and urgent action as well as follow-up procedures in all situations where indications of possible violent conflict and genocide prevail; in such cases, it will consider in-country visits to obtain first-hand information on the situation;
Considers it of vital importance that stronger interaction is established between United Nations human rights treaty bodies and the Security Council, and in this regard the Committee will explore how the former can work together in raising awareness about possible outbreaks of violent conflict and genocide and address the Secretary-General and the Special Adviser to pass on concerns and warning to the Security Council;
Agrees with the High-level Panel's finding that the developed countries have particular responsibility to do more to transform their armies into units suitable for deployment to peace operations, and that more States will have to place their contingents on standby for United Nations purposes and keep air transport and other strategic lift capacities available to assist peace operations.
This will require resources commensurate with the scale of the challenges ahead;
Notes the Global Peace Operations Initiative proposal for Western States to train, equip and provide logistical support to the international military forces willing to participate in peacekeeping operations to be funded by members of the Group of Seven (G-7) States;
Urges increased resource allocation by States Members of the United Nations, more particularly by the developed countries, and that developed countries reinforce peacekeeping contingents from the developing countries by contributing their own contingents;
Considers it essential to build the capacity of peacekeeping contingents for more rapid deployment;
Commends the global cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union in the field of peace and security;
Considers it imperative to dispel the climate of impunity that is conducive to war crimes and crimes against humanity by referring all perpetrators of these crimes to the International Criminal Court;
Urges the international community to look at the need for a comprehensive understanding of the dimensions of genocide, including in the context of situations of economic globalization adversely affecting disadvantaged communities, in particular indigenous peoples.
1701st meeting 11 March 2005
Note
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS At its sixty-fifth session, the Committee decided to entrust Mr. de Gouttes with the task of drafting a new general recommendation on racial discrimination in the administration of justice.
Following discussion of the draft general recommendation during the sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh sessions, the Committee adopted the following general recommendation at its 1724th meeting:
General recommendation XXXI on the prevention of racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
Recalling the definition of racial discrimination set out in article 1 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Recalling the provisions of article 5 (a) of the Convention, under which States parties have an obligation to guarantee the right of everyone, without distinction as to race, colour, or national or ethnic origin, to equality before the law, notably in the enjoyment of the right to equal treatment before the tribunals and all other organs administering justice,
Recalling that article 6 of the Convention requires States parties to assure to everyone within their jurisdiction effective protection and remedies, through the competent national tribunals and other State institutions, against any acts of racial discrimination, as well as the right to seek from such tribunals just and adequate reparation or satisfaction for any damage suffered as a result of such discrimination,
Referring to paragraph 25 of the declaration adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, in 2001, which expressed “profound repudiation of the racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance that persist in some States in the functioning of the penal system and in the application of the law, as well as in the actions and attitudes of institutions and individuals responsible for law enforcement, especially where this has contributed to certain groups being overrepresented among persons under detention or imprisoned”,
Referring to the work of the Commission on Human Rights and of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (see E/CN.4/Sub.2/2005/7) concerning discrimination in the criminal justice system,
Bearing in mind the reports of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Referring to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, in particular article 16, which stipulates that “[a] refugee shall have free access to the courts of law on the territory of all Contracting States”,
Bearing in mind the observations relating to the functioning of the system of justice made in the Committee's conclusions concerning reports submitted by States parties and in general recommendations XXVII (2000) on discrimination against Roma, XXIX (2002) on discrimination based on descent and XXX (2004) on discrimination against non-citizens,
Convinced that, even though the system of justice may be regarded as impartial and not affected by racism, racial discrimination or xenophobia, when racial or ethnic discrimination does exist in the administration and functioning of the system of justice, it constitutes a particularly serious violation of the rule of law, the principle of equality before the law, the principle of fair trial and the right to an independent and impartial tribunal, through its direct effect on persons belonging to groups which it is the very role of justice to protect,
Considering that no country is free from racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system, regardless of the type of law applied or the judicial system in force, whether accusatorial, inquisitorial or mixed,
Considering that the risks of discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system have increased in recent years, partly as a result of the rise in immigration and population movements, which have prompted prejudice and feelings of xenophobia or intolerance among certain sections of the population and certain law enforcement officials, and partly as a result of the security policies and anti-terrorism measures adopted by many States, which among other things have encouraged the emergence of anti-Arab or anti-Muslim feelings, or, as a reaction, anti-Semitic feelings, in a number of countries,
Determined to combat all forms of discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system which may be suffered, in all countries of the world, by persons belonging to racial or ethnic groups, in particular non-citizens - including immigrants, refugees, asylum-seekers and stateless persons - Roma/Gypsies, indigenous peoples, displaced populations, persons discriminated against because of their descent, as well as other vulnerable groups which are particularly exposed to exclusion, marginalization and non-integration in society, paying particular attention to the situation of women and children belonging to the aforementioned groups, who are susceptible to multiple discrimination because of their race and because of their sex or their age,
Formulates the following recommendations addressed to States parties:
General steps
Steps to be taken in order to better gauge the existence and extent of racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system; the search for indicators attesting to such discrimination
Factual indicators
States parties should pay the greatest attention to the following possible indicators of racial discrimination:
(a) The number and percentage of persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble who are victims of aggression or other offences, especially when they are committed by police officers or other State officials;
(b) The absence or small number of complaints, prosecutions and convictions relating to acts of racial discrimination in the country.
Such a statistic should not be viewed as necessarily positive, contrary to the belief of some States.
It may also reveal either that victims have inadequate information concerning their rights, or that they fear social censure or reprisals, or that victims with limited resources fear the cost and complexity of the judicial process, or that there is a lack of trust in the police and judicial authorities, or that the authorities are insufficiently alert to or aware of offences involving racism;
(c) Insufficient or no information on the behaviour of law enforcement personnel vis-à-vis persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble;
(d) The proportionately higher crime rates attributed to persons belonging to those groups, particularly as regards petty street crime and offences related to drugs and prostitution, as indicators of the exclusion or the non-integration of such persons into society;
(e) The number and percentage of persons belonging to those groups who are held in prison or preventive detention, including internment centres, penal establishments, psychiatric establishments or holding areas in airports;
(f) The handing down by the courts of harsher or inappropriate sentences against persons belonging to those groups;
(g) The insufficient representation of persons belonging to those groups among the ranks of the police, in the system of justice, including judges and jurors, and in other law enforcement departments.
In order for these factual indicators to be well known and used, States parties should embark on regular and public collection of information from police, judicial and prison authorities and immigration services, while respecting standards of confidentiality, anonymity and protection of personal data.
In particular, States parties should have access to comprehensive statistical or other information on complaints, prosecutions and convictions relating to acts of racism and xenophobia, as well as on compensation awarded to the victims of such acts, whether such compensation is paid by the perpetrators of the offences or under State compensation plans financed from public funds.
Legislative indicators
The following should be regarded as indicators of potential causes of racial discrimination:
(a) Any gaps in domestic legislation on racial discrimination.
In this regard, States parties should fully comply with the requirements of article 4 of the Convention and criminalize all acts of racism as provided by that article, in particular the dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred, incitement to racial hatred, violence or incitement to racial violence, but also racist propaganda activities and participation in racist organizations.
States parties are also encouraged to incorporate a provision in their criminal legislation to the effect that committing offences for racial reasons generally constitutes an aggravating circumstance;
(b) The potential indirect discriminatory effects of certain domestic legislation, particularly legislation on terrorism, immigration, nationality, banning or deportation of non-citizens from a country, as well as legislation that has the effect of penalizing without legitimate grounds certain groups or membership of certain communities.
States should seek to eliminate the discriminatory effects of such legislation and in any case to respect the principle of proportionality in its application to persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble.
Strategies to be developed to prevent racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice system
States parties should pursue national strategies the objectives of which include the following:
(a) To eliminate laws that have an impact in terms of racial discrimination, particularly those which target certain groups indirectly by penalizing acts which can be committed only by persons belonging to such groups, or laws that apply only to non-nationals without legitimate grounds or which do not respect the principle of proportionality;
(b) To develop, through appropriate education programmes, training in respect for human rights, tolerance and friendship among racial or ethnic groups, as well as sensitization to intercultural relations, for law enforcement officials: police personnel, persons working in the system of justice, prison institutions, psychiatric establishments, social and medical services, etc.;
(c) To foster dialogue and cooperation between the police and judicial authorities and the representatives of the various groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble, in order to combat prejudice and create a relationship of trust;
(d) To promote proper representation of persons belonging to racial and ethnic groups in the police and the system of justice;
(e) To ensure respect for, and recognition of the traditional systems of justice of indigenous peoples, in conformity with international human rights law;
(f) To make the necessary changes to the prison regime for prisoners belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble, so as to take into account their cultural and religious practices;
(g) To institute, in situations of mass population movements, the interim measures and arrangements necessary for the operation of the justice system in order to take account of the particularly vulnerable situation of displaced persons, in particular by setting up decentralized courts at the places where the displaced persons are staying or by organizing mobile courts;
(h) To set up, in post-conflict situations, plans for the reconstruction of the legal system and the re-establishment of the rule of law throughout the territory of the countries concerned, by availing themselves, in particular, of the international technical assistance provided by the relevant United Nations entities;
(i) To implement national strategies or plans of action aimed at the elimination of structural racial discrimination.
These long-term strategies should include specific objectives and actions as well as indicators against which progress can be measured.
They should include, in particular, guidelines for prevention, recording, investigation and prosecution of racist or xenophobic incidents, assessment of the level of satisfaction among all communities concerning their relations with the police and the system of justice, and recruitment and promotion in the judicial system of persons belonging to various racial or ethnic groups;
(j) To entrust an independent national institution with the task of tracking, monitoring and measuring progress made under the national plans of action and guidelines against racial discrimination, identifying undetected manifestations of racial discrimination and submitting recommendations and proposals for improvement.
Steps to be taken to prevent racial discrimination with regard to victims of racism
Access to the law and to justice
In accordance with article 6 of the Convention, States parties are obliged to guarantee the right of every person within their jurisdiction to an effective remedy against the perpetrators of acts of racial discrimination, without discrimination of any kind, whether such acts are committed by private individuals or State officials, as well as the right to seek just and adequate reparation for the damage suffered.
In order to facilitate access to justice for the victims of racism, States parties should strive to supply the requisite legal information to persons belonging to the most vulnerable social groups, who are often unaware of their rights.
In that regard, States parties should promote, in the areas where such persons live, institutions such as free legal help and advice centres, legal information centres and centres for conciliation and mediation.
States parties should also expand their cooperation with associations of lawyers, university institutions, legal advice centres and non-governmental organizations specializing in protecting the rights of marginalized communities and in the prevention of discrimination.
Reporting of incidents to the authorities competent for receiving complaints
States parties should take the necessary steps to ensure that the police services have an adequate and accessible presence in the neighbourhoods, regions, collective facilities, camps or centres where the persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble reside, so that complaints from such persons can be expeditiously received.
The competent services should be instructed to receive the victims of acts of racism in police stations in a satisfactory manner, so that complaints are recorded immediately, investigations are pursued without delay and in an effective, independent and impartial manner, and files relating to racist or xenophobic incidents are retained and incorporated into databases.
Any refusal by a police official to accept a complaint involving an act of racism should lead to disciplinary or penal sanctions, and those sanctions should be increased if corruption is involved.
Conversely, it should be the right and duty of any police official or State employee to refuse to obey orders or instructions that require him or her to commit violations of human rights, particularly those based on racial discrimination.
States parties should guarantee the freedom of any official to invoke this right without fear of punishment.
In cases of allegations of torture, ill-treatment or executions, investigations should be conducted in accordance with the Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions and the Principles on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
C. Initiation of judicial proceedings
States parties should remind public prosecutors and members of the prosecution service of the general importance of prosecuting racist acts, including minor offences committed with racist motives, since any racially motivated offence undermines social cohesion and society as a whole.
In advance of the initiation of proceedings, States parties could also encourage, with a view to respecting the rights of the victims, the use of parajudicial procedures for conflict resolution, including customary procedures compatible with human rights, mediation or conciliation, which can serve as useful options for the victims of acts of racism and to which less stigma may be attached.
In order to make it easier for the victims of acts of racism to bring actions in the courts, the steps to be taken should include the following:
(a) Offering procedural status for the victims of racism and xenophobia and associations for the protection of the rights of such victims, such as an opportunity to associate themselves with the criminal proceedings, or other similar procedures that might enable them to assert their rights in the criminal proceedings, at no cost to themselves;
(b) Granting victims effective judicial cooperation and legal aid, including the assistance of counsel and an interpreter free of charge;
(c) Ensuring that victims have information about the progress of the proceedings;
(d) Guaranteeing protection for the victim or the victim's family against any form of intimidation or reprisals;
(e) Providing for the possibility of suspending the functions, for the duration of the investigation, of the agents of the State against whom the complaints were made.
In countries where there are assistance and compensation plans for victims, States parties should ensure that such plans are available to all victims without discrimination and regardless of their nationality or residential status.
Functioning of the system of justice
States parties should ensure that the system of justice:
(a) Grants a proper place to victims and their families, as well as witnesses, throughout the proceedings, by enabling complainants to be heard by the judges during the examination proceedings and the court hearing, to have access to information, to confront hostile witnesses, to challenge evidence and to be informed of the progress of proceedings;
(b) Treats the victims of racial discrimination without discrimination or prejudice, while respecting their dignity, through ensuring in particular that hearings, questioning or confrontations are carried out with the necessary sensitivity as far as racism is concerned;
(c) Guarantees the victim a court judgement within a reasonable period;
(d) Guarantees victims just and adequate reparation for the material and moral harm suffered as a result of racial discrimination.
Steps to be taken to prevent racial discrimination in regard to accused persons who are subject to judicial proceedings
Questioning, interrogation and arrest
States parties should take the necessary steps to prevent questioning, arrests and searches which are in reality based solely on the physical appearance of a person, that person's colour or features or membership of a racial or ethnic group, or any profiling which exposes him or her to greater suspicion.
States parties should prevent and most severely punish violence, acts of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and all violations of human rights affecting persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble which are committed by State officials, particularly police and army personnel, customs authorities, and persons working in airports, penal institutions and social, medical and psychiatric services.
States parties should ensure the observance of the general principle of proportionality and strict necessity in recourse to force against persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble, in accordance with the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials.
States parties should also guarantee to all arrested persons, whatever the racial, national or ethnic group to which they belong, enjoyment of the fundamental rights of the defence enshrined in the relevant international human rights instruments (especially the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights), in particular the right not to be arbitrarily arrested or detained, the right to be informed of the reasons for their arrest, the right to the assistance of an interpreter, the right to the assistance of counsel, the right to be brought promptly before a judge or an authority empowered by the law to perform judicial functions, the right to consular protection guaranteed by article 36 of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations and, in the case of refugees, the right to contact the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
As regards persons placed in administrative holding centres or in holding areas in airports, States parties should ensure that they enjoy sufficiently decent living conditions.
Lastly, as regards the questioning or arrest of persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble, States parties should bear in mind the special precautions to be taken when dealing with women or minors, because of their particular vulnerability.
B. Pretrial detention
Bearing in mind statistics which show that persons held awaiting trial include an excessively high number of non-nationals and persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble, States parties should ensure:
(a) That the mere fact of belonging to a racial or ethnic group or one of the aforementioned groups is not a sufficient reason, de jure or de facto, to place a person in pretrial detention.
Such pretrial detention can be justified only on objective grounds stipulated in the law, such as the risk of flight, the risk that the person might destroy evidence or influence witnesses, or the risk of a serious disturbance of public order;
(b) That the requirement to deposit a guarantee or financial security in order to obtain release pending trial is applied in a manner appropriate to the situation of persons belonging to such groups, who are often in straitened economic circumstances, so as to prevent this requirement from leading to discrimination against such persons;
(c) That the guarantees often required of accused persons as a condition of their remaining at liberty pending trial (fixed address, declared employment, stable family ties) are weighed in the light of the insecure situation which may result from their membership of such groups, particularly in the case of women and minors;
(d) That persons belonging to such groups who are held pending trial enjoy all the rights to which prisoners are entitled under the relevant international norms, and particularly the rights specially adapted to their circumstances: the right to respect for their traditions as regards religion, culture and food, the right to relations with their families, the right to the assistance of an interpreter and, where appropriate, the right to consular assistance.
C. The trial and the court judgement
Prior to the trial, States parties may, where appropriate, give preference to non-judicial or parajudicial procedures for dealing with the offence, taking into account the cultural or customary background of the perpetrator, especially in the case of persons belonging to indigenous peoples.
In general, States parties must ensure that persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble, like all other persons, enjoy all the guarantees of a fair trial and equality before the law, as enshrined in the relevant international human rights instruments, and specifically.
The right to the presumption of innocence
This right implies that the police authorities, the judicial authorities and other public authorities must be forbidden to express their opinions publicly concerning the guilt of the accused before the court reaches a decision, much less to cast suspicion in advance on the members of a specific racial or ethnic group.
These authorities have an obligation to ensure that the mass media do not disseminate information which might stigmatize certain categories of persons, particularly those belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble.
The right to the assistance of counsel and the right to an interpreter
Effectively guaranteeing these rights implies that States parties must set up a system under which counsel and interpreters will be assigned free of charge, together with legal help or advice and interpretation services for persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble.
The right to an independent and impartial tribunal
States parties should strive firmly to ensure a lack of any racial or xenophobic prejudice on the part of judges, jury members and other judicial personnel.
They should prevent all direct influence by pressure groups, ideologies, religions and churches on the functioning of the system of justice and on the decisions of judges, which may have a discriminatory effect on certain groups.
States parties may, in this regard, take into account the Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct adopted in 2002 (E/CN.4/2003/65, annex), which recommend in particular that: Judges should be aware of the diversity of society and differences linked with background, in particular racial origins; They should not, by words or conduct, manifest any bias towards persons or groups on the grounds of their racial or other origin; They should carry out their duties with appropriate consideration for all persons, such as the parties, witnesses, lawyers, court staff and their colleagues, without unjustified differentiation; and They should oppose the manifestation of prejudice by the persons under their direction and by lawyers or their adoption of discriminatory behaviour towards a person or group on the basis of their colour, racial, national, religious or sexual origin, or on other irrelevant grounds.
Guarantee of fair punishment
In this regard, States should ensure that the courts do not apply harsher punishments solely because of an accused person's membership of a specific racial or ethnic group.
Special attention should be paid in this regard to the system of minimum punishments and obligatory detention applicable to certain offences and to capital punishment in countries which have not abolished it, bearing in mind reports that this punishment is imposed and carried out more frequently against persons belonging to specific racial or ethnic groups.
In the case of persons belonging to indigenous peoples, States parties should give preference to alternatives to imprisonment and to other forms of punishment that are better adapted to their legal system, bearing in mind in particular International Labour Organization Convention No. 169 concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries.
Punishments targeted exclusively at non-nationals that are additional to punishments under ordinary law, such as deportation, expulsion or banning from the country concerned, should be imposed only in exceptional circumstances and in a proportionate manner, for serious reasons related to public order which are stipulated in the law, and should take into account the need to respect the private family life of those concerned and the international protection to which they are entitled.
E. Execution of sentences
When persons belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble are serving prison terms, the States parties should:
(a) Guarantee such persons the enjoyment of all the rights to which prisoners are entitled under the relevant international norms, in particular rights specially adapted to their situation: the right to respect for their religious and cultural practices, the right to respect for their customs as regards food, the right to relations with their families, the right to the assistance of an interpreter, the right to basic welfare benefits and, where appropriate, the right to consular assistance.
The medical, psychological or social services offered to prisoners should take their cultural background into account;
(b) Guarantee to all prisoners whose rights have been violated the right to an effective remedy before an independent and impartial authority;
(c) Comply, in this regard, with the United Nations norms in this field, and particularly the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, the Basic Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners and the Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment;
(d) Allow such persons to benefit, where appropriate, from the provisions of domestic legislation and international or bilateral conventions relating to the transfer of foreign prisoners, offering them an opportunity to serve the prison term in their countries of origin.
Further, the independent authorities in the States parties that are responsible for supervising prison institutions should include members who have expertise in the field of racial discrimination and sound knowledge of the problems of racial and ethnic groups and the other vulnerable groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble; when necessary, such supervisory authorities should have an effective visit and complaint mechanism.
When non-nationals are sentenced to deportation, expulsion or banning from their territory, States parties should comply fully with the obligation of non-refoulement arising out of the international norms concerning refugees and human rights, and ensure that such persons will not be sent back to a country or territory where they would run the risk of serious violations of their human rights.
Lastly, with regard to women and children belonging to the groups referred to in the last paragraph of the preamble, States parties should pay the greatest attention possible with a view to ensuring that such persons benefit from the special regime to which they are entitled in relation to the execution of sentences, bearing in mind the particular difficulties faced by mothers of families and women belonging to certain communities, particularly indigenous communities.
Notes
CONSIDERATION OF COPIES OF PETITIONS, COPIES OF REPORTS AND OTHER INFORMATION RELATING TO TRUST AND NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES TO WHICH GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTION 1514 (XV) APPLIES, IN CONFORMITY WITH ARTICLE 15 OF the CONVENTION Under article 15 of the Convention, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination is empowered to consider copies of petitions, copies of reports and other information relating to Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and to all other territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) applies, transmitted to it by the competent bodies of the United Nations, and to submit to them and to the General Assembly its expressions of opinion and recommendations relating to the principles and objectives of the Convention in those territories.
At the request of the Committee, Mr. Pillai examined the documents made available to the Committee in order for it to perform its functions pursuant to article 15 of the Convention.
At its 1727th meeting (sixty-seventh session), Mr. Pillai presented his report, for the preparation of which he had taken into account the reports of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during 2004 (A/59/23) and copies of the working papers on the 16 Territories prepared by the Secretariat for the Special Committee and the Trusteeship Council in 2004 and listed in document CERD/C/503 as well as in annex V to the present report.
The Committee noted, as it has done in the past, that it was difficult to fulfil its functions comprehensively under article 15 of the Convention as a result of the absence of any copies of petitions pursuant to paragraph 2 (a) and owing to the fact that the copies of the reports received pursuant to paragraph 2 (b) contain only scant information directly relating to the principles and objectives of the Convention.
The Committee would like to repeat its earlier observation that in the reports of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, reference is made to the relations between the Special Committee and the Committee's continuous monitoring of related developments in Territories, having regard to the relevant provisions of article 15 of the Convention.
The Committee further noted, however, that issues concerning racial discrimination, and directly relating to the principles and objectives of the Convention, are not reflected in the sections of the report of the Special Committee which deal with a review of its work and the future work of the Special Committee.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AT ITS FIFTY-NINTH SESSION The Committee considered this agenda item at its sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh sessions.  For its consideration of this item the Committee had before it General Assembly resolution 59/176 of 20 December 2004 in which the Assembly, inter alia: (a) commended the Committee for its contributions to the effective implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; (b) urged States that had not yet become parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede to it as a matter of urgency, with a view to achieving universal ratification by 2005; (c) requested States parties to the Convention to consider making the declaration provided for in article 14 thereof; (d) called upon States parties to fulfil their reporting obligations; (e) urged States parties to withdraw reservations that are contrary to the object and purpose of that Convention and to review their reservations on a regular basis with a view to withdrawing them; (f) expressed its appreciation for the efforts made so far by the Committee to improve the efficiency of its working methods, and encouraged the Committee to continue its activities in this regard; (g) encouraged the continued participation of members of the Committee in the annual inter-committee meetings and meetings of chairpersons of the human rights treaty bodies, especially with a view to a more coordinated approach to the activities of the treaty body system and standardized reporting; and (h) strongly urged States to accelerate ratification of the amendment to article 8 of the Convention concerning the financing of the Committee.
Xii.
THIRD DECADE TO COMBAT RACISM AND RACIAL DISCRIMINATION; FOLLOW-UP TO THE WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM, RACIAL DISCRIMINATION, XENOPHOBIA AND RELATED INTOLERANCE The Committee considered the question of the follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination at its sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh sessions.
At its sixty-sixth session, the Committee was informed of, and discussed, the third session of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action (see E/CN.4/2005/20), held from 11 to 22 October 2004, and, in particular, the mandate of the Working Group relating to the preparation of complementary international standards to strengthen and update international instruments against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in all their aspects.
Following the recommendation of the Working Group, which requested “OHCHR to organize a four- to five-day high-level seminar within the fourth session of the Working Group” (ibid., para. 73, recommendation 36), the Committee, during its sixty-seventh session, discussed its participation in the fourth session of the Working Group.
The Committee decided that it should be duly represented at that meeting, in view of the fact that the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination is the main international legal instrument in that field.
OVERVIEW OF THE METHODS OF WORK OF THE COMMITTEE An overview of the methods of work of the Committee was included in its report to the fifty-first session of the General Assembly.
It highlighted changes introduced in recent years and was designed to improve the Committee's procedures.
At its sixtieth session, the Committee decided to review its working methods at its sixty-first session and asked Mr. Valencia Rodríguez, convenor of an open-ended working group on this issue, to prepare and submit a working paper for consideration.
The working paper submitted by Mr. Valencia Rodríguez was discussed and revised further by the Committee at its sixty-second and sixty-third sessions and adopted at the sixty-third session, with the exception of one paragraph which remains pending.
The text of the paper as adopted was included in an annex to the Committee's report to the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
At its sixty-fourth session, the Committee continued to discuss its working methods and, in particular, the question of follow-up to the recommendations addressed to States parties after consideration of their initial or periodic reports.
The Committee decided to add a new paragraph to rule 65 of its rules of procedure concerning the request for additional information from States parties.
The text of rule 65 as amended can be found in annex III to the Committee's report to the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
At its 1670th meeting (sixty-fifth session), the Committee decided, in accordance with paragraph 2 of rule 65 of its rules of procedure, to appoint the following members as coordinator and alternate coordinator to further the implementation of paragraph 1 of rule 65 of its rules of procedure concerning requests for additional information from States parties.
Coordinator: Mr. Morten Kjaerum (2004-2006)
Alternate: Mr. Nourredine Amir (2004-2006) The terms of reference for the work of the coordinator are reproduced in annex IV (see paragraph 447 for a reference to the decision of the Committee to establish a follow-up procedure for its Opinions adopted under article 14 of the Convention).
At its 1659th meeting (sixty-fifth session), the Committee established a working group on early warning and urgent action procedures.
This working group includes the following five members of the Committee:
Coordinator: Ms. Patricia Nozipho January-Bardill (2004-2006)
Members: Mr. Alexei S. Avtonomov (2004-2006)
Mr. Jose Francisco Cali Tzay (2004-2006)
Mr. Régis de Gouttes (2004-2006)
Mr. Agha Shahi (2004-2006) The working group met for the first time during the sixty-fifth session of the Committee to discuss a number of cases brought to its attention.
The working group also met during the sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh sessions.
Notes
Discussion on reform of treaty bodY SYSTEM Concerning the effective implementation of international instruments on human rights, including reporting obligations under international instruments on human rights, the Committee had before it the report of the seventeenth meeting of persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies.
At its sixty-seventh session, the Committee discussed in particular the point concerning future consultations on proposals for reform of the United Nations human rights framework, including those relating to a unified standing treaty body.
After an initial discussion on 16 August 2005 (see CERD/C/SR.1723), the Committee had a dialogue on this issue on 18 August 2005 with María-Francisca Ize-Charrin, Officer-in-Charge of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (see CERD/C/SR.1726).
Members of the Committee highlighted various questions that will need clarifying in the context of the discussion regarding a unified standing treaty body.
They stressed the need to take into account the opinion of all stakeholders, including not only States parties and treaty body members, but also national human rights institutions, non-governmental organizations and victims of human rights violations.
They also asked whether a single treaty body would necessarily result in a single report.
The risk of marginalization of some instruments and some human rights issues, including the Convention and the question of racial discrimination, was highlighted by several members who also underscored that racial discrimination is a major human rights issue in the current world context which should continue to be given all necessary attention.
Some members also asked whether an amending protocol would be necessary and, if this was the case, they expressed the fear that the implementation and entry into force of such a protocol could take several years.
Some members said that there was also a risk that during the transition period, the whole system might come to a standstill.
Questions were also asked concerning the membership of a unified standing body, the selection process and the length of mandate of prospective members.
Some members wondered whether the body would be permanent and how it would be organized, in particular whether it would be composed of several chambers and on what criteria these chambers would be established.
The danger of losing the acquis of the existing human rights protection system was stressed by several members who also stated that a unified standing treaty body would not resolve the current difficulties of the system such as non-reporting and lack of political will of States vis-à-vis the implementation of treaty body recommendations.
Some members made various proposals to improve the current system, including:
(a) To persevere with current steps towards improving working methods;
(b) To enhance the implementation of recommendations made by the chairpersons and inter-committee meetings;
(c) The creation of different chambers within treaty bodies that would address the issue of excessive delays in the examination of reports;
(d) To strengthen the Petitions Team in the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights;
(e) To envisage the creation of a single body to deal with individual communications;
(f) To strengthen follow-up to treaty body recommendations;
(g) To clarify the relationship between treaty bodies and a future Human Rights Council in order to avoid duplication;
(h) To ensure that a peer review system which may be put in place would use treaty body recommendations as a starting point and provide the required political support in order to ensure their implementation.
In her dialogue with the Committee, Ms. Ize-Charrin stressed that no decision had yet been taken and that extensive consultations were necessary in order to study the possible creation of a unified standing treaty body.
She emphasized that the opinion of treaty body members and of all other stakeholders would be sought in order to render this process as informed and participatory as possible and, ultimately, to move towards decisions.
Ms. Ize-Charrin recalled that the Office of the High Commissioner had been actively engaged in strengthening the implementation of the recommendations of treaty bodies through various projects.
She agreed with members that follow-up to treaty body recommendations must be enhanced and that the implementation of the recommendations of the chairpersons and inter-committee meetings should be strengthened.
Regarding the need to clarify the relationship between treaty bodies and a future Human Rights Council in order to avoid duplication and concerning the legal arrangements which the creation of a unified standing body would require, Ms. Ize-Charrin explained that it was too early to provide specific replies to these questions, which would be progressively clarified.
She informed the Committee that the Office of the High Commissioner would shortly start drafting a concept paper that would study all these questions, and that treaty body members would be invited to provide comments during the process.
In her concluding remarks, Ms. Ize-Charrin stressed the full commitment of the High Commissioner to ensuring that any reform of the treaty body system will be one that enhances the protection of human rights for all groups and individuals at the national level, in particular in areas as important as that of discrimination, including racial discrimination, which the High Commissioner has identified in her Plan of Action as one of the main human rights challenges.
Annex I
States parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (170) as at 19 August 2005*
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Holy See, Hungary, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
States parties that have made the declaration under article 14, paragraph 1, of the Convention (46) as at 19 August 2005
Algeria, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, Uruguay and Venezuela.
C. States parties that have accepted the amendments to the Convention adopted at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties* (39) as at 19 August 2005
Australia, Bahamas, Belize, Bahrain, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Guinea, Holy See, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands (for the Kingdom in Europe and the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba), New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe.
Annex II
A. Sixty-sixth session (21 February-11 March 2005)
Adoption of the agenda.
Organizational and other matters.
Prevention of racial discrimination, including early warning measures and urgent action procedures.
Consideration of reports, comments and information submitted by States parties under article 9 of the Convention.
Submission of reports by States parties under article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention.
Consideration of communications under article 14 of the Convention.
Follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance.
B. Sixty-seventh session (2-19 August 2005)
Adoption of the agenda.
Organizational and other matters.
Prevention of racial discrimination, including early warning measures and urgent action procedures.
Consideration of reports, comments and information submitted by States parties under article 9 of the Convention.
Submission of reports by States parties under article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention.
Consideration of communications under article 14 of the Convention.
Follow-up procedure.
Consideration of copies of petitions, copies of reports and other information relating to Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and to all other territories in which General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) applies, in conformity with article 15 of the Convention.
Follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance.
Report of the Committee to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session under article 9, paragraph 2, of the Convention.
Annex III
DECISIONS AND OPINIONS OF THE COMMITTEE UNDER ARTICLE 14 OF THE CONVENTION
A. Sixty-sixth session
Opinion concerning
Communication No. 31/2003
Submitted by: Ms. L.R. et al.
(represented by the European Roma Rights Center and the League of Human Rights Advocates)
Alleged victim(s): The petitioners
State party: Slovak Republic
Date of communication: 5 August 2003
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, established under article 8 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Meeting on 7 March 2005,
Adopts the following:
Opinion
The petitioners are Ms. L.R. and 26 other Slovak citizens of Roma ethnicity residing in Dobšiná, Slovak Republic.
They claim to be victims of a violation by the Slovak Republic of article 2, paragraph 1, subparagraphs (a), (c) and (d); article 4, paragraph (a); article 5, paragraph (e), subparagraph (iii); and article 6 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
They are represented by counsel of the European Roma Rights Center, Budapest, Hungary, and the League of Human Rights Advocates, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
The facts as presented
2.1 On 20 March 2002, the councillors of the Dobšiná municipality adopted resolution No. 251-20/III-2002-MsZ, whereby they approved what the petitioners describe as a plan to construct low-cost housing for the Roma inhabitants of the town.a About 1,800 Roma live in the town in what are described as “appalling” conditions, with most dwellings comprising thatched huts or houses made of cardboard and without drinking water, toilets, or drainage or sewage systems.
The councillors instructed the local mayor to prepare a project aimed at securing finance from a government fund set up expressly to alleviate Roma housing problems in the State party.
2.2 Thereupon, certain inhabitants of Dobšiná and surrounding villages established a five-member “petition committee”, led by the Dobšiná chairman of the Real Slovak National Party.
The committee drafted a petition with the following text:
“I do not agree with the building of low-cost houses for people of Gypsy origin on the territory of Dobšiná, as it will lead to an influx of inadaptable citizens of Gypsy origin from the surrounding villages, even from other districts and regions.”b
The petition was signed by some 2,700 inhabitants of Dobšiná and deposited with the municipal council on 30 July 2002.
On 5 August 2002, the council considered the petition and unanimously voted, “having considered the factual circumstances”, to cancel the earlier resolution by means of a second resolution which included an explicit reference to the petition.c
2.3 On 16 September 2002, in the light of the relevant law,d the petitioners' counsel requested the Rožňava District Prosecutor to investigate and prosecute the authors of the discriminatory petition, and to reverse the council's second resolution as it was based on a discriminatory petition.
On 7 November 2002, the District Prosecutor rejected the request on the basis of purported absence of jurisdiction over the matter.
The Prosecutor found that “… the resolution in question was passed by the Dobšiná Town Council exercising its self-governing powers; it does not constitute an administrative act performed by public administration and, as a result, the prosecution office does not have the competence to review the legality of this act or to take prosecutorial supervision measures in non-penal area”.
2.4 On 18 September 2002, the petitioners' counsel applied to the Constitutional Court for an order determining that articles 12 and 33 of the Constitution, the Act on the Right of Petition and the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities (Council of Europe) had been violated, cancelling the second resolution of the council and examining the legality of the petition.
Further information was provided on two occasions at the request of the Court.
On 5 February 2003, the Court, in closed session, held that the petitioners had provided no evidence that any fundamental rights had been violated by the petition or by the council's second decision.
It stated that as neither the petition nor the second resolution constituted legal acts, they were permissible under domestic law.
It further stated that citizens have a right to petition regardless of its content.
The complaint
3.1 The petitioners argue that the State party has violated article 2, paragraph 1, subparagraph (a), by failing to “ensure that all public authorities and public institutions, national and local, shall act in conformity with this obligation” [to engage in no act or practice of racial discrimination].
They argue, with reference to the Committee's jurisprudence, that a municipal council is a local public authority,e and that the council engaged in an act of racial discrimination by unanimously endorsing the petition and cancelling its resolution to build low-cost but adequate housing for local Roma.
3.2 The petitioners argue that there has been a violation of article 2, paragraph 1, subparagraph (c), on the basis that the State party failed to “nullify any laws or regulations which have the effect of creating or perpetuating racial discrimination”.
Neither the District Prosecutor nor the Constitutional Court took measures to cancel the council's second resolution, which was itself based on a discriminatory petition.
They also argue that there has been a violation of subparagraph (d) of paragraph 1, as well as article 4, paragraph (a), on the basis that the State party failed “to prohibit and bring to an end … racial discrimination by any persons, group or organization” by not effectively investigating and prosecuting the petition's authors.
They argue that the petition's wording can be regarded as “incitement to racial discrimination”, and refer to the Committee's decision in L.K.
v.
The Netherlands,f where the State party was found to have insufficiently investigated a petition and verbal threats designed to stop an immigrant from moving into a subsidized home.
3.3 The petitioners contend that article 5, paragraph (e), subparagraph (iii), was violated as the State party failed to safeguard the petitioners' right to adequate housing.
The local conditions, described above, are, in the petitioners' view, well below an adequate level for housing and living conditions in the State party, and would have been resolved by the original council decision proceeding rather than being cancelled, without remedy, on the basis of a discriminatory petition.