# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	professional
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Europarl
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-Europarl/v8/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/Europarl.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA
This highlights the need for something which we in the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance have been demanding for an extremely long time, namely a rapid reaction force offering protection to civilians in the event of major environmental and industrial catastrophes of this type.
It also sheds light upon the low level of environmental requirements in some of the applicant States.
We must demand that there should be no exceptions which could jeopardise people' s health and the ecosystems.
Mr President, the Commission' s White Paper on environmental liability, which was put forward several days ago - on 9 February to be precise - cites the tanker accident that contaminated and poisoned the French coast
as the most recent incident in the series of environmental disasters caused by human beings.
Only a few days later we are able to add another terrible environmental disaster to the list.
These episodes always spring from the same sources, namely inadequate technology and also maximisation of profit, which is evidently prized more highly than the well-being of the environment, and of course the health and well-being of human beings.
Someone has already mentioned, in this connection, how vital it is for the European Union to provide both technical and financial aid.
However we must also make it clear to Romania that it cannot wriggle out of this, but must work hard at fulfilling the acquis communautaire.
In addition, I believe it is imperative that we draft and implement a directive on comprehensive environmental liability within the European Union with all speed.
Mr President, I do not think we are in a position to throw stones at the Eastern European countries which have come knocking at the door of the European Union, because ecological disasters occur as much here, in the west, as they do in the east.
For example, the overflow from the decanting basins at the gold mines in Salsigne, in France, have caused tremendous pollution and are a huge economic disaster even today.
We know full well that pollution and restoration costs run into billions.
Who is going to pay?
Which is why the environmental aspect, which is becoming a matter of urgency, must be taken into account in all development projects at all costs.
I too should like to ask the European Union to put its own house in order here, i.e. to call on Member States which still have gold mines to commission expert reports, so that we know just what the situation is.
I am thinking in particular of the gold mines in French Guiana, where the workers, who are generally women, are exploited and work in absolutely deplorable health conditions.
.
Let me associate myself, not least as a former Environment Minister, completely and without any reservation whatsoever, with the expressions of concern by honourable Members.
An objective assessment of the facts is not easy at this stage.
But early reports suggest that the poisoning of the Lepos, Tisza, Somes and Danube Rivers is a very serious environmental tragedy.
It has destroyed an entire ecosystem in a matter of days.
No living organisms, from microbes to otters, have been spared.
Several Members have set out what seems to have happened.
We have all seen some of the consequences on our television screens.
Some environmental experts have put the environmental consequences of this disaster, at least so far as damage to the ecosystem is concerned, on a par with Chernobyl.
It has affected the peoples of three countries - Romania, Hungary and Yugoslavia.
It is the Tisza, Hungary' s second river, perhaps its most beautiful and most loved by its people, that has borne the brunt.
As with all such disasters it is the long-term consequences that are the most pernicious.
Some estimates suggest that it could take up to five years to restock the river.
There is a continuing threat to other wildlife from eating toxic fish.
We plainly have a responsibility to do everything we can, as rapidly as we can, to help cope with this catastrophe.
That is certainly the view of my colleague, Commissioner Wallström, who I know would have wished to respond to this resolution in person today.
The reason she cannot do so is because, as some honourable Members have pointed out, she is in Hungary and Romania to see for herself the extent of the damage and how best we can help the Hungarian and Romanian authorities to tackle the crisis.
We stand ready to do so.
We contacted the Romanian Government and the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River about the accident earlier this month to seek more information urgently.
The Romanians have approached UNEF and OCHA, in Geneva, for an assessment of the damage in the Danube catchment area by an independent and international team of experts.
We stand ready to assist in this assessment if there is a joint request from Hungary and Romania and if access to the sites for nationals of both countries can be guaranteed.
That is obviously crucial.
It is plainly essential to establish as rapidly as possible an accurate picture of the scope of the damage so that we can decide exactly how best to help tackle it.
It is to that end that our efforts are now engaged.
There is also a need to clarify the legal responsibilities of the mining company and of the Romanian authorities.
This is an important point, as several speakers have suggested.
The polluter-pays principle is a cornerstone of European Union environmental policy.
It is mirrored in the International Convention for the Protection and Sustainable Use of the Danube River and it should be applied in this case.
The European Union could not substitute itself for the mining company for any compensation payments due.
The Union has mobilised some EUR 20 million over the past seven years to support protection of the Danube River basin.
In the context of pre-accession aid to the region it may be possible to redirect some of the assistance we are giving under ISPAR and PHARE to tackle the most severe impact of this accident, as long as the polluter-pays principle is fully respected.
We will want, in the longer term, to see what lessons can be drawn from this disaster, above all to see how to prevent such disasters happening in the first place.
The incident reinforces the case for a strengthening of European civil protection, along the lines suggested by President Prodi in his recent speech and as suggested by one or two Members today.
But for now the priority is to cope with this crisis.
As I have said, my colleague, Commissioner Wallström, is on the spot today.
She will want to keep Parliament closely in touch with the action she proposes as a result of her visit.
This has been an appalling tragedy for Europe and Europe has to respond and do all it can to ensure that incidents as dreadful as this do not continue to blight our future.
The debate is closed.
We shall now proceed to the vote.
VOTE
Mr President, I abstained from voting on company restructuring because, after hoping that the Community would intervene on company restructuring, I would like to specifically remind the House that it is indeed true that a thousand people have been left jobless, deprived of the chance to continue working but, if the States had not delayed the official pensionable age - of at least 200 000 people in Italy, who are therefore continuing to work and who would otherwise have freed up 200 000 jobs if the laws which delayed their pensionable age by five years had not intervened - we would not now be looking at a figure of one thousand people unemployed: there would now be a thousand employed workers, albeit in another firm, but they would nevertheless have had a job.
.
(FR) The only reason we voted for the PSE-Verts/ALE-GUE/NGL compromise motion for a resolution is because this resolution allowed us to condemn the decision by the Goodyear-Dunlop management to close its factory in Italy.
However, the measures set out in this resolution are derisory in terms of combating the policy of the major industrial groups which are shedding jobs and exacerbating unemployment.
Moreover, it is all just words, because the Socialist governments, which are now in a majority in Europe, are just as incapable of taking action to prevent redundancies as right-wing governments.
The real problem is not finding a legal way of slightly complicating redundancy procedures, but banning them.
The only way of stopping the diabolical machine which produces capital gains on the one side and unemployment on the other is to ban redundancies in all large companies which are in profit, on pain of compulsory purchase, and to publish the accounts of large companies and subject them to the scrutiny of the workers and the general public.
Society must have the means of enforcing its own agenda on large companies and their owners.
The first item on that agenda is the eradication of unemployment.
The sums needed to create useful jobs in public services and finance the distribution of work among everyone, without cutting wages, must be taken from the profits of large companies.
It is far more important for the majority of society than the waste involved in financial operations or the scandalous enrichment of a minority of large shareholders.
.
(SV) I cannot support the present resolution because, in paragraph 8, an individual factory in Italy is singled out with the express wish that precisely this establishment should remain in place, while the current management is being advised to try to sell the factory to a European tyre manufacturer.
It is not the European Parliament' s business to express an opinion on which factories in the European Union' s 15 Member States are to remain in place and which are to be shut down; to expand their work forces or reduce them; stay in the same location or else move; be sold or not be sold; and, in the case of those which are to be sold, to comment on whether they are to be sold to companies within or outside Europe.
Ultimately, it is a question of different spheres of authority, where the European Parliament and its Members do not have any legal means of changing the current corporate decision or do not even have a particularly deep knowledge of the situation in the factory as it stands.
The Swedish Christian Democrats would emphasise the value of the European Union' s and the European Parliament' s concentrating on their basic tasks and not undermining the value of their actions in these areas by also acting in areas outside their jurisdiction.
Tourism and employment
The next item is the report (A5­0030/2000) by Mr Viceconte, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the communication from the Commission: 'Enhancing tourism' s potential for employment - follow-up to the conclusions and recommendations of the High Level Group on Tourism and Employment' [COM(1999)0205 - C5-0112/1999 - 1999/2115(COS)].
, rapporteur.
(IT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, despite the European Union' s delay and indecision with regard to the introduction of a fully-fledged Community policy on tourism, increasing attention is being paid to tourism as a sector capable of generating new jobs.
One of the reasons for the Community' s interest is the structural flexibility of this sector of the employment market, which explains its attractiveness for women and young people, to whom it often offers their first experience of employment.
The importance of the tourist industry and its impact on employment - although everyone is now aware of this - is nevertheless based more on personal experience rather than on verifiable statistical data.
The fact that, due to the absence of sufficiently reliable and scientific statistical data, the tourist industry is in effect an unknown quantity has greatly limited the prospects of pursuing a consistent policy in this area and creating employment on a wider scale.
It would be appropriate, therefore, to begin by summarising the impact of tourism on the lives of Union citizens and the desirability, in both economic and social terms, of promoting the European tourist industry.
Firstly, I would remind you that the tourist industry is one of the infrastructures which any advanced society must have.
Without it, institutions, business and the world of work could not function.
Tourism must therefore be thought of as the whole range of goods and services required by individuals moving from their habitual place of residence and thus confers mobility, the characteristic feature of contemporary society.
The term 'tourism' must no longer be solely perceived as synonymous with sun, sea and holidays, which has the effect of reducing the interest taken in the subject at institutional level.
Secondly, I would like to explode a myth, taking as a starting point an apparent paradox, which is clearly highlighted by Eurostat figures: the main international tourist countries are not those traditionally regarded as tourist destinations, but on the contrary the most advanced nations, whose quality of life is one of their main attractions and most heavily promoted features.
Clearly, the importance of tourism for the economy of regions traditionally regarded as tourist destinations, southern regions for example, is very different, and should be studied carefully.
It is an obvious truth, and one that is measurable by other economic and social indicators, that thanks to tourism, many Mediterranean regions have undergone a radical change for the better in their economic and social system and the way of life of their inhabitants, and achieved a drastic reduction in the numbers emigrating.
Social growth has occurred only in those areas where the tourist market has given rise to the development of all the activities required to meet the needs of visiting tourists, thus creating an entire productive system.
In such cases, there is a measurable increase in employment as a result of the growth in tourist numbers, thus establishing a virtuous circle of growth in the local economy.
This reminds us that tourism cannot be regarded as the poor countries' petroleum industry, because it requires huge investment in structures, infrastructures, entrepreneurship, professional expertise, social services and training; that the tourist industry is essential for the equilibrium of many regions as it provides a direct source of employment and a market for all local productive activities: agriculture, small firms in the industrial and craft sector, transport, services, retail sector, training, etc; that the development of the Community' s tourist industry is closely linked to its sustainability with regard to the Community objectives; that the varied geography and historical, cultural and environmental heritage must be protected and exploited.
In my opinion, the European Union can, in compliance with the principle of subsidiarity, supplement the action of the Member States and contribute to consolidating the potential of tourism by means of certain measures, such as the adoption of a specific legal basis for tourism policy in the Treaties; the adoption of mechanisms within the programmes and projects set up under its regional policies and other policies of the Union, with a view to promoting tourism in all its forms: rural, environmental, cultural, conference-based, spa-related and sports-related tourism, and also tourism focusing on senior citizens, research and training; the amendment of Directive 95/57/EC on the collection of statistical information in the field of tourism; the cofinancing of projects to set up new transport services and infrastructures; the cofinancing of pilot schemes involving benchmarking and the exchange of experiences.
These and other specific measures included in my report can, in my view, lend added value to the actions that the competent national and regional authorities should foster, in order to promote tourism and create new jobs, starting with the adoption of positive fiscal measures to assist small and medium-sized firms, particularly by reducing the burden of charges on labour.
Mr President, Commissioner, before I explain to you the position of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities, I would like to share with you three basic factors which, in my opinion, determine the present and future of European tourism in an international environment.
In Europe today, the tourism market contributes 5.5% of the gross national product and occupies a rather significant proportion of the workforce, approximately 6%.
Those figures are incomparably higher for some countries.
To grasp the importance of tourism for some parts of Europe, it is worth pointing out that in my own country, Greece, a country that attracts tourists, over the past four decades, during which the farming population has clearly aged and the population is over-concentrated in the major urban centres, the only areas which have retained populations of low average age or to which young people have returned are ones where tourism has developed.
It is therefore clear that besides being a matter of general economic interest for Europe, tourism is a priority for the economic and social participation of the European Union' s regions.
Another factor is that the world market is growing explosively.
The forecast is for ten billion tourists in 2010, but unfortunately for Europe there is a reverse trend.
Europe' s share of the increase is falling drastically each year to the benefit of Asia, the Far East and America.
You see, the world tourism market is influenced every day and directly by the liberalisation of transport, its reduced cost, and competition from new centres of tourism outside Europe.
Furthermore, 90% of businesses active in tourism are small or medium-sized, the very enterprises which form the living cells of our social and economic tissue, which are called upon to tackle the new obstacles and respond positively to the challenges of this global development.
As the rapporteur said, this becomes particularly important when tourism is appreciated as a unitary productive system because of its ability to absorb large quantities of agricultural and industrial products, services and transport and to create a significant amount of added value.
Here, then, I want to point out that international competition is tough and, if we are to overcome it positively, we must together envision and share a long-term strategy.
We must take very serious note of the need to upgrade the human resources engaged in tourism, so that tourism will be able to respond to the new technological challenges of our age.
Today, nobody can ignore the fact that new digital technologies and systems, with Internet at the sharp end, mobile telephones and digital television, are bringing about radical changes in tourism as a whole and its respective structures and operational models.
The introduction of these new technologies is not a threat, but a new opportunity for our tourism because it offers the potential to provide new and innovative tourism products and services, which our tourism needs for an ever-lengthening tourism season, so that it can attract new customers and offer new and alternative forms of tourism.
The new technologies also make it possible to open new markets in traditionally undervalued, non tourist areas, which could develop to become centres of tourism and attract substantial investments.
To this new labour market there must be a response in the programmes of tourism schools and training programmes for company staff, including programmes for training the unemployed and their re-introduction to work.
The Committee on Women' s Rights paid particular attention to the issue of education, because according to official figures women account for 53% of those engaged in tourism services, and in parallel, they form a majority among the working people most easily affected by social and economic change.
We must not forget that people working in tourism, especially women, encounter particular problems such as seasonal work, the need to renew contracts from one year to the next, social protection, lack of interest in continuing education, and reduced possibilities for development.
We therefore ask the European Commission for special measures and to adopt the principle of equal opportunities in all tourism programmes and programmes for company development.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we are debating the employment potential of the tourist industry today, which the Commission appears at last to have recognised.
It is important, long overdue, and in fact still does not go far enough.
I cannot shake off the feeling that we have been going round in circles for years.
Things are certain to be different in future, with the new Commission, although I could have hoped for a little more enthusiasm on the part of the competent Commissioner.
I have been personally involved in tourism competence discussions for Europe since the beginning of the 90s.
Time after time it was a roller-coaster ride of glimmers of hope one minute - as occurred at the Council for tourism and employment in 1997- and disappointments the next - the Council and Commission' s dismissive attitude towards including a tourism article in the Treaty for example.
Many of the things the Commission offers in its communication by way of follow-up measures to the assessments and recommendations produced by the High level Group for tourism and employment, are not new, for the European Parliament has been making the same demands for years now.
It is just a shame that expert opinions count for more than the views of the Members of this Parliament.
Particularly when we bear in mind the current, underlying attitude towards Europe prevalent amongst the citizens of the EU Member States, and the lack of a sense of European identity felt by our people, as Vaclav Havel pointed out most forcibly yesterday, employment potential is only one side of the tourism coin.
The other side is the potential it has to help build a European sense of identity, which is so important to Europe' s continued existence.
We are still awaiting a communication from the Commission on this.
Yes, we must watch out - Europe faces fierce competition.
Whilst we have experienced a 10% drop in our world-wide market share over the last few years, south-east Asia, Australia and New Zealand in particular are experiencing a travel boom.
Of the 120 million new jobs that are expected to be created worldwide, the World Travel and Tourism Council only expects 2% of them to be in Europe.
Is that not an alarming thought?
For tourism does not just have an important economic role to play, it also contributes towards international understanding.
Any one that truly gets to know and understand the countries and people of Europe from personal travel experiences is simply not going to turn to nationalism at a later stage.
All forms of tourism help to build mutual trust and gradually break down prejudice, arrogance, mistrust and scepticism.
They increase people' s willingness to accept one another and counteract what appears to be a decline in tolerance in people' s dealings with one another.
That is precisely why it is in our own interests, whilst adhering strictly to the principle of subsidiarity, to stimulate, coordinate and promote tourism, and to do so by creating optimum framework conditions and using a reliable database.
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report, which I unreservedly endorse.
Let us hope that it is not just a paper exercise, as was the case before.
Mr President, I would like to begin with some words of optimism, which came to us in the form of the High-Level Group communication of October 1998, the first page of which said that by the end of the next decade, it would be possible to create between 2 200 000 e 3 300 000 new jobs in tourism activities in the Union.
In addition, it said that this would only happen if the right conditions were created.
The Commission and Parliament are called upon to answer two questions: what are the right conditions and what is the role of the European Union on this?
The Commission and Parliament can help us understand, in the first place, exactly what we are dealing with, because even the term 'tourism' , as was, moreover, pointed out in the Viceconte report, is still an ambiguous term, a kind of variable that depends on latitude, climate, a range of opportunities, and a series of background factors; it can be synonymous with holidays or it can be a true area of production, income, wealth and employment.
There is a shortage of facts: we have no information on the economic impact, which still remains a complete mystery.
We have criteria for the gathering and interpretation of statistics which are totally at odds with each other, despite what was said in a 1995 directive by the Commission and Parliament.
With the aim of working out a strategy, it is vital to have a reading of these facts which harmonious and as strict as possible, so that we truly make tourism capable of creating jobs.
This does not follow automatically: often in the past a great deal of wealth has been accumulated thanks to the promotion of the tourist industry, without this being matched by an increase in employment.
There is no legal basis, and we feel that this is currently the major obstacle to any intervention in the tourism sector.
A legal basis translates into the ability to formulate strategies, to coordinate and to programme, all vital factors for making European Union tourism competitive with other markets.
A legal basis would mean we would avoid having to draw on the Structural Funds, as was the case in the past, to obtain some loose change.
Moreover, only minimal amounts were made available to us: we should bear in mind that the Commission communication indicated amounts totalling EUR 4 700 000 000 over the last five years, which corresponds to the cost of building 400 kilometres of motorway.
There is no opportunity to send a strong message to the Member States: recognising the legal basis of tourism would allow the States to acknowledge one of the European Union' s competences which at the moment, is only exercised in fits and starts.
We fully endorse the Community measures which were recommended in the Commission communication: advantageous taxation, that is, fiscal measures that offer conditions that are truly competitive in this market to the production sector - 95% of which, I would point out, is made up of small and medium-sized businesses, which is equivalent to 2 million small and medium-sized businesses in the European tourism sector; it awards special attention to vocational qualifications in the European Union, and therefore to investing in training; finally, it undertakes to make the job market transparent.
The tourism market is by definition a flexible market; we do not want this flexibility to be seen in a solely negative light, with seasonal work being misinterpreted as illegal work: remember that 50% of employment, especially in southern countries of the European Union, is done on the black economy.
We feel that the European Union and the Commission needs to make a strong commitment to sustainable tourism, which means having a strategy that is compatible with the environment, after the excesses of recent years when private wealth often did not correspond to high levels of employment.
First and foremost, we need to compete in terms of quality.
Finally, we consider that tourism can, in addition to being a growth factor, be a factor for democracy, and in this regard we are asking the Commission for a clear, conscious commitment.
Mr President, there are three points I wish to address.
The first is the inclusion of a legal base in the Treaty.
This is something I favour, but currently as part of a minority in my own Group.
We are all fully conscious of the importance of tourism, both to local economies and as a factor of European integration.
The problem for some of us, however, is the lack of specification of the extent of the legal base and of just how it would relate to considerations of subsidiarity.
Second, there are similar issues related to the establishment of a multiannual programme for tourism.
The resolution contains many excellent ideas for the promotion of different types of tourism and for its increasing professionalism.
At the same time the Commission is currently concerned about confining itself to core tasks.
The question has to be asked whether some of the activities suggested in the resolution might not put more pressure on its resources than is desirable.
Third, there are several references in the resolution to permanent employment.
Of course the promotion of this is desirable and permanent employment need not necessarily mean full-time employment.
But there will always be people who are looking for seasonal employment.
Students are an obvious example.
We have some concern that the resolution does not give enough consideration to them and to ways in which their interests could receive specific protection.
Thus, while complimenting Mr Viceconte on his report and finding a great deal in the resolution to commend, we shall be asking for a number of split votes to allow these concerns to be addressed.
Mr President, I too believe that tourism has a very important role to play, not just in our European regions, but throughout the world, because it is a great asset when it comes to economic and social development.
But it is also a very vulnerable sector, as we recently saw with the oil slick.
A flourishing tourist sector can be totally wiped out by an ecological disaster such as an oil slick.
When it comes to tourism, we can no longer do what we like where we like.
There are huge reserves; certain zones, rural zones, so-called zones lagging behind but which still have unspoilt nature and untouched natural habitats, are listed as having good potential for what we call eco-tourism or green tourism.
This could be developed and provide a large number of new jobs.
But these regions need to take real account of positive and negative experiences in other tourist sectors.
We must not kill the goose that lays the golden egg of tourism.
Tourism must be environmentally friendly if it is to continue to be an asset in the future.
I can think of many mountain regions which are continually spoilt in order to develop a tourist sector.
We have stopped counting the damage and destruction in natural habitats and mountain zones.
I should also like to refer to the darker side of tourism, the tourism exported from the Member States of the European Union.
I am referring to sex tourism.
I know that action is being taken against this so-called tourism elsewhere, but we must remember the European Union' s responsibility at this level.
Under no circumstances can we, as responsible politicians, allow what is currently happening to continue, with young girls practically bought in the countries of the East and coming here to be abused on the cheap.
Finally, I should like to refer to the tourism which gives citizens contact with the outside world and democracy.
I am thinking in particular of countries such as Cuba which are isolated but I know, because I have travelled there extensively, that the Cubans who come into contact with tourists can learn something of the outside world, obtain different information and pass on different information.
For all these reasons, I think that reforming the Treaties would allow the huge tourist question, which is an important asset for the whole planet, to be properly integrated.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Viceconte' s report is a very good piece of work in my view and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur warmly on it.
He has succeeded in setting forth in a very lucid manner a field which is broad and difficult to pin down exactly; that of the economic, social, cultural, sporting and health-related activities in the sphere of tourism in all its many forms, taking into account the diverse requirements of the EU Member States.
The difficulties attending dealings with the European dimension of tourism, and the support that the Council, the Commission and Parliament are required to provide, were clearly articulated.
What I consider to be particularly worthy of mention is the approach whereby we are to take our cue from the scale of the economic sector of tourism and its importance in employment terms in the EU, and deduce from this the need to create and apply a Community framework for activities.
Irrespective of the stalemate situation vis-à-vis the Council, the Commission should exploit the opportunities which also exist at present to develop elements of a European tourism policy.
And these include the following: firstly, establishing strategic priorities for developing this sector; secondly, drawing up a list of criteria, which will make it possible for specific, tourism-related interests to be taken account of in the implementation phase of EU projects within the scope of the various programmes; and thirdly, seeking and establishing a suitable method for arriving at an interim solution for financing expenditure on coordination with Community measures in other policy areas - employment, the environment, structural funds, Community initiatives - until such time as a legal basis is adopted.
It is also absolutely vital for the Austrian Council Presidency' s compromise proposal concerning the adoption of a multi-annual framework programme to be put into practice as soon as possible.
Of course this will mean that those Members of the Council who blocked its adoption will have to be urged in the strongest terms to think over their rejection of it and change their minds.
At the same time, the European Commission, as well as the Member States, could, and should, integrate the development of policy guidelines for the tourism sector into the drafting of a framework programme, or the two should be pursued in tandem.
The Commission must make it its business to analyse the various national regulations and activities and extrapolate generalisations for the EU area on this basis.
These can, and will, form a sound basis for the drafting of the EU framework conditions.
In view of its enormous employment potential, it is precisely the economically under-developed, or problem, regions of the EU that tourism will have an impact on in terms of stimulating local economic activity - agriculture, handicrafts, services, transport, trade, as well as education.
In other words, it will be possible to set up regional economic cycles.
It is extremely important, in this respect, to make the sustainability of measures and the protection of natural habitats in our environment our guiding principles.
Small and medium-sized companies offering tourist services are perfectly suited to this, for they ensure that vacation and leisure facilities, health cure establishments and sporting activities are adapted in a harmonious manner to the natural environment.
Other aspects, such as the observation of non-discriminatory practices at the work place, which constitute a general principle to be applied in the implementation of Community policies, must be firmly established in the measures for supporting tourism in the various EU programmes.
At the same time, special attention must be given to the specific issue of the high proportion of women employed, foreign and part-time workers, and appropriate assistance activities must be supported.
Experiences gained in the German Bundesland Brandenburg - where I come from, and which is one of the Objective 1 Regions of course - demonstrate that not only did targeted assistance for small tourist enterprises preserve or create jobs, it also enabled substantial progress to be made in the development of rural areas by promoting green tourism, for example taking conservation areas into account.
And EU funds have also made a considerable contribution to this in the past.
Mr President, during the most recent meeting of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, I was pleasantly surprised.
The opinion of Mr Sánchez García, addressed to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, contained a remark regarding the IGC.
The draftsman of the opinion held the view that there was no need for a legal foundation for tourism in the Treaty.
This was in contrast to the majority opinion held in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.
Having heard many Members who share the view expressed in the opinion, this was a real relief.
Unfortunately, his text has not survived the vote.
It does, however, support my view that I am not, apparently, the only one who cannot agree with the majority opinion.
This brings me to the content of the report.
An important aspect of the tourism industry is employment and potential employment.
Especially in the southern Member States, the tourist industry is a major source of income.
From this vantage point, there is every reason for the government to formulate stimulating measures and a stimulating policy.
The seasonal nature of tourism and the employment fluctuations that this entails also deserve attention.
I am surprised, however, at the fact that many want to achieve this by means of Community policy.
This is not desirable, either from the point of view of tourism itself or the stimulation of employment.
The discrepancies between the different regions can often be traced back to cultural or historical factors.
Within these regions, a huge range of problems have their part to play.
It is obvious that mainly local and regional - and, therefore, to a lesser extent national - authorities are best placed to assess the situation and draft appropriate policy.
For this reason, I cannot therefore endorse the transfer of powers to European level.
In addition, employment policy in general is also a factor.
Here too, the structure of the economy differs for each Member State, and the ways in which the current status has been achieved are diverse.
It will not do for one type of policy, probably with many exceptions and adaptations, to be applied.
This would mean that the EU would unjustly be removing tasks from Member States and that the Brussels bureaucracy would be intervening unnecessarily.
It is preferable for Member States to take measures to stimulate employment themselves.
Their expertise, is, of course, superior to that of the Commission.
This is why I am very hesitant when it comes to formulating Community measures to promote employment.
Even in the tourism industry.
It would really be a nuisance if Parliament were to attempt to achieve this unofficially by extending its powers.
Mr President, you will understand that we cannot assent to the present resolution as it stands.
First of all I should like to thank Mr Viceconte for all the work that he has done on this report.
It is a very extensive report.
We greatly welcome it, just as we welcomed the original report that it was based on, the report of the high-level working group which was set up by the European Commission.
I hope that the Commission will not forget that.
Having set it up, I hope the Commission actually makes use of it and therefore does not just allow it to sit around in the corridors and gather dust.
Tourism is basically small businesses and therefore a very fertile area for job creation.
As has already been said in this debate, three million potential new jobs within the next ten years is something well worth going for.
Europe can no longer refuse to give the recognition - both political and in terms of policy-making - that the fastest growing sector of its economy deserves because of its economic and social position.
We need a more dynamic vision based on tourism' s contribution to job creation.
We must recognise a sector that is predominantly engaged in cross-border activity and therefore deserves a European policy with a stimulating, innovative and proactive approach to sustainable business development.
I know the Commissioner is very keen on information technology.
He has convinced me of that.
But his portfolio of information technology and tourism actually go very well together.
There are several reasons why the tourism industry is an ideal test-bed, therefore, for integrating job creation strategies.
Let us look at some of these reasons.
The importance to the economy of tourism and its growth potential is obviously one.
Various sectors of the population are employed by the tourism industry, particularly the more vulnerable groups, such as young people, women and the unskilled.
I am not saying that we do not need to raise the skills within the sector - of course we do - but let us get the jobs established first.
The availability of unskilled, temporary and seasonal work is very important in some of the economic areas of the Community.
Tourism contributes to regional development - in rural areas that are maybe trying to diversify - and tourism contributes to urban areas that aim to raise the profile of their own cultural heritage.
If we take all these aspects together we have the potential of really doing something in Europe and maybe extending the tourism season by staggering holidays right across Europe.
We must not lose sight of the fact that with enlargement we have the potential to increase the number of visitors who come to Europe' s shores to see some of the traditional cultural heritage that has not been opened up to the world for quite a number of years - in fact, about forty years.
We are losing market share.
I believe we have to do something to make ourselves more competitive.
I hope you will help us.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, today we are addressing a very important sector that directly involves over 10 million jobs in the European Union and helps the more or less disadvantaged, island and remote areas to stand on their own feet.
And of course, tourism creates more jobs and contributes to the stimulation of employment, especially among society' s more sensitive sections: women and young people.
In view of all this, I think it is a serious contradiction that there is no European policy on tourism.
The lack of any legal base makes it impossible to adopt measures relating to the sector.
The occasional application of Article 308 - formerly Article 235 - which requires unanimity, has prevented the adoption of a programme even of only EUR 8 million for five years and 15 Member States.
The measures taken from time to time in the past have been fragmentary and therefore ineffective, and such provisions as have been made were dictated by parallel policies such as consumer protection, environmental policy, transport policy, taxation policy, etc., which very often are not only no help to tourism but on the contrary make it more difficult, since their introduction has usually entailed costs for the tourism industry without regard to its ability to bear them or its incentives to cope with them.
With sorrow, I stress that in the context of restructuring the Commission' s services, tourism is dealt with by a section, not even a directorate, within the Directorate-General for 'Enterprise' .
But we must support our tourism!
In our view, the axes which could create a basis for its support are: the addition of material capital for tourism in the new review which will also constitute a legal base for the sector, the framing of a Community tourism policy to support the sector without disturbing the operation of the tourism market, coordination of the tourism policy with other, parallel Community policies which affect it directly or indirectly, a study of the sector, and the adoption of medium and long-term measures to enhance the competitiveness of tourism as a product.
Mr President, Commissioner, since the issue of employment has been raised, I want to recall another issue which is also very serious, namely the bankruptcies among Tour Operators and their consequences mainly for hotels, which are small or medium enterprises lacking the necessary organisation and access to information that would indicate to them whether or not their contractual partners are trustworthy.
Clearly it is impossible to adopt measures at the national level.
In contrast, at European level it would be possible to look into measures for improving the relations between hotels and Tour Operators, for example a regulation of such relations, the promotion of a special bankruptcy fund, etc., in collaboration with representatives from the two branches.
In the past, the Commission had requested quantitative records of the losses incurred by companies because of such bankruptcies, so that it could form an opinion, and asked the European confederations of hotel-and-restaurant owners and tourist agencies, HOTREC and ECTAA, to work out and draw up a regulation to govern the relations between them.
Since then, however, there has been no progress.
There must therefore be measures to improve the quality and competitiveness of Europe' s tourism and, to the extent of the possible, safeguard the operation of companies.
Such measures must also aim to promote rational use of natural and cultural assets and of the tourism infrastructure, so contributing to the balanced and sustainable development of tourism.
I will end by congratulating Mr Viceconte and, as one who comes from Crete, a tourist area, I ask that we should always view tourism not only in terms of pleasant holidays but as a primary job creator in a Europe which needs those jobs.
Mr President, Commissioner, the new attitude adopted recently by the Commission on this important economic activity is striking to those of us who, in recent years, have kept an eye on tourism and its place in the Community framework.
We all know that this change of heart is basically due to the close cause-effect relationship between tourism and employment.
It is also due to the recognition by the European Union, since the 1997 conference on these issues, of the enormous potential, represented by tourism, for employment.
In this respect the Commission communication before us today is opportune, as is the report by Mr Viceconte whom I congratulate.
This report contains 34 conclusions, including 15 calls to the Commission to adopt specific measures and actions without forgetting the environmental dimension and cultural protection, particularly in outermost and island regions.
It also contains four calls to the Member States which highlight the need to coordinate actions with the regional authorities and the establishment of measures favourable to tourist-oriented SMEs, particularly in the tax sector and in access to financial instruments.
These would encourage the growth of employment in sectors which use labour intensively, such as the tourist sector.
Finally, once this legal basis to which many of us aspire has been established so that a common tourism policy can be developed, we must be realistic and prepare a strategy on tourism and its relationship with employment, as proposed by the Commission with the support of this House.
In this strategy, young people and women, training and quality and the new information society must receive preferential attention.
Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to start by thanking Mr Viceconte for his report, which has drawn our attention to a sector which is all too often underestimated.
Tourism is a social, economic and cultural phenomenon which affects most European citizens, either as the recipients or the providers of a wide variety of services.
Every year, nearly 200 million Europeans leave their homes for a short time in order to travel, usually to other countries in Europe.
Moreover, Europe is still the main destination for tourists from third countries, even though it faces increasingly stiff competition and an increasingly diversified and attractive range of products.
Since the Treaties contain no specific legal basis for a real Community tourism policy, the European Union must help to improve and encourage cooperation in this sector, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, in order to take practical advantage of the potential which tourism offers in terms of employment.
Vocational training and a mobile workforce are important tools in the strategy to fight unemployment in Europe especially, as far as tourist service providers are concerned, in meeting multicultural demands and ensuring that services are tailored to customers.
Employment in the tourism sector is often highly seasonal and precarious, thereby hampering its sustainable development.
It is therefore even more urgent that we acquire and disseminate managerial and technological skills in order to promote new means of production and a supply of tourism which reflects market developments as closely as possible.
As the report notes, the adoption by the Member States of tax incentives for SMEs in order to reduce labour costs would be an excellent way of promoting growth in employment in labour-intensive sectors and, consequently, in the tourism sector.
This sector of activity is also a deciding factor in the economic and social development of less favoured regions, especially the most remote and island regions, which have undisputed assets in this area.
Let us not forget that, in the most remote regions, tourism is the most important industry in terms of income.
The income and employment generated by tourism help enormously in reducing imbalances and encouraging their economies to converge with the average rate of growth in the Community.
In addition, tourism can promote a certain cultural and economic rapprochement, insofar as it makes us more aware of other European cultures and thus helps respect for European ways of life to develop.
It goes without saying, therefore, that tourism, developed rationally in the long term, should represent a sustainable source of income for local economies, while safeguarding and enhancing the value of the rural, cultural, historical and environmental heritage.
I should like to close by stressing the essential role which the European Union should play in promoting new forms of tourism in new places which will allow continental Europeans to discover the most far-flung destinations in Europe, namely the most remote regions.
Mr President, we are having a major debate on a text of very little substance.
The basic document is really no more than a Commission communication which embraces the conclusions and recommendations of a high level group on tourism and employment.
Not only is there very little substance but this is also a rather old document dating from 28 April 1999 which therefore makes it nearly a year old.
This document stems from the previous Commission.
It is undoubtedly the result of work carried out by Commissioner Papoutsis throughout his term of office and which culminated in the Luxembourg summit and his failed Philoxenia programme.
I believe this is the first debate in this House with the new Commission and a new Commissioner, Mr Liikanen, who is of course listening very closely to what we are discussing.
I would take this opportunity to ask him a couple of questions directly.
Firstly, the governments made a commitment at the Maastricht Conference of 1992 to include a legal basis for this issue in the Treaties.
This commitment was not fulfilled in the Treaty of Amsterdam of 1997 and is therefore outstanding.
Yet there is a Council resolution from last June on tourism and employment.
What expectations does the Commissioner have that the new Intergovernmental Conference which is starting will include this aspect?
My second question is much more direct and perhaps more awkward.
Bearing in mind the failed efforts of the last decade, as highlighted by Mr Koch, does Commissioner Liikanen believe that he can do something during his term of office to ensure that the Community dimension of tourism becomes a proper policy, given the importance that all the previous speakers have given to tourism in terms of employment?
Will the Commission present new initiatives in order to see whether, through the constant efforts of the Commission and Parliament, we can gradually convince the Council to do something on this issue?
Mr President, Commissioner, first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Viceconte, who spoke at such length on the tangible possibility, for the fifteen Member States of the Union, of creating jobs by way of a sensible policy, a sensible European Union initiative in this field.
This very afternoon we have had a debate on workers who suddenly find themselves unemployed.
We now hope to be able to solve these problems.
Tourism is an activity that falls decidedly and fundamentally within the competence of the European Union.
All the European States are known throughout the world for being tourist magnets envied by all, including the United States of America, which we spoke about this afternoon with regard to the native Americans.
I would like to stress one point in the Viceconte report which I welcome and particularly support, and which I would like the House and the Commission to reflect on before giving a favourable response.
It regards tourism for senior citizens.
I usually see Commissioner Diamantopoulou desperately tearing her hair out, bit by bit, because the elderly live too long, leading to problems with pension payments.
However, in this case, the fact that we are living longer means that there are more senior citizens.
Unfortunately not all, but many of them travel the world to see its marvels and to discover and learn more about it: Italians want to see what the English are like, the Greeks want to see what the Turks are like and the French want to see their Italian cousins.
Tourism brings the peoples of the fifteen States and of the entire world closer together, and of course, it leads to peace and understanding.
This kind of tourism, which is undertaken mainly by large numbers of senior citizens, is just as important.
This type of tourism must be promoted and supported because it allows people to work in tourist destinations, not just during the summer when we go swimming in the sea, for example, but also during winter when we go to take the air.
Senior citizens are always on holiday, all year round, from 1 January through to 31 December because they do not work and do not have just one month off during the year.
Unfortunately, this is not true of them all, but this is why I am calling on the Commission to follow up on the Viceconte report.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, on the one hand we have heard predictions to the effect that by the year 2007, tourism will have created an additional 1.84 million jobs.
On the other hand, we are aware that in practically all developed countries there is a lack of manpower in the tourism sector, which cannot be completely overcome, even in times of high unemployment.
This contradiction applies when we talk in terms of the tourism labour market having two sides to it.
On the one hand, tourism provides jobs in regions where there is a severe shortage of other jobs in trade, industry and agriculture, or the number of jobs is declining; it offers employment opportunities to those population groups who cannot find work in other sectors on account of a lack of qualifications, or technical and global developments, and, in particular, tourism enables many young people to get a foot on the ladder of working life.
As such, the tourism sector offers employment policy a ray of hope.
However, we can also see that there are many lamentable disadvantages to working in this sector: long working days and large amounts of overtime, work at weekends, on public holidays and during the holiday season, none of which are conducive to people spending quality time with their families.
Add to this seasonal unemployment, physically demanding workloads on account of unhealthy working conditions and times of peak demand, and a lack of promotion prospects.
We should focus exclusively on all the tensions at work here, leaving no stone unturned.
In my country, Austria, tourism and the leisure industry are of central importance to the national economy, contributing as they do to income and job security, as well as to the balance of payments.
In 1998 alone, total income from tourism and leisure activities was 450 billion Schilling.
The net product share of the overall sector was around 13%.
I would therefore like to extend sincere thanks to all those who work in tourism, as well as all those who work to conserve nature, culture and recreational areas.
I would urge that we exploit the possibilities of working time arrangements with a view to shortening periods of unemployment, and that we undertake a subtly differentiated analysis of the labour market in the tourism sector.
We need a European marketing strategy, bearing in mind the competition we face from other continents.
In the course of our deliberations we must also analyse price structuring, as a result of which it is cheaper to fly to America these days than it is to fly from Vienna to Brussels.
Training has been mentioned and a great deal else besides, but there is still a great deal to do if we are to provide a really firm basis for this growth industry and ensure that this is what it continues to be.
Mr President, nine million jobs today, twelve million in ten years.
Tourism is a wellspring of jobs in Europe yet we still do not have reliable statistics enabling us to identify the different employment sectors.
There are no far-sighted support measures and nor are we concentrating on small and medium-sized enterprises.
Since we are a long way off having a knowledge-based strategy it is little wonder that that there is a lack of awareness of Community dimensions.
I have never understood how certain Member States could boycott the Philoxenia programme when in fact this initiative is designed to unite tourism, environmental and cultural concerns.
Hence I would like to ask Commissioner Liikanen if he intends to give this programme any chance at all.
Tourism simply does not feature in most national action plans for the transposition of our common European employment strategy.
I was able to demonstrate that there is a great deal of potential here in my report on future jobs, which the European Parliament adopted here almost exactly a year ago.
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs expressly included elements of this paper in its position.
Tourism, history, education, sport, health, ecology and rural development produce considerable synergistic effects.
By improving infrastructure measures, conserving our cultural heritage, nurturing regional traditions, and offering local products, it will be possible to enhance the appeal of even the most out-of-the-way regions.
Those who stand to benefit on the job creation front include tourist industry workers, marketing and software experts, environmental consultants and those in charge of target groups undertaking enquiries.
It is easier for jobseekers and those with fewer qualifications to find work in tourism.
It is usually easier to combine a working and family life.
Nevertheless, part-time and seasonal jobs carry with them the risk of unregulated and unsecured working conditions.
The dialogue with the two sides of industry, as well as with local authorities, must be stepped up.
Therefore, whilst quantity of staff is important on the tourist industry front, so too is quality, which can be consolidated and enhanced by means of further vocational training.
People can be trained in communication skills and creativity.
Team spiritedness, a sense of responsibility and management know how can be achieved.
Multilingualism and a capacity for empathy with foreign cultures will enable people to gain a better understanding of our Community.
Which is why it is all the more important for us to create stable foundations for a European approach, whilst always upholding the principle of subsidiarity of course.
In my view, this includes having certificates of qualifications, i.e. diplomas that are recognised by all Member States.
We need to set the scene for this.
Therefore, there is a lot to be said for tourism as a driving force in employment and integration.
More than any other sector, it is tourism that brings home to us the fact that, ultimately, the big, wide world is a global village.
.
Mr President, I would first like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Viceconte and congratulate him on the report.
I think we all acknowledge the economic, social and environmental importance of tourism in today' s developed Europe and its great potential for growth and employment.
I am glad to see that the Commission and Parliament are converging towards the same goal in this area.
Employment issues are at present the core concern regarding tourism.
An essential condition in order to make good progress in the work in this respect is that the cooperation with Member States and the industry and with other partners be as fruitful as possible.
This will determine the success of our work.
Certainly the Commission will seek good coordination with national employment policies.
This will also be important with a view to the special summit in March, where tourism is bound to be mentioned as a significant contributor to employment.
Coordination of Community tourism activities with other important issues such as regional policies, transport, employment, environment, culture and competition must strongly involve Member States and the tourism industry itself.
As far as specific policies are concerned, I would like to pinpoint just one on which the draft resolution focuses - regional policy.
The Commission guideline document for the new structural fund' s programming period has already identified tourism as one of the areas with particular potential for employment creation through competitive enterprises.
The Commission expects Member States to put increased emphasis on tourism measures in their plans and programming.
Quality, sustainability, innovation are at the forefront of the Commission' s own policy and are priorities recognised by the Council of Ministers.
Quality products in order to improve competitiveness, sustainability in order to protect resources and innovation in particular through the use of information technologies.
Regarding sustainability indicators, the European Environment Agency is already working with the Commission on the issue.
I want to mention, as has already been mentioned by many speakers today, that tourism related to the natural and cultural heritage is expected to be the fastest expanding form of tourism in the EU during the next two decades.
These possibilities should be fully exploited.
Mr Provan said that I often talk a lot about tourism and information technology.
I am personally convinced that information and communication technologies will be a key competitiveness and innovation factor for European tourism.
The travel and tourism sector is the front-runner in making use of ICT tools.
This will dramatically change the way it operates.
Marketing, reservation and transport are expected to be the areas of profoundest change and improvement.
Use of ICT opens a completely new dimension in the context of travel and tourism.
Direct business to consumer contact will supplement, and sometimes also reduce, the currently, nearly exclusive business to business relationship.
It will give more and better choice to tourists and generate new and better tourist products.
For the Commission this requires that action in the tourism field must be tightly linked to measures promoting the take-up of information communication technology by the tourism industry, in particular by the innovation and innovative society technological programmes which are both within my competence.
The new strategy outlined by the Commission communication on tourism and employment, and agreed by the Council, places the emphases on tourism gathering and disseminating information and good practice.
The implementation of the directive on statistics aims at improving the knowledge of market structures and trends in European tourism and its industry.
Commission decisions have advanced the methodological approach.
The report on the experience acquired in the work carried out under this directive is part of our work programme for the current year.
More work on the social and economic impact of tourism is currently on-going with the international organisations, such as the World Tourism Organisation.
The European Community' s prime role is to ensure a framework which enables and encourages stakeholders and authorities at all levels to optimise and realise the tourism sector' s potential for growth and employment.
Such a European strategy will be achieved through building on the commitment by Member States and the Commission to cooperate in a number of priority areas: exchange and dissemination of information, notably through new technologies; training in order to upgrade skills, quality of tourist products and sustainable development in tourism.
In the autumn the Commission will report back on the progress made in this respect.
A report on the work to be undertaken, together with the Member States and the tourism industry should be available in about two years from now.
Depending on the results of this work, a wider debate could then take place which might well be the starting-point for even more comprehensive policy initiatives.
Mr Medina Ortega asked me some very concrete questions.
As regards the role of tourism policy in the communities concerned, we must understand that many policy sectors have a huge impact on the framework on tourism.
It is not only the targeted, specific tourism actions which are important but the other horizontal actions in the field of transport.
At the moment, the question of congestion of air and roads is the fundamental problem.
In the area of environment, we are looking at ways to cooperate with Mrs Wallström; in the area of regional policy Mr Barnier is giving a lot of attention to this sector.
We need to have this streamlined approach on tourism which covers all the policies.
I am sure that we will improve on that in the future when we have had a good high-level working group report, your support with your report here and also when the tourism sector is part of enterprise policy.
Why is it so important in that sector?
It is because the key emphasis on the enterprise policy will be how to help to create new enterprises; how to make it easier for young people and women to create their own enterprises.
That is where the potential is.
If we can eliminate the obstacles to make it cheaper to create new enterprises, to facilitate the access to financing and to change the attitude of society to be more positive entrepreneurship, I am sure the tourism sector will be the first to benefit from this.
There is one problem that I hesitate to mention today as I am new in the sector.
I have been working now in all industrial and service sectors, but when you look at the organisational structure in tourism it is almost impossible.
It is very difficult for a Commissioner to try to work in an area where there are dozens of different organisations whose representativeness needs to be ascertained every time.
To strengthen the role of tourism in Europe, the organisations should do what has happened in most economic sectors: seek better focus, better coordination and concentrated activities.
Then we could have a solid dialogue in our everyday work.
That is the real difficulty which we must overcome.
As far as the Treaty is concerned, the intergovernmental conference started this week so we do not know the results yet.
I want to be very candid: I have not seen much enthusiasm about that conference or the proposal to enlarge the powers of the EU.
Tourism is also in the list of subjects which do not figure as new areas of competence for the EU.
We will see what happens but at the moment that seems to be the case.
Finally, the Commission welcomes the resolution which continues the line of the high-level group, the Commission communication on enhancing tourism' s potential for employment and the corresponding Council conclusions.
The general agreement between both institutions in this field must not keep the Commission from following the most pragmatic approach in achieving our common objectives.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 7.40 p.m.)